The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tin Foil and Its Combinations for Filling
Teeth, by Henry L. Ambler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tin Foil and Its Combinations for Filling Teeth

Author: Henry L. Ambler

Release Date: October 8, 2008 [EBook #26840]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIN FOIL ***




Produced by Stephen Blundell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                               TIN FOIL
                               AND ITS
                   COMBINATIONS FOR FILLING TEETH.


                                 BY
                HENRY L. AMBLER, M.S., D.D.S., M.D.,
 Professor of Operative Dentistry and Dental Hygiene, in the Dental
              Department of Western Reserve University.
 Member of the American Dental Association; of the Ohio State Dental
          Society; of the Northern Ohio Dental Association;
                of the Cleveland City Dental Society.


                            PHILADELPHIA:
                  THE S. S. WHITE DENTAL MFG. CO.,
                               LONDON:
                    CLAUDIUS ASH & SONS, Limited.
                                1897




  Copyright, HENRY L. AMBLER, 1896.
        All rights reserved.
 Entered at Stationers Hall, London.


Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. Variant
    and obsolete spellings, particularly chemical terms, have been
    retained. The oe ligature is represented by [oe]. Subscript
    characters are shown _{thus}, for example H_{2}O.




PREFACE.


Believing that sufficient and well-deserved prominence was not being
given to the use of tin foil and its combinations, the author decided to
present a brief historical resume of the subject, together with such
practical information as he possesses, before the profession in order
that it may have the satisfaction of saving more teeth, since that is
the pre-eminent function of the modern dentist. One object is to meet
the demand for information in regard to the properties and uses of tin
foil; this information has been sought to be given in the simplest form
consistent with scientific accuracy. The present use of tin is a case of
the "survival of the fittest," because tin was used for filling teeth
more than one hundred years ago. There is not a large amount of
literature upon the subject, and no single text-book has treated the
matter fully enough to answer the needs of both teacher and pupil. It is
difficult for the student to collect and harmonize from the many
different sources just the kind and amount of information required for
his special use. Perhaps this work will be of assistance to scientific
students and practical operators in the art of using tin foil, including
all who wish in compact form an explanation of the facts and principles
upon which the art is based. A good method to arouse in students an
interest in the use of tin foil is to have them use it in operative
technics, which is becoming an effective adjunct in every dental
college. By this means a great factor will be brought to bear, and the
result will be that hundreds of graduates every year will begin
practice better qualified to save teeth than if they had not known
whatever may be learned about this material. At the University of
Pennsylvania, Department of Dentistry, session 1896-97, out of the total
number of fillings made in the clinical department (fractions omitted)
55 per cent. were gold, 15 per cent. tin, 10 per cent. amalgam. This
shows that tin has some very strong friends in the persons of Professors
Darby and Kirk.

The historical sketch of the development of the subject is arranged in
chronological order, and is given partly to show that some old ideas and
methods were good, and some obviously incorrect when viewed in the light
of more recent developments. Part of the history will be new to the
oldest members of the profession, and the younger ones will certainly
read it with interest. The work has been brought up to date by
considering all the properties and methods available. More names, good
opinions, and dates could have been given, but the writer believes that
what is herein presented is enough to thoroughly substantiate his own
opinions, experiments, and practical applications. Some of the
illustrations have been made especially for this work; the others have
been obtained through the courtesy of the owners.

"Let not the foggy doctrine of the superiority of gold in all cases act
on progress as the old medieval superstitions acted on astronomy,
physiology, zoology. Truth sought after without misgiving, and the
humblest as well as the highest evidence taken in every case, and acted
on with skill and discrimination, will crown all with a high average of
success."

It is hoped that what has been said in this volume will enable those who
study it to save more teeth, and stimulate them to make improvements on
the material and methods, doing much better than has been described or
suggested.

CLEVELAND, OHIO, June, 1897.




    "With soft and yielding lamina, and skill,
    The practiced dental surgeon learns to fill
    Each morbid cavity, by caries made,
    With pliant tin; when thus the parts decayed
    Are well supplied, corrosion, forced to yield
    To conquering art the long-contested field,
    Resigns its victim to the smiles of peace,
    And all decay and irritation cease."
                                      (_Solyman Brown._)

The quantity of tin foil used measures the number of teeth saved with
_metals_ in any country during any historical period.




CONTENTS.


                               CHAPTER I.                           PAGE
 Antiquity of Tin--Alchemistic Name--Medical Use--Where Found--
   Purity Obtained--Physical Characteristics                           1

                              CHAPTER II.
 History of the Use of Tin Foil, 1783-1844                             7


                              CHAPTER III.
 History Continued, 1845-1895                                         15

                              CHAPTER IV.
 Columbian Dental Congress--Opinions on Tin Foil--Reasons for
   Using--Manufacture in United States--Number and Weight of
   Foil--Cohesion--Good Qualities of Tin Foil--Temporary Teeth--
   Thermal Changes--Calcification--Chalky Teeth                       27

                               CHAPTER V.
 Discoloration of Tin--Decomposition of Food--Sulfids--Oxids--
   Galvanic, Therapeutic, and Chemical Action                         40

                              CHAPTER VI.
 White Caries--Gold and Tin as Conductors--Wearing Away of
   Fillings--Poor Foil--Buccal Cavities--Number of Years
   Fillings Last--Strips or Tapes for Filling--Number 10 Foil--
   Form of Cavities--Shields--Matrices--Condensing--Finishing--
   Cervical Margins--Filling Anterior Teeth--Lining with Gold         49

                              CHAPTER VII.
 Filling, part Tin, part Gold--Cervical Margin Liable to
   Caries--Electrolysis--Hand Pressure--Hand Mallet--Tapes and
   Ropes Compared--Manner of Preparing Foil--Starting the
   Filling--Cylinders--Mats--Facing and Repairing--Tin
   Shavings--Dr. Herbst's Method--Fees                                56

                             CHAPTER VIII.
 Dr. Robinson's Fibrous and Textile Metallic Filling--Tin and
   Gold combined (Tg), Methods of Preparing and Using--Lining
   Cavities with Tin--Tin and Amalgam--Plastic Tin--Stannous
   Gold--Crystal Tin--Filling Root-Canals--Tin and Watts's
   Sponge Gold--Capping Pulps                                         66

                              CHAPTER IX.
 Temporary Fillings--Sensitive Cavities--Integrity--Tin with
   Sponge, Fibrous, and Crystallized Gold--Tin at Cervical
   Margin--Filling Completed with Gold--Gutta-Percha and Tin--
   Occlusal Cavities with Tin and Gold--Comparison of Gold with
   Tin--Wedge-shaped Instruments--Old Method of Using Rolls,
   Ropes, Tapes, or Strips--Later Method--Filling with Compact
   and Loose Balls--Cylinder Fillings--Operative Technics             91




CHAPTER I.


Moses, who was born 1600 B.C., mentions tin, and history records its use
500 B.C., but not for filling teeth; much later on, the Ph[oe]nicians
took it from Cornwall, England, to Tyre and Sidon.

The alchemistic name for tin is Jove, and in the alchemistic
nomenclature medicinal preparations made from it are called Jovial
preparations.

Hindoo native doctors give tin salts for urinary affections. Monroe,
Fothergill, and Richter claim to have expelled worms from the human
system, by administering tin filings.

Blackie, in "Lays of Highlands and Islands," referring to tin as money,
says,--

    "And is this all? And have I seen the whole
    Cathedral, chapel, nunnery, and graves?
    'Tis scantly worth the tin, upon my soul."

"Tin-penny."--A customary duty formerly paid to the tithingmen in
England for liberty to dig in the tin-mines.

In 1846, Tin (Stannum, symbol Sn) was found in the United States only at
Jackson, N. H. Since then it has been found, to a limited extent, in
West Virginia and adjoining parts of Ohio, North Carolina, Utah, and
North Dakota. The richest tin mines of the world, however, are in
Cornwall, England, which have been worked from the time of the
Ph[oe]nician discovery.

The tin which is found in Malacca and Banca, India, is of great purity,
and is called "Straits Tin" or "Stream Tin." It occurs in alluvial
deposits in the form of small rounded grains, which are washed, stamped,
mixed with slag and scoriae, and smelted with charcoal, then run into
basins, where the upper portion, after being removed, is known as the
best refined tin. Stream tin is not pure metallic tin, but is the result
of the disintegration of granitic and other rocks which contain veins of
tinstone. Banca tin is 99.961 parts tin, 0.019 iron, 0.014 lead in 100
parts; it is sold in blocks of 40 and 120 pounds, and a bar 0.5 meter
long, 0.1 broad, 0.005 deep can be bent seventy-four times without being
broken. Subjected to friction, tin emits a characteristic odor.

Tin in solution is largely used in electro-metallurgy for plating. Pure
tin may be obtained by dissolving commercial tin in hydrochloric acid,
by which it is converted into stannous chlorid; after filtering, this
solution is evaporated to a small bulk, and treated with nitric acid,
which converts it into stannic oxid, which in turn is thoroughly washed
and dried, then heated to redness in a crucible with charcoal, producing
a button of tin which is found at the bottom of the crucible.

Pure tin may be precipitated in quadratic crystals by a slight galvanic
current excited by immersing a plate of tin in a strong solution of
stannous chlorid; water is carefully poured in so as not to disturb the
layer of tin solution; the pure metal will be deposited on the plate of
tin, at the point of junction of the water and metallic solution.

In the study of tin as a material for filling teeth, we have deemed it
expedient to consider some of its physical characteristics, in order
that what follows may be more clearly understood.

Tin possesses a crystallized structure, and can be obtained in
well-formed crystals of the tetragonal or quadratic system (form right
square prism), and on account of this crystalline structure, a bar of
tin when bent emits a creaking sound, termed the "cry of tin;" the purer
the tin the more marked the cry.

The specific gravity is 7.29; electrical state positive; fusing point
442 deg. F.; tensile strength per square inch in tons, 2 to 3. Tensile
strength is the resistance of the fibers or particles of a body to
separation, so that the amount stated is the weight or power required
to tear asunder a bar of pure tin having a cross-section of one square
inch.

Tenacity: Iron is the most tenacious of metals. To pull asunder an iron
wire 0.787 of a line in diameter requires a weight of 549 lbs. To pull
asunder a gold wire of the same size, 150 lbs.; tin wire, 34 lbs.; gold
being thus shown to be more than four times as tenacious as tin.
(Fractions omitted.)

Malleability: Pure tin may be beaten into leaves one-fortieth of a
millimeter thick, thus requiring 1020 to make an inch in thickness.
Miller states that it can be beaten into leaves .008 of a millimeter
thick, thus requiring 3175 to make an inch in thickness. Richardson says
that ordinary tin foil is about 0.001 of an inch in thickness.

If the difficulty with which a mass of gold (the most malleable of
metals) can be hammered or rolled into a thin sheet without being torn,
be taken as one, then it will be four times as difficult to manipulate
tin into thin sheets.

Ductility: If the difficulty with which gold (the most ductile of
metals) can be drawn be taken as one, then it will be seven times as
difficult to draw tin into a wire. At a temperature of 212 deg. it has
considerable ductility, and can be drawn into wire.

Among the metals, silver is the best conductor of heat. If the
conductivity of silver be taken as 100, then the conducting power of
gold would be 53.2; tin, 14.5; gold being thus shown to be nearly four
times as good a conductor of heat as tin. Among the metals, silver is
the best conductor of electricity. If its electrical conductivity be
taken at 100, then the conducting power of gold would be 77.96; tin,
12.36; gold being thus shown to be more than six times as good a
conductor of electricity as tin.

Resistance to air: If exposed to dry, pure air, tin resists any change
for a _great_ length of time, but if exposed to air containing moisture,
carbonic acid, etc., its time resistance is reduced, although even then
it resists corrosion much better than copper or iron.

As to linear expansion, when raised from 32 deg. to 212 deg. F., aluminum
expands the most of any of the metals. Taking its expansion as 1, that
of tin would be 3, _i.e._, aluminum expands three times as much as tin.
(Dixon, "Vade Mecum.")

Solids generally expand equally in all directions, and on cooling return
to their original shape. Within certain limits, metals expand uniformly
in direct proportion to the increase in temperature, but the rate of
expansion varies with different metals; thus, under like conditions, tin
expands nearly twice (1-3/5) as much as gold, but the _rate_ of
expansion for gold is nearly twice (1-7/10) that of tin.

The capacity for absorbing heat varies with each metal; that of gold is
about twice (1-3/4) that of tin.

Tin has a scale hardness of about 4, on a scale of 12 where lead is
taken as the softest and platinum the hardest. (Dixon, "Vade Mecum.")

Tin has a scale hardness of about 2. (Dr. Miller.)

To fuse a tin wire one centimeter in diameter requires a fusing current
of electricity of 405.5 amperes. Up to 225 deg. C., the rise in resistance
to the passage of an electric current is more rapid in tin than in gold.
In some minerals the current follows the trend of the crystals.

Gold wire coated with tin, and held in the flame of a Bunsen burner,
will melt like a tin wire. At 1600 deg. to 1800 deg. tin boils and may be
distilled.




CHAPTER II.


The largest and most complete dental library in the world is owned by
Dr. H. J. McKellops, of St. Louis. Upon his cheerful invitation, the
writer visited that "Mecca," and through his kindness and assistance a
complete search was made, which resulted in obtaining a great portion of
the following historical facts with reference to the use of tin in
dentistry:

"In 1783 I stopped a considerable decay in a large double under tooth,
on the outside of the crown or near the gums, with fine tin foil, which
lasted for a good number of years." ("A Practical and Domestic Treatise
on Teeth and Gums," by Mr. Sigmond, Bath, England, 1825.)

"Fine tin foil or gold leaf may be injected into a cavity successfully,
and retained securely for many years." (Joseph Fox, Dover, England,
1802.)

"The statement has been made several times that tin foil was used in the
United States for filling teeth as early as 1800, at which time
dentistry began to be cultivated particularly as a science and art, and
was beginning to be regarded as of more importance than it formerly had
been. The writer has not found any record of its use in this country
earlier than 1809. Tin may often be employed with entire confidence. I
have seen fillings forty-one years old (made in 1809) and still perfect.
Several molars had four or five plugs in them, which had been inserted
at different periods during the last half-century. I prefer strips cut
from six sheets laid upon each other. If the foil is well connected, the
cut edges will adhere firmly; if they do not, the foil is not fit for
use." (Dr. B. T. Whitney, _Dental Register of the West_, 1850.) First
reference to the fact that tin is adhesive.

"Tin is desirable in all unexposed cavities. It has a stronger affinity
for acetic, citric, tartaric, malic, lactic, and nitric acids than the
tooth has: a good material where the secretions are of an acid
character, it is better that the filling should waste away than the
tooth. One cavity in my mouth was filled with gold, decay occurred, the
filling was removed; cavity filled with oxychlorid, which produced pain;
filling removed; cavity filled with gutta-percha, still experienced
pain; filling removed; cavity filled with tin, and pain ceased in an
hour. A tin filling was shown in New York which was sixty years old;
made in 1811." (Dr. E. A. Bogue, _British Journal of Dental Science_,
1871.)

"I have lately been removing tin pluggings (the juices of the mouth
having oxidated and dissolved away the metal, so as to expose the teeth
to decay) from teeth which I plugged fifteen years ago (1818) for the
purpose of re-stopping with gold, and have in almost every instance
found the bone of the tooth at the bottom of the pluggings perfectly
sound and protected from decay." (J. R. Spooner, Montreal, 1833.)

In 1800 the number of dentists in the United States was about one
hundred, and many of them were using tin foil for filling teeth.

In 1822 tin was employed by the best dentists, with hardly an exception;
it grew in favor, especially for large cavities in molars, and for a
cheaper class of operations than gold, but tin was not generally used
until 1830. ("History of Dental and Oral Science in America.")

"Lead, tin, and silver corrode and become more injurious than the
original disease, and will in every case ultimately prove the cause of
destruction to the tooth, which might have been preserved by proper
treatment." (Leonard Koecker, 1826, and "New System of Treating the
Human Teeth," by J. Paterson Clark, London, 1829 and 1830.)

"Tin in situations out of reach of friction in mastication, as between
two teeth, is like the tooth itself apt to be decomposed by acidity
unless kept very clean." ("Practical and Familiar Treatise on Teeth and
Dentism," J. Paterson Clark, London, 1836.) Refer to what the same
author said in 1829.

"Tin is used as a plugging material." ("The Anatomy, Physiology, and
Diseases of the Teeth," by Thomas Bell, F.R.S., London, 1829.)

"Silver and tin foil, although bright when first put in a cavity, very
soon change to a dark hue, resembling the decayed parts of the teeth
which are of a bluish cast; besides this, they are not sufficiently pure
to remain in an unchanged state, and frequently they assist in the
destruction of a tooth instead of retarding it." ("Familiar Treatise on
the Teeth," by Joseph Harris, London, 1830.)

"Tin is objectionable on account of rapid oxidation and being washed by
the saliva into the stomach, as it may materially disorder it; the
filling becomes so reduced that the cavity in which it has been inserted
will no longer retain it, and acid fruits influence galvanic action."
("Every Man his Own Dentist," Joseph Scott, London, 1833.)

In 1836 Dr. Diaz, of Jamaica, used tin foil for filling teeth.

"Gold is now preferred, though tin, from its toughness when in the leaf,
is perhaps the most suitable. Americans are superior to British in
filling." ("Plain Advice on Care of the Teeth," Dr. A. Cameron, Glasgow,
1838.)

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

"Tin foil is used for filling teeth." (S. Spooner, New York, 1838,
"Guide to Sound Teeth.")

In 1838 Archibald McBride, of Pittsburg, Pa., used tin for filling
cavities of decay.

The following facts were learned from Dr. Corydon Palmer: E. E. Smith,
who had been a student of John and William Birkey, in Philadelphia, came
to Warren, Ohio, in 1839, and among other things made the first gold
plate in that part of the country. In operating on the anterior teeth,
he first passed a separating file between them, excavated the cavity,
and prepared the foil, _tin_ or gold, in tapes which were cut
transversely, every eighth of an inch, about three-quarters of the way
across. Fig. 1 shows the size of tape and the manner of cutting. With an
instrument (Fig. 2) he drew the foil in from the labial surface, using
such portion of the tape as desired.

The instrument from which the illustration was made was furnished by Dr.
Palmer, and is shown full size. Instruments for use on posterior teeth
were short and strong, with as few curves as possible; no right and left
cutters or pluggers were used, and none of the latter were serrated, but
had straight, tapering round points, flat on the ends, and of suitable
size to fill a good portion of the cavity. He used what was termed
Abbey's chemically pure tin foil, forcing it in hard, layer upon
layer,--as he expressed it, "smacked it up." In this manner he made tin
fillings that lasted more than thirty years.

In 1839 Dr. Corydon Palmer filled teeth with tin foil, also lined
cavities with gold and filled the remainder with tin. In the same year
he filled crown (occlusal) cavities one-half full with tin and the other
half with gold, allowing both metals to come to the surface, on the same
plan that many proximal cavities are now filled. (See Fig. 3, showing
about one-half of the cavity nearly completed with tin cylinders. The
same plan was followed when strips, or ropes, were used.)

"I filled cavities about two-thirds full with tin, and finished with
gold." (S. S. Stringfellow, _American Journal of Dental Science_, 1839.)

"Tin foil is greatly used by some American dentists, but it is not much
better than lead leaf." ("Surgical, Operative, and Mechanical
Dentistry," L. Charles De Londe, London, 1840.)

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

"In 1841 there were about twelve hundred dentists in the United States,
many of whom were using tin, and there are circumstances under which it
may be used not only with impunity, but advantage, but it is liable to
change." (Harris.)

"I put in tin fillings, and at the end of thirty years they were badly
worn, but there was no decay around the margins." (Dr. Neall, 1843.)

In 1843 Dr. Amos Westcott, of Syracuse, N. Y., filled the base of large
cavities with tin, completing the operation with gold.

"Tin is used in the form of little balls, or tubes, but folds are
better; introduce the metal gradually, taking care to pack it so that it
will bear equally upon all points; the folds superimpose themselves one
upon the other; thus we obtain a successive stratification much more
exact and dense, and it is impossible there can be any void." ("Theory
and Practice of Dental Surgery," J. Lefoulon, Paris, 1844.)




CHAPTER III.


"Besides gold, the only material which can be used with any hope of
permanent success is tin foil. Some dentists call it _silver_, and a
tooth which cannot be filled with it cannot be filled with anything else
so as to stop decay and make it last very long. It can be used only in
the back teeth, as its dark color renders it unsuitable for those in
front. When the general health is good, and the teeth little predisposed
to decay, this metal will preserve them as effectually perhaps as gold;
but where the fluids of the mouth are much disordered it oxidizes
rapidly, and instead of preserving the teeth rather increases their
tendency to decay." (Dr. Robert Arthur, Baltimore, 1845, "A Popular
Treatise on the Diseases of the Teeth.")

The false idea that a patient must have good health, normal oral fluids,
and teeth little predisposed to decay, or else if filled with tin the
decay would be hastened, originated with a German or English author, and
has been handed down in works published since early in 1800. It even
crept into American text-books as late as 1860, the authors of which now
disbelieve it.

"Tin undergoes but little change in the mouth, and may be used with
comparative safety." ("Surgical, Mechanical, and Medical Treatment of
the Teeth," James Robinson, London, 1846.)

"Tin is soft, and can be easily and compactly introduced, but it is more
easily acted on by the secretions of the mouth than gold and is less
durable, but in the mouth of a healthy person _it will last for years_.
Still, inasmuch as it cannot be depended on in _all_ cases, we are of
the opinion that it should _never_ be employed." ("The Human Teeth,"
James Fox, London, 1846.)

The italics are ours. Every metal has a limited sphere of usefulness,
and it should not be expected that tin will contend single-handed
against all the complicated conditions which caries presents.

"Of all the cheaper materials, I consider tin the best by far, and
regard its use fully justifiable in deciduous teeth and in large
cavities, as it is not every man who can afford the expense of nine
leaves of gold and four hours of labor by a dentist on a single tooth."
(Dr. Edward Taylor, _Dental Register of the West_, 1847.)

"I consider tin good for any cavity in a chalky tooth: it will save them
better than anything else." (Dr. Holmes, 1848.)

"Tin can be used as a temporary filling, or as a matter of economy. It
may be rendered impervious to air and dampness, but it corrodes in most
mouths, unless it comes in contact with food in chewing, and then it
rapidly wears away; it does not become hard by packing or under
pressure, and that it forms a kind of a union with the tooth is
ridiculous." (Dr. J. D. White, 1849, _Dental News Letter_.)

"A tin plug will answer a very good purpose in medium and large cavities
for six years. Much imposition has been practiced with it, and it is not
made as malleable as it should and can be. An inferior article is
manufactured which possesses brilliancy and resembles silver. This is
often passed off for silver foil. No harm comes from this deception
except the loss of the amount paid above the price for tin; but even
this inferior tin foil is better than silver." ("The Practical Family
Dentist," Dewitt C. Warner, New York, 1853.)

"Tin made into leaves is employed as a stopping material; with
sufficient experience it can be elaborated into the finest lines and
cracks, and against almost the weakest walls, and teeth are sometimes
lost with gold that might have been well preserved with tin. I saw an
effective tin stopping in a tooth of Cramer's, the celebrated musical
composer, which had been placed there thirty-five years ago by Talma,
of Paris." ("The Odontalgist," by J. Paterson Clark, London, 1854.)

Refer to what the same author said in 1836.

"Tin is the best substitute for gold, and can often be used in badly
shaped cavities where gold cannot." (Prof. Harris, 1854.)

"Tin is better than any mixture of metals for filling teeth." (Professor
Tomes, London, 1859.)

In 1860 a writer said that "such a change may take place in the mouth as
to destroy tin fillings which had been useful for years, and that tin
was not entirely reliable in any case; it must not be used in a tooth
where there is another metal, nor be put in the bottom of a cavity and
covered with gold, for the tin will yield, and when fluids come in
contact with the metals, chemical action is induced, and the tin is
oxidized. Similar fillings in the same mouth may not save the teeth
equally well. Filling is predicated on the nature of decay, for only on
correct diagnosis can a proper filling-material be selected."

Reviewing the foregoing statement, we believe that a change may take
place in the mouth which will destroy gold fillings (or the
tooth-structure around them) much oftener than those of tin. It is now
every-day practice to put tin into the same tooth with another metal; if
the bottom of a cavity is filled with tin properly packed, it will not
yield when completed with gold, and if the gold is tight, the oral
fluids cannot come in contact with both metals and produce chemical
action or oxidation; similar fillings of gold in the same mouth do not
save the teeth equally well. Should we expect more of tin in this
respect, or discard it because it is not always better than gold?

In Article V of the "New Departure Creed," Dr. Flagg says, "Skillful and
scrupulous dentists fill with tin covered with gold, thereby preventing
decay, pulpitis, death of the pulp, and abscess, and thus save the
teeth."

In 1862 Mr. Hockley, of London, mentions tin for filling, and the same
year Dr. Zeitman, of Germany, recommended it as a substitute for gold,
particularly for poor people.

"Is tin foil poisonous? If not, why are our brethren so reluctant to use
it? Is it nauseous? If not, why not employ it? Will it not preserve the
teeth when properly used? Then why not encourage the use of it? Does its
name signify one too common in the eyes of the people, on account of its
daily use in the tin shops, or do patients murmur when the fee is
announced, because it is nothing but tin? Is it not better than amalgam,
although the patient may believe it less costly? Eleven good plugs,
twenty-nine years old, in one mouth demonstrates that tin will last as
long as gold in many cases." (F. A. Brewer, _Dental Cosmos_, 1863.)

"So much tin foil is used for personal and domestic purposes that the
following is important: Ordinary tin foil by chemical analysis contained
88.93 per cent. of lead; embossed foil, 76.57 per cent.; tea foil, 88.66
per cent.; that which was sold for the pure article, 34.62 per cent. Tin
foil of above kind is made by inclosing an ingot of lead between two
ingots of tin, and rolling them out into foil, thus having the tin on
the outside of the lead." (Dr. J. H. Baldock, _Dental Cosmos_, 1867.)

The author used tin foil for filling the teeth of some of his
fellow-students at the Ohio College of Dental Surgery in 1867.

"Amalgam should never be used in teeth which can be filled with tin, and
most of them can be." (Dr. H. M. Brooker, Montreal, 1870.)

"I have used tin extensively, and found it more satisfactory than
amalgam. Dentists ignore tin, because it is easier to use amalgam, less
trouble. This is not right. If your preceptor has told you that amalgam
is as good as tin, and he thinks so, let him write an article in its
defense. Not one dentist in ten who has come into the profession within
the last ten years knows how to make a tin filling, and only a few of
the older ones know how to make a _good_ one." (Dr. H. S. Chase,
_Missouri Dental Journal_, 1870.)

"Among the best operators a more general use of tin would produce
advantageous results, while among those whose operations in gold are not
generally successful an almost exclusive use of tin would bring about a
corresponding quantum of success to themselves and patients, as against
repeated failures with gold. The same degree of endeavor which lacked
success with gold, if applied to tin would produce good results and save
teeth. A golden shower of ducats realized for gold finds enthusiastic
admirers, but a dull gray shower for tin work is not so admirable, even
though many of the teeth were no better for the gold as gold, nor so
well off in the ultimate as with tin." (Dr. E. W. Foster, _Dental
Cosmos_, 1873.)

In 1873 Dr. Royal Varney said, "I am heartily in favor of tin; it is too
much neglected by our first-class operators."

"Tin stops the ends of the tubuli and interglobular spaces which are
formed in the teeth of excessive vascular organization; if more teeth
were filled with tin, and a smaller number with futile attempts with
gold, people would be more benefited." (Dr. Castle, _Dental Cosmos_,
1873.)

"If cavities in teeth out of the mouth are well filled with tin, and put
into ink for three days, no discoloration of the tooth (when split open)
can be seen." (W. E. Driscoll, _Dental Cosmos_, 1874.)

"Tin makes an hermetical filling, and resists the disintegrating action
of the fluids of the mouth. If an operator can preserve teeth for
fifteen dollars with tin, which would cost fifty dollars with gold,
ought he not to do so? Upon examination of the cavities from which
oxidized plugs have been removed, these oxids will be found to have had
a reflex effect upon the dentin; the walls and floors will be discolored
and thoroughly indurated, and to a great degree devoid of sensitiveness,
although they were sensitive when filled. Tin is valuable in case of
youth, nervousness, impatience, high vitality of dentin, low
calcification, and low pecuniosity." (Dr. H. Gerhart, _Pennsylvania
Journal of Dental Science_, 1875.)

"Tin Foil for Filling Teeth." Essay by Dr. H. L. Ambler, read before the
Ohio State Dental Society. (_Dental Register of the West_, 1875.)

"Some say that if tin is the material the cavity must be filled with,
that it must be filled entirely with it, but advanced teachings show
differently." (Dr. D. D. Smith, _Dental Cosmos_, October, 1878.)

"Frail teeth can be saved better with tin than with gold. I never saw a
devitalized pulp under a tin filling." (Dr. Dixon, _Dental Cosmos_, May,
1880.)

"Tin may be used as a base for proximate fillings in bicuspids or
molars, in third molars, in children's permanent molars, in the
temporary teeth, and in any cavity where the filling is not
conspicuous." (Dr. A. W. Harlan, _Independent Practitioner_, 1884.)

"Tin in blocks, mats, and tapes is used like non-cohesive gold foil, but
absence of cohesion prevents the pieces from keeping their place as well
as the gold." ("American System of Dentistry," 1887.)

This is virtually saying that there is cohesion of non-cohesive gold,
and that for this reason it keeps its place better than tin. It has
always been supposed that there was no cohesion of layers of
non-cohesive gold, and as the tin is used on the non-cohesive plan,
therefore one keeps its place as well as the other. We claim that
generally in starting a filling, tin will keep its place better than
cohesive or non-cohesive gold, because it combines some of the
cohesiveness of the former with the adaptability of the latter.

"Tin will save teeth in many cases as well or better than gold. Put a
mat of tin at the cervical wall of proximate cavities in molars and
bicuspids, and it makes a good filling which has a therapeutic effect on
tooth-structure that prevents the recurrence of caries, probably because
the infiltration of tin oxid into the tubuli is destructive to animal
life. Where the filling is not exposed to mechanical force, there is no
material under heavens which will preserve the teeth better." (Dr.
Beach, _Dental Cosmos_, 1889.)

"I extracted a tooth in which I found a cavity of decay which had
extended toward a tin filling, but stopped before reaching it; on
examining the tooth-structure between the new cavity and the tin
filling, it was found to be very hard, indicating apparently that there
had been some action produced by the presence of the tin." (Dr. G.
White, _Dental Cosmos_, 1889.)

"Pure tin in form of foil is used as a filling and also in connection
with non-cohesive gold." (Mitchell's "Dental Chemistry," 1890.)

"Tin ranks next to gold as a filling-material." (Essig's "Dental
Metallurgy," 1893.)

"Tin is good for children's teeth, when gold or amalgam is not
indicated. It can be used in cavities which are so sensitive to thermal
changes as to render the use of gold or amalgam unwise, but it can only
be used in cavities with continuous walls, and should be introduced in
the form of cylinders or ropes, with wedge-shaped pluggers having sharp
deep serrations, thus depending upon the wedging or interdigitating
process to hold the filling in the cavity." ("Operative Technics," Prof.
T. E. Weeks, 1895.)

"Tin for filling teeth has been almost superseded by amalgam, although
among the older practitioners (those who understand how to manipulate
it) tin is considered one of the best, if not the very best metal known
for preserving the teeth from caries. In consequence of its lack of the
cohesive property, it is introduced and retained in a cavity upon the
wedging principle, the last piece serving as a keystone or anchor to the
whole filling. Each piece should fill a portion of the cavity from the
bottom to the top, with sufficient tin protruding from the cavity to
serve for thorough condensation of the surface, and the last piece
inserted should have a retaining cavity to hold it firmly in place. The
foil is prepared by folding a whole or half-sheet and twisting it into a
rope, which is then cut into suitable lengths for the cavity to be
filled." (Frank Abbott, "Dental Pathology and Practice," 1896.)

"Forty-three years ago, for a young lady fourteen years of age, I
filled with non-cohesive gold all the teeth worth filling with this
metal; the rest I filled with tin. Three years after that there was not
a perfect gold filling among the whole number, and yet the tin fillings
were just as good as when made. The explanation as to why the tin
fillings lasted so much longer than the gold ones was, that there must
have been something in the tin that had an affinity for the teeth and
the elements that formed the dentin, by which some compound was formed,
or else it must have been in the adaptation." (Dr. H. Gerhart, _Dental
Cosmos_, January, 1897.)




CHAPTER IV.


At the World's Columbian Dental Congress, held in Chicago, August, 1893,
the author presented an essay on "Tin Foil for Filling Teeth."

During the discussion of the subject, the following opinions were
elicited:

Dr. E. T. Darby: "I have always said that tin was one of the best
filling-materials we have, and believe more teeth could be saved with it
than with gold. I have restored a whole crown with tin, in order to show
its cohesive properties; the essayist has paid a very high and worthy
tribute to tin."

Dr. R. R. Freeman: "I have used tin foil for twenty-five years, and know
that it has therapeutic properties, and is one of the best
filling-materials, not excepting gold."

Madam Tiburtius-Hirschfield: "I heartily indorse the use of tin, and
have tested its cohesive properties by building up crowns."

Dr. A. H. Brockway: "I am a strong believer in the use of tin, on
account of its adaptability, and the facility with which saving fillings
can be made with it."

Dr. Gordon White: "After having used tin for nine years, I claim that
it is the best filling-material that has been given to our profession."

Dr. C. S. Stockton: "Tin is one of the best materials for saving teeth,
and we should use it more than we do."

Dr. James Truman: "I use tin strictly upon the cohesive principle, and
would place it in all teeth except the anterior ones, but would not
hesitate to fill these when of a chalky character."

Dr. Corydon Palmer: "For fifty-four years I have been a firm advocate of
the use of tin, and I have a filling in one of my teeth which is forty
years old."

Dr. William Jarvie: "I rarely fill a cavity with gold for children under
twelve years of age that I want to keep permanently, but use tin, and in
five or ten years, more or less, it wears out. Still, it can easily be
renewed, or if all the tin is removed we find the dentin hard and firm.
The dentist is not always doing the best for his patients if he does not
practice in this way."

Dr. C. E. Francis: "I have proved positively that tin foil in good
condition is cohesive, and my views have been corroborated by dentists
and chemists."

Dr. James E. Garretson: "Tin foil is cohesive, and can be used the same
as gold foil, and to an extent answers the same purpose."

Dr. C. R. Butler: "Tin is cohesive and makes a first-class saving
filling."

Dr. W. C. Barrett: "Tin is as cohesive as gold, and if everything was
blotted out of existence with which teeth could be filled, except tin,
more teeth would be saved."

Dr. L. D. Shepard: "Tin possesses some antiseptic properties for the
preservation of teeth that gold does not."

Dr. W. D. Miller: "I use tin foil in cylinders, strips, and ropes, on
the non-cohesive plan, but admit that it possesses a slight degree of
cohesiveness, and when necessary can be built up like cohesive gold by
using deeply serrated pluggers."

Dr. Benjamin Lord says, "It is said that we know the world, or learn the
world, by comparison. If we compare tin foil with gold foil, we find
that the tin, being softer, works more kindly, and can be more readily
and with more certainty adapted to the walls, the inequalities, and the
corners of the cavities.

"We find also that tin welds--mechanically, of course--more surely than
soft gold, owing to its greater softness; the folds can be interlaced or
forced into each other, and united with more certainty, and with so
much security that, after the packing and condensing are finished, the
mass may be cut like molten metal.

"I contend moreover that for contouring the filling or restoring the
natural shape of the teeth, where there are three walls remaining to the
cavity, tin is fully equal to gold, and in some respects even superior;
as tin can be secured, where there is very little to hold or retain the
filling, better than gold, owing to the ease and greater certainty of
its adaptation to the retaining points or edges of the cavity.

"It will be said, however, that tin fillings will wear away. The
surfaces that are exposed to mastication undoubtedly will wear in time;
but the filling does not become leaky if it has been properly packed and
condensed, nor will the margins of the cavity be attacked by further
decay on that account.

"Altogether, I believe that we can make more perfect fillings with tin
than we can with gold, taking all classes of cavities; but it must not
be understood that it is proposed that tin should ever take the place of
gold where the circumstances and conditions indicate that the latter
should be used. Of course, the virtue is not in the gold or the tin, but
in the mechanical perfection of the operation, and tin having more
plasticity than gold, that perfection can be secured with more ease and
certainty.

"If we compare tin with amalgam, we must certainly decide in favor of
the former and give it preference; as if it is packed and condensed as
perfectly as may be, we know just what such fillings will do every time.
We know that there will be no changes or leakage of the fillings at the
margins; whereas, with amalgam, the rule is shrinkage of the mass, and
consequently the admission of moisture around the filling, the result
being further decay. It is not contended that this is always the result
with amalgam, but it is the general rule; yet we must use amalgam, as
there are not a few cases where it is the best that we can do; but it is
to be hoped, and I think it may be said, that as manipulative skill
advances, amalgam will be less and less used. For so-called temporary
work, very often I prefer tin to gutta-percha, as it makes a much more
reliable edge and lasts longer, even when placed and packed without
great care."--_N. Y. Odon. Society Proceedings_, page 51, 1894.

One of the main reasons which induced the writer to begin the use of tin
foil (_Stannum Foliatum_) for filling teeth, in 1867, was the fact that
amalgam filling failures were being presented daily. Believing that tin
could do no worse, but probably would do better, we banished amalgam
from the office for the succeeding seven years, using in the place of
it tin, oxychlorid, and gutta-percha. Since that time we have seen no
good reason for abandoning the use of tin, as time has proved it worthy
of great confidence. There is no better dental litmus to distinguish the
conservative from the progressive dentist.

If we take a retrospective view and consider what tin foil was thirty
years ago, we do not wonder that so many operators failed to make tight,
good-wearing fillings. As it came from the manufacturer it looked fairly
bright, but after being exposed to the air for a short time it assumed a
light brassy color, and lost what small amount of integrity it
originally possessed. This tin was not properly refined before beating,
or something was put on the foil while beating, so that it did not have
the clean, bright surface and cohesive quality which our best foil now
has. No. 4 was commonly used, but it would cut and crumble in the most
provoking manner. Fillings were made by using mats, cylinders, tapes,
and ropes, with hand-pressure, on the plan for manipulating non-cohesive
gold foil, but it was difficult to insert a respectable approximal
filling.

From the best information obtainable, the writer believes that Marcus
Bull (the predecessor of Abbey) was the first to manufacture and sell
tin foil in the United States, as he began the manufacture of gold foil
at Hartford in 1812.

Several years ago a radical change came about in the preparation of tin
foil, for which the manufacturer should have his share of the credit,
even if the dentist did ask for something better, for the quality
depends largely upon the kind and condition of the tin used and on the
method of manufacture.

For making tin foil for filling teeth, the purest Banca tin that can be
obtained is used. The tin is melted in a crucible under a cover of
powdered charcoal. It is then cast into a bar and rolled to the desired
thickness, so that if No. 6 foil is to be made, a piece one and one-half
(1-1/2) inches square would weigh nine grains. This ribbon is then cut
into lengths of about four feet, and spread on a smooth board slanted,
so that the end rests in a vat of clean water.

Then apply to the exposed surface of the ribbon diluted muriatic acid,
and immediately wash with a strong solution of ammonia. Turn the ribbon
and treat the other side in the same way. It is then washed and rubbed
dry. The object of using the acid is to remove stains and whiten the
tin, and the ammonia is used to neutralize the effect of the acid.

The strips are then cut into pieces one and a half inch square, filled
into a cutch and beaten to about three inches square. It is then removed
from the cutch and filled into a mold, and further beaten to the desired
size. When the ragged edges are trimmed off, the foil is ready for
booking.

It takes skill and experience to beat tin foil, for it is not nearly as
malleable as gold; up to No. 20 it is usually beaten, but higher numbers
are prepared by rolling. In each case the process is similar to that
employed in preparing gold foil. The number on the book is supposed to
indicate the weight or thickness of the leaf. On the lower numbers the
paper of the book leaves its impression.

On weighing sheets of tin foil from different manufacturers a remarkable
discrepancy was found between the number on the book and the number of
grains in a sheet, viz: Nos. 3, 4, 5, weighed 7 gr. each; No. 6, 9 gr.;
No. 8, from 9 to 18 gr.; No. 10, from 14 to 15 gr.; No. 20, 18 gr. In
some instances the sheets in the same book varied three grains. We
submit that it would be largely to the advantage of both manufacturer
and dentist to have the number and the grains correspond. No dentist
wishes to purchase No. 8 and find that he has No. 18; no one could sell
gold foil under like circumstances. Of the different makes tested,
White's came the nearest to being correct. The extra tough foil which
can now be obtained is chemically pure, and with it we can begin at the
base of any cavity, and with mallet or hand force produce a filling
which will be one compact mass, so that it can be cut and filed; yet in
finishing, it will not bear so severe treatment as cohesive gold. Always
handle tin foil with clean pliers, never with the fingers; and prepare
only what is needed for each case, keeping the remainder in the book
placed in the envelope in which it is sold, otherwise extraneous matter
collects upon it, and it will oxidize _slightly_ when exposed to the air
for a _great_ length of time.

Before using tin foil, a few prefer to thoroughly crumple it in the
hands or napkin, under the impression that they thus make it more
pliable and easier to manipulate.

A piece of blue litmus paper moistened and moved over a sheet of tin
foil will occasionally give an acid reaction, probably owing to the acid
with which it is cleaned before beating not having been thoroughly
removed. Foil held under the surface of distilled water and boiled for
five minutes, then left until the water is cold, removed and dried,
shows it has been annealed, which makes it work easily, but not as hard
a filling can be made from it as before boiling.

In selecting and using this material for filling, we are able fully to
protect the cavity; and if we understand the material, and how to
manipulate it, we will surely succeed. This statement demands serious
attention, and appeals to every one who is anxious to practice for the
best interests of his patients; then let us make a thorough study of the
merits of the method and material.

Until recently, the term cohesion had but one special meaning to
dentists, and that as applied to gold for filling teeth; being
understood as the property by which layers of this metal could be united
without force so as to be inseparable. The writer claims that good tin
foil in proper condition is cohesive when force is applied, and can be
used for filling teeth in the same manner in which cohesive gold foil is
used. This claim has been confirmed by several dentists, as noted in
another part of this volume.

Cohesion is the power to resist separation, and it acts at insensible
distances. The integral particles of a body are held together by
cohesion, the constituent parts are united by affinity.

The attraction between atoms of pure tin represents cohesion. Marble is
composed of lime and carbonic acid, which are united and held together
by affinity.

The condition which obtains in the tin may be called cohesion, adhesion,
welding, or interdigitation, but the fact remains that layers of tin
foil can be driven together into a solid mass, making a tight filling
with less malleting than is required for gold; if it is overmalleted,
the receiving surface is injured.

On account of its pliability it is easily adapted to the walls and
margins, and a perfect fit is made, thus preventing capillary action and
preventing further caries. Of all the metals used for filling it is the
best tooth-preserver and the most compatible with tooth-substance, and
the facility with which a saving filling can be made largely commends
it.

Tin has great possibilities, and has already gained a high position as a
filling-material. Upon the knowledge we possess of the possibilities and
limitations of tin as a filling-material, and our ability to apply that
knowledge, will largely depend our success in preserving teeth.

It is a good material for filling many cavities in the temporary teeth,
and children will bear having it used, because it can be placed quickly,
and but little force is required to condense one or two layers of No. 10
foil. The dentin in young teeth has a large proportion of organic
material, for which reason, if caries takes place, many believe it is
hastened by thermal changes. Gold fillings in such teeth might prevent
complete calcification, on account of the gold being so good a
conductor; but if tin is used, there is much more probability of
calcification taking place, because of its low conductivity and its
therapeutic influence. It does not change its shape after being packed
into a cavity. Under tin, teeth are calcified and saved by the deposit
of lime-salts from the contents of the dentinal tubuli. This is termed
progressive calcification.

Like other organs of the human body, the teeth are more or less subject
to constitutional change. The condition in which we find tooth-structure
which needs repairing or restoring should be a sure indicator to us in
choosing a filling-material. Up to the age of fourteen, and sometimes
later, we find many teeth which are quite chalky. In some mouths also,
at this period, the fluids are in such a condition that oxychlorid and
oxyphosphate do not last long; for some reason amalgam soon fails, while
gutta-percha is quickly worn out on an occlusal surface. In all such
cases we recommend tin, even in the anterior teeth, for as the patient
advances in years the tooth-structure usually becomes more dense, so
that, if desirable, the fillings can be removed, and good saving
operations can be made with gold. By treating cases in this manner very
little, if any, tooth-structure is lost.

The teeth of the inhabitants of Mexico and Guatemala are characteristic
of their nervous and nervo-lymphatic temperaments; children ten years of
age often have twenty-eight permanent teeth, and they are generally soft
or chalky, but our dentists there report good success in saving them
with tin.

In filling this class of teeth, we should be very careful not to use
force enough to injure the cavity-margin, for if this occurs, a leaky
filling will probably be the result. Still, we have seen some cases
where _slight_ imperfections at the margin, which occurred at the time
of the filling or afterward, did no harm, because the deposit of tin
oxid filled up the ends of the tubuli, thus preventing caries. We
believe that this bar to the progress of caries is set up more
frequently when tin is used than with any other metal under like
conditions.




CHAPTER V.


In some mouths tin does not discolor, but retains a clean, unpolished
tin color, yet when there is a sesquioxid of the metal formed, fillings
present a grayish appearance. In the same mouth some fillings will be
discolored, while others are not. As a general rule, proximal fillings
are most liable to show discoloration. Perhaps one reason is that on
occlusal and buccal surfaces they are subject to more friction from
mastication, movements of the cheeks, and the use of the brush.

We have seen a large number of fillings which were not blackened, yet
were saving the teeth perfectly, thus proving to a certainty that
blackening of tin in the tooth-cavity is not absolutely essential in
order to obtain its salvatory effects as a filling-material.

Where there is considerable decomposition of food which produces
sulfuretted hydrogen, the sulfid of tin may be formed on and around the
fillings; it is of a yellowish or brownish color, and as an antiseptic
is in such cases desirable. To offset the discoloration, we find that
the sulfid is insoluble, and fills the ends of the tubuli, thus lending
its aid in preventing further caries. A sulfid is a combination of
sulfur with a metal or other body. A tin solution acted on by
sulfuretted hydrogen (H_{2}S) produces a dark-brown precipitate (SnS),
stannous salt, which is soluble in ammonium sulfid (NH_{4})_{2}S_{2};
this being precipitated, gives (SnS_{2}) stannic salt, which is yellow.
Brown precipitates are formed by both hydrogen sulfid and ammonium
sulfid, in stannous solutions. Yellow precipitates are formed by
hydrogen sulfid and ammonium sulfid in stannic solutions. The yellow
shade is very seldom seen on tin fillings; the dark brown is more
common.

An oxid is a combination of oxygen with a metal or base destitute of an
acid. In oxidation the oxygen that enters into combination is not
sufficient to form an acid. The protoxid of tin (SnO) is black, and can
be obtained from chlorid of tin, or by _long_ exposure of tin to the
atmosphere. The oxygen in the saliva helps to blacken the tin, and the
metallic oxid penetrates the dentin more or less, acting as a
protection, because it is insoluble. Oxygen is the only element which
forms compounds with all others, and is the type of electro-negative
bodies; it combines with all metals, therefore with tin, and in many
cases only the metal is discolored, and not the tooth. Steam boilers are
made tight by oxidation.

Where there is complete oxidation, the tooth is blackened to but a very
slight depth, and the oxid fills the ends of the tubuli, thus affording
an additional barrier to the entrance of caries. The filling itself will
prevent caries, but oxidation acts as an assistant.

"In the mouth, a suboxid is more likely to be formed than a protoxid,
but both are black; sulfur and oxygen are capable of acting on tin under
favorable circumstances, such as warmth, moisture, full contact,
condensation of elements, and their nascent conditions; the first three
are always present in the mouth. The protosulfuret of tin is black."
(Dr. George Watt.) Others give the color as bluish-gray, nearly black.

Experiments show that slight galvanic currents exist between fillings of
dissimilar metals in the mouth, and practical experience demonstrates
that these currents occasionally produce serious results.

Direct galvanic currents do not decompose normal teeth by true
electrolysis, but acids resulting from decomposition of food and fluids
react upon the lime constituents of the teeth and promote secondary
caries.

When two metals are so situated in the mouth that the mucous membrane
forms a connecting conductor and the fluids are capable of acting on
one metal, galvanic action is established sufficient to decompose any of
the binary compounds contained in these fluids; the liberated nitrogen
and hydrogen form ammonia, which being exposed to the action of oxygen
is decomposed and nitric oxid formed, resulting in nitric acid. We also
have in the mouth air, moisture, and decomposing nitrogenous food to
assist in the production of nitric acid.

"Galvanic action is more likely to develop hydrochloric acid, for the
chlorids of sodium and potassium are present in the normal saliva and
mucus, and when decomposed their chlorin unites with the hydrogen
derived from the water of the saliva." (Dr. George Watt.)

The fact should also be noted that both nitric and hydrochloric acids
are administered as medicine, and often assist in producing decay.

When there is a battery formed in a mouth containing tin fillings and
gold fillings, and the fluids of the mouth are the exciting media, tin
will be the positive element and gold the negative element; thus when
they form the voltaic pair, the tin becomes coated or oxidized and the
current practically ceases.

There is more or less therapeutical and chemical action in cavities
filled with tin, and its compatibility and prophylactic behavior as a
filling-material depends partly upon the chemical action which occurs.

Some dentists fill sensitive cavities with tin, in order to secure
gentle galvanic action, which they believe to be therapeutic,
solidifying the tooth-structure.

"Tin possesses antiseptic properties which do not pertain to gold for
arresting decay in frail teeth; it not only arrests caries mechanically,
but in chalky (imperfect) structure acts as an antacid element in
arresting the galvanic current set up between the tooth-structure and
filling-material." (Dr. S. B. Palmer.) If the metal is acted on, the
tooth is comparatively safe; if the reverse, it is more or less
destroyed. The galvanic taste can be produced by placing a piece of
silver on the tongue and a steel pen or piece of zinc under it; then
bring the edges of the two pieces together for a short time, rinse the
saliva around in the mouth, and the peculiar flavor will be detected.

"In 1820 attention was called to the injurious effects of the galvanic
current on the teeth, and dentists were advised never to use tin and
amalgam in the same mouth.

"A constant galvanic action is kept up in the mouth when more than one
kind of metal is used in filling teeth, and galvanism is often the
cause of extensive injury to the teeth. The most remarkable case I ever
saw was that of a lady for whom I filled several teeth with tin. After a
time decay took place around some of the fillings. I removed them and
began to refill, but there was so much pain I could not proceed. I found
that by holding a steel plugger an inch from the tooth I could give her
a violent galvanic shock. I observed that the exhalation of the breath
increased the evolution of galvanism." (Dr. L. Mackall, _American
Journal of Dental Science_, 1839.)

"When a faulty tooth in the upper jaw had been stopped from its side
with tin, the interstice between it and the adjoining tooth being quite
inconsiderable, while the upper surface of a tooth not immediately
beneath it in the lower jaw was stopped with the same metal, I have
known a galvanic shock regularly communicated from one tooth to the
other when by the movement of jaws or cheeks they were brought near
together." (Dr. E. Parmly, _American Journal of Dental Science_, 1839.)

"An interesting debate here sprung up on the action where two metals are
used in one filling, such as gold and tin, the saliva acting as a
medium, and where the baser metal is oxidized by exhalents and by
imbibition through the bony tooth-structure." (Pennsylvania Society of
Dental Surgeons, 1848.)

"A patient came to me and complained of pain in the teeth. Upon
examination I found an amalgam filling next to one of tin. With a file I
made a V-shaped separation, when they experienced immediate relief from
pain." (Dr. Nevill, _American Journal of Dental Science_, 1867.)

In regard to the decay of teeth being dependent on galvanic action
present in the mouth, Dr. Chase, in 1880, claimed that a tooth filled
with gold would necessarily become carious again at the margin of the
cavity, wherever the acid secretions constantly bathe the filling and
tooth-substance. A tooth filled with amalgam succumbs to this
electro-chemical process less rapidly, while one filled with tin still
longer escapes destruction. The comparative rapidity with which teeth
filled with gold, amalgam, or tin, are destroyed is expressed by the
numbers 100, 67, 50. He prepared pieces of ivory of equal shape and
size, bored a hole in each, and filled them. After they had been exposed
to the action of an acid for one week, they had decreased in
weight,--viz, piece filled with gold, 0.06; amalgam, 0.04; tin, 0.03.

"With tin and gold, some have the superstition that the electricity
attendant upon such a filling will in some way be injurious to the
tooth; it matters not which is on the outside, when rolled and used as
non-cohesive cylinders each appears. We say that neither experimentally,
theoretically, nor practically can any good or bad result be expected
from the electrical action of a tin-gold filling on tooth-bone, and
neither will the pulp be disturbed." (Dr. W. D. Miller, _Independent
Practitioner_, August, 1884.)

"When the bottom of a cavity is filled with tin which is tightly
(completely) covered with gold, there is _practically_ no galvanic
action and there is no current generated by contact of tin and
gold,--_i.e._, no current leaves the filling to affect the dentin. That
portion of tin which forms the base is more positive than a full tin
filling would be. The effect is to cause the surface exposed to dentin
to oxidize more than tin would do alone; in that there is a benefit. In
very porous dentin there is enough moisture to oxidize the tin, by
reason of the current set up by the gold." (Dr. S. B. Palmer.)

Electricity generated by heat is called thermo-electricity. If a cavity
with continuous walls is half filled with tin and completed with gold,
or half filled with silver and completed with gold, and the junctions of
the metal are at 20-1/2 deg. C. and 19-1/2 deg. C., if the electrical action
between the tin and gold be 1.1, the action between the silver and gold
will be 1.8, thus showing the action in silver and gold to be nearly
two-thirds more than in the tin and gold, a deduction which favors the
tin and gold.

Rubbing two different substances together is a common method of
producing an electric charge. Is there not more electricity generated
during mastication on metal fillings than when the jaws are at rest?
Friction brings into close contact numerous particles of two bodies, and
perhaps the electrical action going on more or less all the time through
gold fillings (especially when other metals are in the mouth) accounts
for a powdered condition of the dentin which is sometimes found under
cohesive gold fillings, but not under tin.




CHAPTER VI.


White caries, the most formidable variety known, may be produced by
nitric acid, and in these cases all the components of the tooth are
acted upon and disintegrated as far as the action extends. In proximal
cavities attacked by this kind of caries, separate freely on the lingual
side, and fill with tin. When such fillings have been removed the dentin
has been found somewhat discolored and greatly solidified as compared to
its former condition; this solidification or calcification is more
frequent under tin than gold, which is partly due to the tin as a poor
conductor of heat. Nature will not restore the lost part, but will do
the next best thing--solidify the dentin. In some cases, under tin, the
pulp gradually recedes, and the pulp-cavity is obliterated by secondary
dentin. In other cases the pulps had partly calcified under tin. It has
been known for years that tin would be tolerated in large cavities very
near the pulp without causing any trouble, and one reason for this is
its low conducting power. Attention is called to the fact that gold is
nearly four times as good a conductor of heat as tin, and more than six
times as good a conductor of electricity. Where tin fillings are
subject to a large amount of attrition, they wear away sooner or later,
but this is not such a great detriment, for they can easily be repaired
or replaced, and owing to the concave form produced by wear the patient
is liable to know when a large amount has been worn away. That portion
against the wall of the cavity is the last removed by wear, so that
further caries is prevented so long as there is any reasonable amount of
tin left. If at this time the tooth has become sufficiently solidified,
proper anchorage can be cut in the tin or tooth, one or both, as
judgment dictates, and the filling completed with gold. A tin filling,
confined by four rather frail walls, may condense upon itself, but it is
so soft and adaptable that the force which condenses it continually
secures the readaptation at the margin; thus there will be no leakage or
caries for years. Owing to its softness and pliability, it may be driven
into or onto the tubuli to completely close them from outside moisture,
and with a hand burnisher the tin can be made to take such a hold on
dry, rough tubuli that a cutting instrument is necessary to remove all
traces of it.

Tin foil has been found in the market that under a magnifying glass
showed innumerable tiny black specks, which, upon being touched with an
instrument, crumbled away, leaving a hole through the foil. More than
likely, some of the failures can be attributed to the use of such foil.
Good tough foil, well condensed by hand or mallet force, stays against
the walls of a cavity and makes a tight filling, and ought to be called
as near perfect as any filling, because it preserves the tooth, and
gives a surface which will wear from five to twenty years, depending
upon the size and location of the cavity and tooth-structure. Buccal
cavities in the first permanent molars, and lingual cavities in the
superior incisors, filled for children from six to eight years of age,
are still in good condition after a period of twenty years. Perhaps the
limit is reached in the following cases, all in the mouths of
_dentists_: One filling forty years old; one forty-two; four on the
occlusal surface, fifty; in the latter case gold had been used in other
cavities and had failed several times. Lingual cavities in molars and
bicuspids can be perfectly preserved with tin. Tapes of No. 10 foil,
from one to three thicknesses, can be welded together and will cohere as
well or better than semi-cohesive gold foil, and it can be manipulated
more rapidly; therefore, if desirable, any degree of contour can be
produced, but the contour will not have the hardness or strength of
gold, so in many cases it would not be practicable to make extensive
contours with tin, owing to its physical characteristics.

No. 10 will answer for all cases, and it is not as liable to be torn or
cut by the plugger as a lower number, but one need not be restricted to
it, as good fillings can be made with Nos. 4, 6, or 8. More teeth can be
saved with tin than with any other metal or metals, and the average
dentist will do better with tin than with gold. It is invaluable when
the patient is limited for time or means, and also for filling the first
permanent molars, where we so often find poor calcification of
tooth-structure. In cases of orthodontia, where caries has attacked a
large number of teeth, it is well to fill with tin, and await further
developments as to irregularity and caries.

If cavities are of a good general retaining form, that will be
sufficient to hold the filling in place; but if not, then cut slight
opposing angles, grooves, or pits. Cavities are generally prepared the
same as for gold, except where there is a great deal of force brought
upon the filling; then the grooves or pits may be a little larger;
still, many cavities can be well filled with less excavating than
required for gold, and proximal cavities in bicuspids and molars, where
there is sufficient space, can be filled without removing the occlusal
surface, and here especially should the cavities be cut square into the
teeth, so as not to leave a feather edge of tin when the filling is
finished, as that would invite further caries and prove an obstruction
to cleansing the filling with floss.

In proximal cavities involving the occlusal surface, cut the cervical
portion down to a strong square base, with a slight pit, undercut, or
angle, at the buccal and lingual corners; where there is sufficient
material, a slight groove across the base, far enough from the margin so
that it will not be broken out, can be made in place of the pit,
undercut, or angle; then cut a groove in the buccal and lingual side
(one or both, according to the amount of material there is to work
upon), extending from the base to the occlusal surface; in most of these
cases the occlusal grooves or pits would have to be excavated on account
of caries; thus there would be additional opportunity for anchorage. In
place of the grooves the cavity may be of the dovetail form. In nearly
all proximal cavities in bicuspids and molars, some form of metal
shield, or matrix, is of great advantage, as they prevent the tin from
crushing or sliding out. By driving the tin firmly against the metal, a
well-condensed surface is secured; and as the metal yields a little, we
can with a bevel or thin plugger force the tin slightly between the
metal and the margin of the cavity, thus making sure of a tight filling,
with plenty of material to finish well. After removing the metal,
condense with thin burnishers and complete the finish the same as for
gold. Where no shield or matrix is used, or where it is used and removed
before completing the filling, it is often desirable to trim the
cervical border, for in either case there is more light and room to work
when only a portion of the cavity has been filled. Tin cuts so much
easier than gold, it is more readily trimmed down level with all
cervical margins.

Be sure that all margins are made perfect as the work progresses, and if
the cavity is deep and a wide shield shuts out the light, then use a
narrow one, which can be moved toward the occlusal surface from time to
time.

In filling the anterior teeth when the labial wall is gone, and the
lingual wall intact or nearly so, use a piece of thin metal
three-quarters of an inch long and wide enough to cover the cavity in
the tooth to be filled, insert it between the teeth, and bend the
lingual end over the cavity; the labial end is bent out of the way over
the labial surface of the adjoining tooth, as shown in Fig. 4. When the
labial wall is intact or nearly so, access to the cavity should be
obtained from the lingual side, and in this case the bending of the
shield would be reversed, as shown in Fig. 5. The shield is not
absolutely essential, but it helps support the tin, and also keeps a
separation.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

It is preferable to save the labial wall and line it with (say) five
layers of No. 4 semi-cohesive gold folded into a mat and extended to the
outer edge of the cavity; this gives the tooth a lighter shade, and
bicuspids or molars can be filled in the same manner. Cases are on
record where incisors with translucent labial walls, filled by this
method, have lasted from twenty-three to thirty-seven years.




CHAPTER VII.


For the last ten years the writer has been using tin at the cervical
margin of proximal cavities in bicuspids and molars, especially in deep
cavities (now an accepted practice), and he finds that it prevents
further caries oftener than any other metal or combination of metals he
has ever seen used. In filling such cavities, adjust the rubber, and use
a shield or matrix of such form as to just pass beyond the cervical
margin; this will generally push the rubber out of the cavity, but if it
does not, then form a wedge of wood and force between the metal and the
adjoining tooth, thus bringing the metal against the cervical margin,
and if a small film of rubber should still remain in the cavity, it may
be forced out by using any flat burnisher which will reach it, or it can
be dissolved out with a little chloroform. Fill from one-fourth to
one-half of the cavity with tin, and complete the remainder with gold
when the tooth is of good structure; this gives all the advantages of
gold for an occlusal surface.

Before beginning with the gold, have the tin solid and square across the
cavity, and the rest of the cavity a good retaining form, the same as
for gold filling; then begin with a strip of gold slightly annealed and
mallet it into the tin, but do not place too great reliance upon the
connection of the metals to keep the filling in place.

On the same plan, proximal cavities in the anterior teeth can be filled,
and also buccal cavities in molars, especially where they extend to the
occlusal surface. The cervical margin should be well covered with tin
thoroughly condensed, thus securing perfect adaptation, and a solid base
for the gold with which the filling is to be completed. Time has fully
demonstrated that the cervical margin is most liable to caries, and here
the conservative and preservative qualities of tin make it specially
applicable.

"Electrolysis demonstrates to us that no single metal can be decomposed,
but when gold and tin are used in the above manner they are united at
the line of contact by electrolysis. The surface of both metals is
exposed to the fluids of the mouth, and the oxid of tin is deposited on
the tin, by reason of the current set up by the gold; thus some atoms of
tin are dissolved and firmly attached to the gold, but the tin does not
penetrate the gold to any great extent." (Dr. S. B. Palmer.)

This connection of the metals assists in holding the filling in place,
but it is more likely to break apart than if it was all gold. After
electrolysis has taken place at the junction, it requires a cutting
instrument to completely separate the tin and gold.

For filling by hand pressure, use instruments with square ends and
sides, medium serrations, and of any form or size which will best reach
the cavity.

For filling with the hand mallet, use instruments with medium
serrations, and a steady medium blow with a four-ounce mallet; in force
of blow we are guided by thickness of tin, size of plugger, and depth of
serrations, strength of cavity-walls and margins, the same as in using
gold. The majority of medium serrated hand mallet pluggers will work
well on No. 10 tin of one, two, or three thicknesses. If the tin shows
any tendency to slide, use a more deeply serrated plugger. The
electro-magnetic, and mechanical (engine) mallet do not seem to work tin
as well as the hand mallet or hand force, as the tendency of such
numerous and rapid blows is to chop up the tin and prevent the making of
a solid mass, and also injure the receiving surface of the filling. In
using any kind of force, _always_ aim to carry the material to place
before delivering the pressure, or blow.

In order to obtain the best results, there must be absolute dryness, and
care must be exercised, not thinking that because it is _tin_ it will be
all right. Skill is required to make good tin fillings, as well as when
making good gold fillings. Always use tapes narrower than the orifice of
the cavity; they are preferable to rolls or ropes. After a few trials it
is thought that every one will have the same opinion. A roll or rope
necessarily contains a large number of spaces, wrinkles, or
irregularities, which must be obliterated by using force in order to
produce a solid filling; thus more force is employed, and more time
occupied in condensing a rope, than a flat tape; the individual blow in
one case may not be heavier than in the other, but the rope has to be
struck more blows. The idea that a rope could be fed into a cavity with
a plugger faster and easier than a tape has long ago been disproved.
Many of the old-fashioned non-cohesive gold foil operators used flat
tapes, as did also Dr. Varney, one of the kings of modern cohesive gold
operators.

The tape is made by folding any portion of a sheet of foil upon itself
until a certain width and thickness is obtained. This tape is very
desirable in small or proximal cavities where a roll or rope would catch
on the margin and partially conceal the view.

In the form of a tape, perhaps more foil can be put in a cavity, and
there may be more uniform density than when ropes are used. Tapes can
also be made by folding part of a sheet of foil over a thin, narrow
strip of metal. Fold the tin into tapes of different lengths, widths,
and thicknesses, according to the size of the cavity; then fold the end
of the tape once or twice upon itself, place it at the base of any
proximal cavity, and begin to condense with a foot plugger of suitable
size, and if there is a pit, groove, or undercut which it does not
reach, then use an additional plugger of some other form to carry the
tin to place; fold the tape back and forth across the cavity, proceeding
as for cohesive gold. In small proximal cavities a very narrow tape of
No. 10, one thickness, can be used successfully. For cavities in the
occlusal surface, use a tape as just described, generally beginning at
the bottom or distal side, but the filling can be started at any
convenient place, and with more ease than when using cohesive gold. In
any case if the tin has a tendency to move when starting a filling,
"Ambler's left-hand assistant" is used, by slipping the ring over the
second finger of the left hand, letting the point rest on the tin. This
instrument is especially valuable in starting cohesive gold (see Fig.
6). This is the easiest, quickest, and best manner of making a good
filling, relying upon the welding or cohesive properties of the tin.

Many operators have not tried to unite the tin and make a solid mass;
they seem to think that it cannot be accomplished, but with proper
pluggers and manipulation it can be done successfully.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

For large occlusal or proximal cavities, the tapes may be folded into
mats, or rolled into cylinders, and used on the plan of wedging or
interdigitation, and good fillings can be produced by this method, but
the advantage of cohesion is not obtained, and more force is required
for condensing. They are, therefore, not so desirable as tapes,
especially for frail teeth. When using mats or cylinders, the general
form of the cavity must be depended upon to hold the filling in place.
To make the most pliable cylinders, cut a strip of any desired width
from a sheet of foil and roll it on a triangular broach, cutting it off
at proper times, to make the cylinders of different sizes.

A cylinder roller, designed by the author, is much superior to a broach.
(See Fig. 7.) When the cavity is full, go over the tin with a mallet or
hand burnisher, being careful not to injure the cavity-margin. Cut down
occlusal fillings with burs or carborundum wheels, and proximal fillings
with sharp instruments, emery strips or disks. After partially
finishing, give the filling another condensing with the burnisher, then
a final trimming and moderate burnishing; by this method a hard, smooth
surface is obtained.

Fillings on occlusal surfaces can be faced with No. 20 or 30 tin, and
burnished or condensed, by using a burnisher in the engine, but do not
rely upon the burnisher to make a good filling out of a poor one.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

By trimming fillings before they get wet, any defects can be remedied by
cutting them out; then with a thin tape (one or two layers of No. 10)
and serrated plugger proceed with hand or mallet force to repair the
same as with cohesive gold.

Another method of preparing tin for fillings is to make a flat, round
sand mold; then melt chemically pure tin in a clean ladle and pour it
into the mold; put this form on a lathe, and with a sharp chisel turn
off thick or thin shavings, which will be found very tough and cohesive
when freshly cut, but they do not retain their cohesive properties for
any great length of time,--perhaps ten or twenty days, if kept in a
tightly corked bottle. After more or less exposure to the air they
become oxidized and do not work well, but when they are very thin they
are soft, pliable, and cohesive as gold, and any size or form of filling
can be made with them.

Among the uses of tin in the teeth, the writer notes the following from
Dr. Herbst, of Germany: "After amputating the coronal portion of the
pulp, burnish a mat of tin foil into the pulp-cavity, thus creating an
absolutely air-tight covering to the root-canal containing the remainder
of the pulp; this is the best material for the purpose." There has been
a great deal said about this method, pro and con, notably the latter.
The writer has had no practical experience with it, and it need not be
understood that he indorses it.

If a pulp ever does die under tin, perhaps it will not decompose as
rapidly as it otherwise would, owing to its being charged with
tin-salts.

The Herbst method of filling consists in introducing and condensing tin
in cavities by means of smooth, highly tempered steel engine or hand
burnishers. In the engine set of instruments there is one oval end
inverted cone-shaped, one pear-shaped, and one bud-shaped. The revolving
burnisher is held firmly against the tin, a few seconds in a place, and
moved around, especially along the margins, not running the engine too
fast. Complicated cavities are converted into simple ones by using a
matrix, and proximal cavities in bicuspids and molars are entered from
the occlusal surface. The tin foil is cut into strips, and then made
into ropes, which are cut into pieces of different lengths; the first
piece must be large enough so that when it is condensed it will lie
firmly in the cavity without being held; thus a piece at a time is added
until the cavity is full. The hand set of burnishers has four which are
pear-shaped and vary in size, and one which is rather small and
roof-shaped. In filling and condensing they are rotated in the hand
one-half or three-quarters of a turn.

Dr. Herbst claims a better adaptation to the walls of the cavity than by
any other method. Proximal cavities in bicuspids and molars can easily
be filled; the tin can be perfectly adapted against thin walls of enamel
without fracturing them; less annoyance to the patient and less work for
the dentist; can be done in half the time required for other methods.

Fees should be reasonably large, certainly more than for amalgam, for
we can save many teeth for a longer time than they could have been
preserved with cohesive gold. Many are not able to pay for gold, but
they want their teeth filled and _saved_, and it is expected that we
will do it properly and with the right kind of material; thus it is our
duty in such cases to use more tin and less amalgam.

We should always take into consideration the amount of good accomplished
for the patient,--the salvation of the tooth,--and if we are sure, from
experience and observation, that the tin filling will last as long as a
gold one in the same cavity, or longer, then the fee should be as much
as for gold, with the cost of the gold deducted. The amount of the fee
ought to be based upon the degree of intelligence, learning, and skill
required; upon the amount of nervous energy expended; upon the draft
made on the dentist's vitality; upon what benefit has been given the
patient; upon the perfection of the result; and, everything else being
equal, upon the time occupied; the value of this last factor being
estimated in proportion to the shortness of it.




CHAPTER VIII.


Dr. Robinson's Fibrous and Textile Metallic Filling is a shredded
metallic alloy, mostly tin, and has the appearance of woven or felt
foil. It is prepared in a machine invented by the doctor especially for
the purpose, and he gives directions for using as follows: "Cut the
material into strips running with the selvage, and fill as you would
with soft foil; use it in all surrounding walls, and finish with a
mallet burnisher. Where the surface comes to hard wear, weld on gold
with long, sharp serrated pluggers, and finish the same as with gold
fillings. The advantage over gold for cervical, buccal, and lingual
walls is the perfect ease with which it is adapted, and it can be
burnished so as to be absolutely impervious to moisture. Sharp,
coarse-serrated pluggers are particularly desirable when using hand
pressure." It comes in one-half-ounce boxes, filled with sheets less
than two inches square; the thin ones are used for filling, and the
thick ones make good linings for vulcanite.

This material is easy to manipulate, but great care is required in
condensing at cavity-margins, so as to make a tight filling, and also
not injure the margins. It makes as hard a surface as tin foil, and can
be cut, polished, and burnished so that it is smooth and looks well; it
can be used in temporary or chalky teeth, as a small amount of force
condenses it. By using a matrix proximal cavities can be filled from
one-fourth to one-half full, and the rest filled with gold, relying on
the form of the cavity to hold the gold, regardless of its connection
with the fibrous material. If the surface is not overmalleted so as to
make it brittle or powdery, a strip of No. 4 cohesive gold, of four or
five thicknesses, may be driven into it with a hand mallet and plugger
of medium serrations; this union is largely mechanical, but of
sufficient tenacity to make manipulation easy, as the material makes a
solid foundation to build upon. After exposure to the oral fluids,
electrolysis takes place at the junction of the metals.

In 1884 Dr. Brophy said, "I have used Robinson's material for two years,
and find it possesses good qualities, and can be used in deciduous
teeth, first permanent molars, and cervical margins with better results
than can be obtained with any other material by the majority of
operators."

Malleted with deeply serrated pluggers, it will make a filling which
will not leak. It has saved many teeth from caries at the cervical
margin where it might have recurred sooner had cohesive gold been used.
In the mouth it changes color about the same as tin foil, and a few
fillings did not maintain their integrity, but became crumbly and
granular.

For conducting properties it ranks about with tin, and fillings can be
made more rapidly than with cohesive gold. We have used ounces of it,
but time has proved that everything that can be done with it in filling
teeth can also be accomplished as well and in some cases better with tin
foil.

In 1878 Dr. N. B. Slayton patented his Felt Foil, which was said to be
tin cut into hair-like fibers by a machine, then pressed into small
sheets and sold in one-half-ounce books, but it sold only to a very
limited extent. Soon after this Dr. Jere Robinson, Sr., invented a
machine and began the manufacture of a similar article, but he found he
was infringing on the Slayton patent, so he purchased the Slayton
machine and made satisfactory terms to continue his own manufacture of
fibrous material. After this little was heard of Slayton's Felt Foil,
but Robinson's was considerably used. The two materials look and are
manipulated almost exactly alike. Dr. Robinson has both of
above-mentioned machines now in his possession.

Archibald McBride, of Pittsburg, Pa., in 1838, made a roll of a portion
of a sheet of tin, and then used just enough gold to cover it, aiming
to keep the gold on the surface, so as to have the filling look like one
of all gold, and not with the idea of deriving any special benefit from
the effects of wear or preservation as obtained by thus combining the
two metals. The fee for a gold filling was one dollar; tin, fifty cents.
Some operators have advocated using tin and gold (symbol Tg), rolled or
folded together in alternate layers, thus exposing both metals to the
fluids of the mouth; claiming that fillings can be made quicker, are not
so subject to thermal changes, and can be inserted nearer the pulp than
when gold is used. This may be true in comparison with gold, but these
three claims are entirely met by using tin alone. Others say that this
union of gold and tin will preserve the teeth as well as a correct gold
filling, making no conditions or restrictions as to tooth-structure or
location of cavity. They say that it preserves the cervical margin
better than gold; that it expands _slightly_.

A description of some different methods of combining and manipulating
tin and gold is subjoined:

(_a_) Two sheets of No. 4 cohesive gold and one of the same number of
tin are used; place the tin between the gold, cut off strips, and use
with hand or mallet force the same as cohesive gold; if non-cohesive
gold is used, the strips can be folded into mats or rolled into
cylinders, and are used on the wedging plan, the same as non-cohesive
gold, or the strips can be folded back and forth in the cavity until it
is full.

(_b_) Lay a sheet of non-cohesive gold, No. 3, on a sheet of tin of the
same number, cut off strips, roll into ropes and use as non-cohesive
gold. It is easily packed and harder than tin, and has a preservative
action on the teeth. Line the cavity with chloro-balsam as an insulator
against possible currents and moisture; especially should this be done
in large cavities or chalky teeth.

(_c_) A sheet of non-cohesive gold, No. 4, is laid on a sheet of tin of
the same number, cut into strips and rolled into cylinders, or folded
into blocks, always in equal portions; then they will unite to the
extent of two leaves. These fillings sometimes become a solid mass about
the color of amalgam, and last very well, as the metals have become
united by electrolysis. An excess of tin will be marked by lines or pits
in the filling, showing where the tin has been disintegrated or
dissolved by the chemical action which occurs on the surface exposed to
moisture.

No doubt, good fillings have been made by the above methods, yet some
were granular, gritty, and were easily removed, while others were quite
smooth and hard; probably in the first instance the proportion of tin
and gold was not proper,--that is, not equal; or it was not well
condensed. Tin being the positive element, it is more easily acted on
and disintegrated by electrolysis (chemical action of the fluids).

When this combination does become hard, it wears longer than tin on an
occlusal surface, but we believe that in some cases where it was used
the teeth could have been saved just as well with either tin or gold, or
by filling part of the cavity with tin and the rest with gold.

If tin foil is laid on 22-carat gold and vulcanized, it becomes
thoroughly attached and will take a tin polish; the attraction or
interchange of atoms takes place to this extent.

This combination of tin and gold can be used at the cervical margin, or
a cavity can be lined with it, and the remainder filled with cohesive or
non-cohesive gold.

"Tin and gold (Tg) folded or rolled together in equal portions possesses
a greater number of desirable properties than any other material, for it
is easily adapted, has antiseptic action and a lower conductivity than
gold. A new filling is harder than tin, softer than gold, but after a
time it becomes as hard as amalgam. It oxidizes and thus helps make
tight margins, and is very useful at cervical margins; generally
discolors, but not always, and does not discolor the tooth unless a
carious portion has been left, and then only discolors that portion. In
oral fluids it is indestructible if well condensed, otherwise it is
crumbly. There is no change of form, except a _slight_ expansion, which
does no harm. A weak electric current is set up between the gold and
tin, and tin oxid is formed. The hardening and discoloration both depend
upon the separation of the tin by the electrical action and its
deposition on the surface of the gold. I generally prepare cavities the
same as for non-cohesive gold, but a Tg filling may be held in a more
shallow cavity and with less undercuts than for gold. Hand pressure is
adopted, but a mallet may be used advantageously. Lay a sheet of No. 4
non-cohesive gold on a sheet of No. 4 tin, then cut into strips and
twist into ropes; keep the tin on the outside, for it does not tear as
easily as gold. Carry the material against the walls and not against the
base, otherwise the filling will be flat or concave; but should this
occur, then force a wedge-shaped plugger into the center of the filling,
and drive the material toward the walls, and then fill the hole or
remove all the filling and begin anew.

"In very deep cavities use a mat of Tg, dampened in carbolic acid and
dipped in powdered thymol, as a base; this has an antiseptic action, and
also prevents pressure on or penetration into the pulp.

"Drs. Abbot, Berlin; Jenkins, Dresden; Sachs, Breslau, have observed
tin-gold fillings from fifteen to twenty-five years, and say that for
certain cases it is better than any other material. I use square-pointed
pluggers (four-cornered), as part of the packing is done with the side
of the plugger. Tg is useful in partly erupted molars, buccal cavities
under the gums, occlusal cavities in temporary teeth, cavities where all
decay cannot be removed. Use Tg with a gold capping in small, deep
occlusal cavities, cavities with overhanging walls, occlusal cavities
with numerous fissures, large, deep occlusal cavities near the pulp, in
proximal cavities.

"Line labial walls of incisors with non-cohesive gold, and fill the
remainder with Tg. For repairing gold fillings I use Tg." (Dr. Miller,
Berlin, _Dental Cosmos_, 1890.)

Dr. Jenkins, of Dresden, says, "I use Tg in soft, imperfect teeth, of
which there are plenty in Germany, because it has pliability,
adaptability, slight susceptibility to thermal changes, makes a
water-tight joint, very useful at cervical margins, and can be used with
a minimum amount of pressure. When packed dry and with the gold next to
the tooth, discoloration occurs only on the surface; packed wet, the
whole discolors. I do not attribute its success to electrical action.
Lay a sheet of No. 4 tin on a sheet of No. 4 non-cohesive gold, fold so
as to keep the gold on the outside; use the strip with lateral pressure,
doubling it upon itself."

Dr. A. H. Thompson: "After several years' successful use of tin-gold, I
commend it for approximal cavities, cervical margins, and frail walls.
The oxid formed penetrates the enamel and dentin; if a filling wears
down, cover the surface with gold."

Dr. Pearson: "I do not like tin and gold in alternate layers. I prefer
No. 10 tin foil."

Dr. James Truman: "I believe that tin-gold has a positive value as a
filling-material."

"I prepare tin-gold by taking a sheet of No. 4 non- or semi-cohesive
gold, fold them together (or twist them) so as to have the gold on the
outside, and then fill any cavity with it. Since adopting the above
combination I have almost abandoned amalgam. This is recommended on
account of its density, ease of insertion, capacity for fine finish,
non-conducting and non-shrinking qualities, and compatibility with
tooth-substance. Those who have not used it will be surprised at the
rapidity with which it can be manipulated. It may be employed in any
cavity not exposed to view, also in crown, buccal, and approximal
fillings which extend into the occlusal surface, as it offers an
astonishing resistance to wear. It can be used anywhere that amalgam
can, and with more certainty of non-leakage, and it has the additional
advantage that it can be finished at the same sitting. Care is necessary
in manipulating it, so as to avoid chopping. I use hand pressure when
filling, and the mallet to condense the surface." (Dr. A. W. Harlan,
_Independent Practitioner_, 1884.)

"Pure tin foil is employed in connection with non-cohesive gold in
filling proximal cavities in bicuspids and molars; a sheet of gold and a
sheet of tin are folded together." (C. J. Essig: "Prosthetic
Dentistry.")

Dr. Benj. Lord says, "A combination in which I find great interest is in
the use of soft or non-cohesive gold with tin foil. This is no novelty
in practice, but I think that, for the most part, too great a proportion
of tin has been used, and hence has arisen the objection that the tin
dissolved in some mouths. I am satisfied that I myself until recently
employed more tin than was well. I now use from one-tenth to one-twelfth
as much tin as gold, and no disintegration or dissolving away of the
tin ever occurs. I fold the two metals together in the usual way of
folding gold to form strips, the tin being placed inside the gold. The
addition of the tin makes the gold tougher, so that it works more like
tin foil. The packing can be done with more ease and certainty; the
filling, with the same effort, will be harder, and the edges or margins
are stronger and more perfect.

"The two metals should be thoroughly incorporated by manipulation. Then,
after a time, there will be more or less of an amalgamation. By using
about a sixteenth of tin, the color of the gold is so neutralized that
the filling is far less conspicuous than when it is all gold, and I very
often use such a proportion of tin in cavities on the labial surfaces of
the front teeth.

"If too much tin is employed in such cases, there will be some
discoloration of the surface of the fillings; but in the proportion that
I have named no discoloration occurs, and the surface of the filling
will be an improvement on gold in color."

"Dr. Howe. I would like to ask Dr. Lord whether, in referring to the
proportions of tin and gold, he means them to be considered by weight?

"Dr. Lord. No, not by weight, but by the width of the strip of tin and
the width of the strip of gold. I get the proportions in that way, then
lay the tin on the gold and fold the gold over and over, which keeps the
tin inside the gold.

"Dr. Howe. Will Dr. Lord tell us whether he refers to the same numbers
of gold foil and tin foil; as, for instance, No. 4 gold and No. 4 tin?

"Dr. Lord. I use the No. 5 gold, and tin, I think, of about the
same number, but I always use No. 5 gold, both cohesive and
non-cohesive."--_New York Odontological Society Proceedings_, 1893, page
103.

"Tin and gold, in the proportions generally used, do not present a
pleasing color; when finished, it looks but little better than tin, and
after a short time it grows dark, and sometimes black. I use five parts
of gold to one of tin, prepared as follows: Lay down one sheet of
Abbey's non-cohesive gold foil, No. 6; upon this place a sheet of No. 4;
upon this place a sheet of White's globe tin foil, No. 4; upon this
another sheet of Abbey's non-cohesive gold, No. 4; upon this a sheet of
No. 6. Cut into five strips and crimp; the crimped strips are cut into
pieces a little longer than the depth of the cavity to be filled; some
of the strips are rolled into cylinders, others are left open, because
easier to use in starting a filling. The color of this combination is
slightly less yellow than pure gold, and hardens just as rapidly as when
the proportions are one to one, but does not become quite as hard. This
preparation is non-cohesive, and should be inserted by the wedge
process. I use it in the grinding surface of molars and bicuspids,
buccal cavities in molars and bicuspids, cervical fissure pits in
superior incisors, proximal cavities in bicuspids and molars. If
proximal cavities are opened from the occlusal surface, the last portion
of the filling should be of cohesive gold to withstand mastication. In
simple cavities I place as many pieces as can be easily introduced,
using my pliers as the wedging instrument to make room for the last
pieces, and then condense the whole. If the cavity is too deep for this,
I use Fletcher's artificial dentin as a base, because it partly fills
the cavity and the ends of the cylinders stick to it. After an
approximal cavity is prepared, use a matrix held in place by wooden
wedges; the cylinders are about one-eighth of an inch long, and
condensed in two or three layers so as to secure perfect adaptation;
hand pressure is principally used, but a few firm strokes with a hand
mallet are useful. When ready to add the cohesive gold for the
grinding-surface, a few pieces of White's crystal mat gold should first
be used, because it adheres beautifully; thus a perfect union is
secured, but I never risk adding the gold without leaving a little
undercut for it in the tooth. By this method we obtain a beautiful
contour filling in a short time. Fillings should be burnished and then
polished with a fine strip, or moistened pumice on a linen tape. Where
cohesive gold is used for the entire filling, in many cases the
enamel-walls, already thin near the cervical margin, are made thinner by
the unavoidable friction of the polishing strips, but tin and gold is so
soft that a good surface is obtained in a few moments, and this danger
is reduced to a minimum. The surface is as smooth as a cohesive gold
filling, while such a surface is impossible with non-cohesive gold. In
cavities which extend so far beyond the margin of the gum that it is
impossible to adjust the rubber-dam, I prepare the cavity as usual, then
adjust a matrix, disinfect, dry, and fill one-third full with tin and
gold, then remove the matrix, apply the rubber, place matrix again in
position, and complete the filling by adding a little tin and gold, then
pure gold." (Dr. W. A. Spring, _Dental Review_, February, 1896.)

Dr. T. D. Shumway says, "To have a scientific method of treatment, there
certainly must be a recognition of what is known of the nature of
tooth-structure. The method adopted more than a quarter of a century
ago, and which is at present employed, does not accord with the
teachings of the physiologist and microscopist; it is in direct
opposition to natural law. Each new discovery in the minute structure of
the teeth makes this more plain; pounding the teeth with a mallet cannot
be defended on scientific grounds. That it has not resulted more
disastrously is due to the wonderful recuperative energy of nature to
repair injury. No one would think of attempting to arrest and prevent
disintegration in any other vital organ by abrasion. Why, then, in
operation on the teeth, should we reverse the plain, simple teaching of
nature? Placing cohesive gold against the dentinal walls by pounding it
to heal a lesion is opposed to natural law. Cohesive gold will not be
mastered by force; if compelled to yield by superior strength, it seeks
a way to release itself; it is easily coaxed, but not easily driven.
Cohesive gold will unite with tin at an insensible distance just as
cohesive gold unites with itself; this union takes place without force
or pressure. Exactly what takes place when gold and tin are brought in
contact in the way described we do not know; we can only say that there
appears to be a perfect union. When cohesive gold was introduced to the
profession, while it was softer than non-cohesive foil, it was found to
resist under manipulation. This resistance is in accordance with the
well-known law that all crystalline bodies, when unobstructed, assume a
definite form. With gold the tendency is to a spherical form. The
process of crystallization is always from within outward. The mallet was
introduced to overcome the resistance caused by the development of the
cohesive property. Pounding gold with a mallet only increases its
crystallization. A crystalline body coming in contact with a fibrous one
can neither be antiseptic nor preservative; a filling-material which
possesses these properties must be one that corresponds or is in harmony
with tooth-substance.

"In the interglobular spaces there is a substance which is called
amorphous or structureless, and a filling to be in harmony with this
substance should be amorphous or structureless in its composition. The
only materials we have which meet these conditions are gutta-percha and
tin. It is its structureless character that gives to tin its value.
Coming in contact with the living dentin, it is easily adapted, and does
not excite inflammation; it does not interfere with the process going on
within the teeth to heal the lesion caused by caries. A wound from a
bullet made of tin, unless it struck a vital part, nature would heal,
even if the cause of the wound was not removed, by encysting the ball.
This process of nature of repairing injury by encysting the cause is of
interest to the dentist in the study of suitable filling-materials. Tin
is very useful at the cervical margin of cavities; it acts as an
antiseptic or preservative, and reduces the liability to subsequent
decay. It is our endeavor to obtain a filling that will preserve the
teeth and reduce the liability to, if not wholly prevent, secondary
decay. The law of correspondence is of more consequence than the
mechanical construction of the filling. Tin can be used without that
rigid adherence to mechanical rule that is necessary to retain a filling
of cohesive gold; thus less of the tooth needs to be sacrificed.

"Gold will unite with tin under certain conditions so as to form
apparently a solid mass. By a combination of these metals, not by
interlacing or incorporating one in the other, but by affinity, secured
by simple contact, we have all the preservative qualities of tin
combined with the indestructible properties of gold. For the base of the
filling we have a material in harmony with tooth-substance, introduced
in a way that is in accord with the law that governs all living bodies,
and for the outside a crystalline substance that corresponds to the
covering of the teeth. This covering of gold is a perfect shield to the
base, and the field for the display of artistic skill in restoring
contours is as broad as though gold was used entirely. Will a filling of
this kind withstand mastication? There is in the economy of nature a
provision made to overcome the resistance of occlusion. The teeth are
cushioned in the jaw and yield under pressure. The elasticity of the
substance of which the teeth are made is well understood. Ivory is the
most elastic substance known. The teeth coming together is like the
percussion of two billiard balls. Now a filling to save the teeth should
correspond as nearly as possible with the tooth-substance; it should not
be arbitrary, but elastic and yielding. Tin is interdigitous; it expands
laterally, and is almost as easily introduced as amalgam, and when put
in place does not have to be bound to be retained. Tin, with an outside
covering of gold to protect it, makes a filling to which amalgam bears
no comparison. In the light of scientific investigation there can be but
one method--a method based upon the recognized principle that the
_filling-material_ and the _manner_ of _introducing_ it shall correspond
to and be in harmony with the living, vital organism with which it comes
in contact.

"After excavating, the cavity is treated with absolute alcohol, as
cleanliness and thorough dryness are absolutely essential.

"The _tin_ is put in with steel pluggers, after the method of wedging;
it must be thoroughly condensed, so as to leave a smooth surface, and
enough used to come up to where the enamel and dentin join.

"The effect is not produced by incorporating or interlacing the gold
with the tin; we rely upon the affinity of the two metals to retain the
gold; no undercuts, angles, or pits are made in the tin, dentin, or
enamel. The gold, extra cohesive from No. 4 to 40, is made to adhere to
the tin by simple contact, without pressure or force; the union is not
mechanical.

"The instruments used for filling the remainder of the cavity with gold
are Shumway's ivory points, which adapt the gold nicely to the margin.

"The set consists of five and were patented in 1881, and have been used
by me since that time for manipulating cohesive gold. One 'point' is for
proximal cavities in the anterior teeth; three 'points' of different
sizes are for occlusal cavities; one 'point' for proximal cavities in
bicuspids and molars and labial and buccal cavities; the sides, edges,
and ends of the 'points' are used, as the purpose is simply to obtain
contact.

"The 'point' shown full size in Fig. 8 is of more general application
than any of the others, and is used for proximal cavities in bicuspids,
also labial and buccal cavities. The handle is made of ebony, and has a
silver ferrule, from which the ivory extends to the end and completes
the instrument.

"The metal pin in the end of the handle is for picking up and carrying
the gold."

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

Tin has been used successfully for completely lining cavities, filling
the remainder with gold; it is also useful for repairing gold fillings.

Two or three thicknesses of tin foil may be pressed into a cavity with a
rubber point or hard piece of spunk, allowing it to come well out to the
margin; filling the rest with amalgam.

"As a lining it presents to dentin an amalgam of tin and mercury which
does not discolor the dentin like ordinary amalgam, and helps do away
with local currents on the filling, which is one cause of amalgam
shrinkage in the mouth." (Dr. S. B. Palmer.)

When caries extends to the bifurcation of roots, make a mat of two or
three layers of tin, place it in the bifurcation and use it as a base in
filling the rest of the cavity with amalgam.

Tin is second in importance in alloys for amalgam, as it increases
plasticity, prevents discoloration, reduces conductivity and edge
strength, retards setting, favors spheroiding, therefore should not be
the controlling metal.

It will be noticed that when cavities are lined with tin foil, it only
constitutes a small part of the filling, and that it has not been melted
with the other metals in the alloy before being amalgamated.

A thick mat of tin has been recommended as a partial non-conductor under
amalgam fillings.

Plastic tin can be made by pouring mercury into melted tin, or by mixing
the fillings with mercury at ordinary temperatures; it has a whitish
color, and if there is not too much mercury it occurs in the form of a
brittle granular mass of cubical crystals. Generally amalgams of tin and
mercury do not harden sufficiently, but forty-eight parts of mercury and
one hundred of tin make a fairly good filling, said to have a
therapeutical value; it should not be washed or squeezed before using,
and "is not a chemical combination."

"Tin unites with mercury in atomic proportions, forming a weak
crystalline compound." (Dr. E. C. Kirk.)

Mercury and tin readily unite as an amalgam under ordinary
circumstances, and form a definite chemical compound having the formula
Sn_{2}Hg. (Hodgen.)

Another preparation of tin is known as stannous gold; it is manufactured
in heavy sheets and used the same as cohesive gold foil, and can be
easily manipulated, for it is rather plastic.

Crystal tin for taking the place of tin foil:

"Take chemically pure hydrochloric acid and dissolve tin foil in it
until a saturated solution is obtained; this may be done speedily by
heating the acid to a boiling point, or the same thing can be
accomplished in a few hours with the acid cold; it is then chlorid of
tin. It is then poured into a clean vessel and an equal quantity of
distilled water added; then a clean strip of zinc is plunged into the
solution, and tin crystals are deposited on the zinc; when there is
sufficient thickness on the zinc, remove both, and slip the crystals off
from the zinc into pure water, clean the zinc thoroughly, and reinsert
for another coating. The character of the crystallization will be
modified by the extent of the dilution of the solution in the first
place. Wash the tin in pure water until all traces of the acid are
removed, or a few drops of ammonia can be added to neutralize the acid.
It was suggested that it would be desirable to have some acid remain in
the tin for filling teeth in which there is no sensitive dentin. We have
put in a few fillings, and it works beautifully, and makes firmer
fillings than foil. It must be kept in water (probably alcohol is
better). It is pure tin, unites perfectly, and works easier than foil."
(Dr. Taft, _Dental Register of the West_, 1859.)

For some years it was considered the best practice to enlarge all
root-canals and fill them with gold; in many of these cases the crown
cavities were filled with tin.

Tin has been used for filling root-canals, but should there happen to be
any leakage through the foramen or tooth-structure, the tin will
discolor, and there may be infiltration into the crown, thus causing
discoloration, which might be objectionable if the crown was filled with
gold. Chloro-percha, gutta-percha, and oxychlorid of zinc are much
better for this purpose.

The apical quarter of a canal has been filled with tin, and the
remainder with cement. Tin can be used for filling root-canals. Roll on
a broach small triangular pieces of the foil into very small cone-shaped
cylinders, carry to place, then withdraw the broach, and force in the
cylinder with the same or a larger broach; sometimes it is necessary to
use another broach, to push the cylinder off from the one on which it is
rolled. Another method is to carry and pack into the canal by means of a
broach, very narrow strips of No. 10 or 20 foil; or the apical third of
the canal could be filled with gold and the rest with tin.

"About four years ago I concluded to try tin for filling root-canals;
then I began to look for patients whose general health was good, who had
strong, hardy-looking teeth, and kept their mouths in good condition. I
found one who answered all my requirements, with a molar to be filled,
and they would not have it filled with gold, or could not, on account of
the expense. I filled the canals with tin and the crown with amalgam.
After filling thirty-eight molars in this way I stopped for
developments. In six or seven weeks a lady returned with an inferior
molar abscessed, but at the time it was filled the circumstances were
such that it could not be properly treated. In nine months a gentleman
for whom I had filled four molars returned with an inferior one
abscessed. This is the sum-total of abscessed teeth where tin was used
in the root-canals, at the end of four years. The others are in good
condition, as I have seen them every six months. The roots were treated
from four to six weeks with carbolic acid before filling." (Dr. A. W.
Harlan, _Missouri Dental Journal_, 1872.)

"Tin foil is just as good as gold for filling root-canals, as it is
entirely innocuous and sufficiently indestructible, while its softness
and pliability commend it. Where gold is to be used for the crown, it is
better to fill the bulbous portion of the pulp-cavity with gold also, so
as to weld these portions of gold together. The success of Dr. Harlan's
treatment was about equal to what might be expected from the same number
of teeth where the canals had been filled with gold." (Editor, _Missouri
Journal_.)

Shavings turned from a disk of pure tin have been used in combination
with Watts's sponge gold for filling teeth, either by making a portion
of the filling from each metal or using them indiscriminately.

A mat of tin foil dipped in chloro-percha can be used to cap an exposed
pulp, or a concave tin disk can be used for the same purpose. A mat of
tin has been used over a slight exposure of the pulp, because of its
slight conduction of heat and cold, thus avoiding much thermal
irritation and stimulating recuperation.

Some use Robinson's fibrous material as a surface for tin fillings,
thinking that it is harder and will wear longer because of the erroneous
notion that it has platinum in it.




CHAPTER IX.


Tin has been recommended for temporary fillings in sensitive cavities,
because it is soft and easily packed in contact with the walls, has
therapeutic value, and after a time, when the temporary filling is
removed, the cavity is not as sensitive as formerly.

It has been observed that starting gold in a sensitive cavity causes
pain, but starting tin in the same place seldom does.

As long as tin preserves its integrity it preserves the tooth, therefore
tin fillings should not be repaired with amalgam, as their integrity may
be destroyed. Cavities can be partly filled with tin and completed with
sponge, fibrous, or crystalloid gold, after the manner described for
beginning with tin and finishing with gold foil.

"I advocated tin at the cervical wall, cervico-lingual and
cervico-buccal angles to the thickness of 24 plate. Then complete the
filling with gold. Some of my most successful efforts in saving soft
teeth have been made in this way. This method has great value over gold
for the whole filling, but there are two objections to it: First, it
imparts to the cervical border the color and appearance of decay, so
that in three cases where an instrument passed readily into the tin I
have removed the fillings, without any necessity for it, not even
finding any softening of the margins. Second, its use requires the same
conditions of dryness, shape of cavity, delicate manipulation,
inconvenience to patient, and strain upon the operator as when gold is
used alone." (Dr. D. D. Smith, _Dental Cosmos_, 1883.) He admits that
this method saves _soft_ teeth and also cervical margins. Do not those
two very important factors more than counterbalance the color, and
oversight of the dentist?

Dryness is an essential in making the best filling with any material,
and the time and strain consumed by the majority of operators in filling
with tin is not more than one-half what it is in using gold.

"I use tin at the cervical margin of all proximal cavities in bicuspids
and molars. I prepare a matrix of orange-wood to suit each case, letting
it cover about one-third of the cavity, then fill with tin condensed by
hand force and automatic mallet; now split the matrix and carefully
remove it piece by piece, so as not to disturb the tin; then trim and
finish this part of the filling. Make another wooden matrix, which
covers the tin and remainder of the cavity, and fit it snugly to place.
Use a coarsely serrated plugger and begin packing non-cohesive gold
into the tin, letting it fill about one-third more of the cavity; then
complete the last third (surface) with cohesive gold. I have tested this
method for twenty years, and it has given me splendid results. I always
tell patients that there will appear sooner or later a slight
discoloration near the gum, which must not be mistaken for caries." (Dr.
A. P. Burkhart.)

Another use for tin in the operating-room is found in Screven's
"Gutta-percha-coated Tin Foil," a cohesive, antiseptic non-conductor, of
which the inventor says: "Cement fillings that have been kept dry for
ten hours after mixing will be much harder than those soon exposed to
moisture, and they will retain that hardness though exposed to moisture
afterward. This preparation will keep a filling perfectly dry in the
mouth, and when removed the filling will be found hard as stone. There
is nothing better for lining cavities, holding nerve-caps in position,
holding a preparation in place when devitalizing a pulp where the tooth
is so much broken away as to make it difficult to prevent a filling
showing through the enamel, and for many other purposes."

High-heat gutta-percha has been used as a base in deep occlusal, buccal,
and approximal cavities, completing the fillings with tin. Occlusal
cavities may be filled with tin; then after the filling is condensed and
finished, drill out the center and fill with cohesive gold, not cutting
away the tin so as to expose the margin; such fillings wear well, as
much of the attritial force comes on the gold portion of the filling.

With the exception of the part in brackets, the following article is
from the _British Journal_, May, 1887:

"If a person eats an oyster stew at 130 deg. F., a gold filling would carry
the difference between the temperature of the stew and that of the
mouth, 130 - 98 = 32 deg., almost undiminished to the bottom of the cavity;
allowing 2 deg. of diminution, then the cavity around the gold filling has
assumed 128 deg.; now the person feels warm and drinks ice-water at 32 deg..
Taking into consideration the specific heat of the gold filling, it will
assume about 40 deg., which it carries with a diminution of the cold of
about 4 deg.,--that is, as if it was 44 deg.,--into the interior of the cavity;
then the cavity will assume 44 deg., the difference within one-tenth of a
minute being 128 - 44 = 84 deg., a change which would produce a violent
inflammation in any organ which was not accustomed to it. This
derangement in the tooth means interruption of circulation, and young
teeth will be most affected.

"Thermal effect depends on heat-conducting power [gold is nearly four
times as good a conductor of heat as tin] and also on specific heat, so
the more the latter approaches that of the tooth the less it is liable
to produce sudden changes [thus favoring tin]. Specific heat manifests
itself by the speed of changes, while the heat-conducting power
influences the intensity [then the intensity of heat in a gold filling
would be three or four times as much as in a tin filling]. In speed gold
produces this change in one-tenth of a minute" [tin in one-fifth,--that
is, gold absorbs heat and expands about twice as fast as tin].

In 1838 Dr. J. D. White introduced sharp-wedge-shaped instruments for
filling teeth, and he claims to have been the first to use them; they
pack laterally as well as downward, and present as small a surface to
the filling as possible, so that the greatest effect may be produced
upon a given surface with a given power. Rolls of either tin or gold are
made by cutting any desirable portion from a sheet of No. 4 foil; cut
this portion once transversely, place on a napkin or piece of chamois,
then with a spatula fold a very narrow portion of the edge once upon
itself; then with the spatula resting on the thickened edge draw the
spatula away from it with gentle pressure, and the foil will follow in a
roll.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

The old method of using rolls, ropes, and tapes or strips is the same,
but we will describe one method of using tapes. (See Fig. 9.) A _strip_
is a single thickness of foil in ribbon form; a strip folded lengthwise
once, twice, or more forms a _tape_ of two, four, or more thicknesses of
foil. The tin foil should be cut into strips and folded into tapes
proportioned in width and thickness to the size of the cavity. One end
of the tape is carried to the bottom of the cavity and then forced
against the side opposite the point where we intend to finish; now
remove the wedge-shaped plugger and catch the tape outside of the
cavity, and fold another portion against that already introduced,
letting all the folds extend from the bottom to a little beyond the
margin. Proceed in this manner, with care and sufficient force, until
the cavity is full, using for the last folds a small instrument.
Condense the surface with a large plugger, then go over it carefully
with a small instrument, and if any part yields, force in a wedge-shaped
plugger and fill the opening in above-described manner; condense,
burnish, and trim alternately until the surface is level with the
cavity-margin. By extending the folds from the orifice to the base of
the cavity, the liability of the tin to crumble or come out is
effectually prevented, and by putting it in with a wedge-shaped plugger
it is pressed out into all depressions of the walls.

A later method of filling with tape or rope is to use wedge-shaped
pluggers with sharp serrations, filling the _ends_ of the cavity, and as
the two parts approach each other that next to the wall should be in
advance of the rest, thus an opening will be left in the center which
can be filled with a smaller tape or rope.

Another old method: Take a piece of foil and roll it into a hard ball;
then gradually work it into the cavity, being careful to have
sufficient around the margin.

Still another suggested method: Roll a piece of foil into a loose ball,
place it in the cavity, and pass a wedge-shaped plugger into its center.
This has the effect of spreading the tin toward the walls of the cavity,
the opening to be filled with folds in a way already described. The
wedge is used as often as it can be made to enter, filling each opening
with folds; then condense the surface, trim, and burnish.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

The English give the Americans the credit of first using cylinders.
Anyhow, Dr. Clark, of New Orleans, in 1855, used them made from
non-cohesive gold, and also from gold and tin in alternate layers. (See
Fig. 10.)

Cylinders were used which were a little longer than the depth of the
cavity, introduced with wedge-shaped pluggers around the walls, each one
being closely adapted to the margin; then another row was added, which
was forced firmly against the preceding, continuing this process until
the cavity was full. The wedge, having a smooth end and sides, is forced
into the center so as to drive the tin toward the sides of the cavity,
being careful not to split the tooth; the opening is then filled with a
cylinder. Now force a smaller-sized wedge into the center of the last
cylinder, and into the opening introduce another cylinder, proceeding in
this manner until the filling is solid. Then condense the ends of the
cylinders, trim, and burnish. For the same operation more recent
pluggers are wedge-shaped, with sharp, deep serrations. In these cases
the filling is retained by the general form of the cavity and wedging
within a certain limit, and not by cohesion of the different parts. For
a time tin cylinders were prepared and put on sale at the dental depots.

As far as we are aware, the first tin foil made use of in operative
technics was by Dr. F. S. Whitslar, who removed a disk of German silver
from an ivory knife-handle in 1845, then used hand pressure to fill the
cavity with tin. In the college course of operative technics tin foil
can be used, almost to the exclusion of gold foil, to demonstrate the
manipulation of both cohesive and non-cohesive gold. Shavings scraped
from a bar of tin are also useful in operative technics; they are more
cohesive than foil.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tin Foil and Its Combinations for
Filling Teeth, by Henry L. Ambler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIN FOIL ***

***** This file should be named 26840.txt or 26840.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/8/4/26840/

Produced by Stephen Blundell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
