The Project Gutenberg EBook of Spectra, by Arthur Ficke and Witter Bynner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Spectra
       A Book of Poetic Experiments

Author: Arthur Ficke
        Witter Bynner

Release Date: October 14, 2008 [EBook #26918]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPECTRA ***




Produced by Ruth Hart




SPECTRA

A BOOK OF POETIC EXPERIMENTS

BY

ANNE KNISH
AND
EMANUEL MORGAN



NEW YORK
MITCHELL KENNERLEY
1916



COPYRIGHT 1916 BY
MITCHELL KENNERLEY

PRINTED IN AMERICA


CONTENTS

                                                 PAGE
To Remy de Gourmont (Emanuel Morgan)              vii
Preface (Anne Knish)                               ix

SPECTRA BY EMANUEL MORGAN
OPUS                                             PAGE
1  Drums                                           53
2  Hope                                            14
6  If I Were Only Dafter                           56
7  A Bunch of Grapes                                8
9  Frogs' Legs on a Plate                          57
13  A Peacock-Feather                              11
14  I Had Put Out My Leaves                        51
15  Despair Comes                                   6
16  The Guillotine                                 20
17  Needles and Pins                               46
29  Knives                                         31
31  Thank God that We Can Laugh                    27
40  Two Cocktails Round a Smile                    35
41  Spectres                                        2
45  The Locust-Tree                                49
46  No Other Angle                                 40
47  Giver of Bribes in the Brightness of Morning   37
55  The Impossible                                 43
62  Three Little Creatures                         16
63  Spears                                         23
78  I Am Beset                                     63
79  Only Lovers                                    66
101  The Piano                                     61
104  Madagascar                                    59

SPECTRA BY ANNE KNISH
OPUS                                             PAGE
1  The Seconds Bob By                              41
40  I Have not Written--That You May Read          26
50  The Piano Lives in a Dusk                       1
67  I Would Not in the Early Morning               10
76  Years Are Nothing                               4
80  Oh, My Little House of Glass                   52
88  So We Came Back Again                          36
96  You Are the Delphic Oracle                     33
118  If Bathing Were a Virtue                       7
122  Upstairs There Lies a Sodden Thing            39
126  His Eyes                                      12
131  I Am Weary                                    18
134  Listen, My Friend                             21
135  In a Tomb of Argolis                          64
150  Sounds                                        29
151  Candle, Candle                                15
181  Skeptical Cat                                 62
182  He's the Remnant of a Suit                    60
187  I Do Not Know Very Much                       58
191  The Black Bark of a Dog                       48
195   Her Soul Was Freckled                        55
200  If I Should Enter to his Chamber              45



TO REMY DE GOURMONT

     POET, a wreath!--
No matter how we had combined our flowers,
You would have worn them--being ours. . . .
On you, on them, the showers--
     O roots beneath!
          EMANUEL MORGAN.



PREFACE

THIS volume is the first compilation of the recent experiments in
Spectra. It is the aim of the Spectric group to push the possibilities
of poetic expression into a new region,--to attain a fresh brilliance
of impression by a method not so wholly different from the
methods of Futurist Painting.

An explanation of the term "Spectric" will indicate something of the
nature of the technique which it describes. "Spectric" has, in this
connection, three separate but closely related meanings. In the first
place, it speaks, to the mind, of that process of diffraction by
which are disarticulated the several colored and other rays of which
light is composed. It indicates our feeling that the theme of a
poem is to be regarded as a prism, upon which the colorless white
light of infinite existence falls and is broken up into glowing,
beautiful, and intelligible hues. In its second sense, the term
Spectric relates to the reflex vibrations of physical sight, and
suggests the luminous appearance which is seen after exposure of
the eye to intense light, and, by analogy, the after-colors of
the poet's initial vision. In its third sense, Spectric connotes
the overtones, adumbrations, or spectres which for the poet haunt
all objects both of the seen and the unseen world,--those
shadowy projections, sometimes grotesque, which, hovering around the
real, give to the real its full ideal significance and its poetic
worth. These spectres are the manifold spell and true essence of
objects,--like the magic that would inevitably encircle a mirror from
the hand of Helen of Troy.

Just as the colors of the rainbow recombine into a white light,--just
as the reflex of the eye's picture vividly haunts sleep,--just as
the ghosts which surround reality are the vital part of that
existence,--so may the Spectric vision, if successful, synthesize,
prolong, and at the same time multiply the emotional images of
the reader. The rays which the poet has dissociated into colorful
beauty should recombine in the reader's brain into a new intensity
of unified brilliance. The reflex of the poet's sight should sustain
the original perception with a haunting keenness. The insubstantiality
of the poet's spectres should touch with a tremulous vibrancy of
ultimate fact the reader's sense of the immediate theme.

If the Spectrist wishes to describe a landscape, he will not
attempt a map, but will put down those winged emotions, those
fantastic analogies, which the real scene awakens in his own mind.
In practice this will be found to be the vividest of all modes of
communication, as the touch of hands quickens a mere exchange of names.

It may be noted that to Spectra, to these reflected experiences of
life, as we perceive them, adheres often a tinge of humor. Occidental
art, in contrast to art in the Orient, has until lately been afraid
of the flash of humor in its serious works. But a growing acquaintance
with Chinese painting is surely liberating in our poets and painters
a happy sense of the disproportion of man to his assumed place in
the universe, a sense of the tortuous grotesque vanity of the
individual. By this weapon, man helps defend his intuition of the
Absolute and of his own obscure but real relation to it.

The Spectric method is as yet in its infancy; and the poems that
follow are only experimental efforts toward the desired end. Among
them, the most obvious illustrations of the method are perhaps _Opus
41_ by Emanuel Morgan and _Opus 76_ by Anne Knish.

Emanuel Morgan, with whom the Spectric theory originated, has
found the best expression of his genius in regular metrical forms
and rhyme. Anne Knish, on the other hand, has used only free
verse. We wish to make it clear that the Spectric manner does
hot necessitate the employment of either of these metrical systems
to the exclusion of the other.

Although the members of our group would by no means attempt to
establish a claim as actual inventors of the Spectric method,
yet we can justifiably say that we have for the first time
used the method consciously and consistently, and formulated
its possibilities by means of elaborate experiment. Among
recent poets in English, we have noted few who can be regarded
in a sure sense as Spectrists.
          ANNE KNISH.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 50_

THE piano lives in a dusk
Where rich amber lights
Quiver obscurely.

     It exists only at twilight;
And somewhere afar
In the depths of a tropic forest
The sun is now setting, and the phoenix looks
Mysteriously toward the gold.

     I think I must have been born in such a forest,
Or in the tangle of a Chinese screen.

     There is indigo in this music;
This dusk is filled with amber lights;
Through the tangled evening of heavy flower-scents
Come footfalls
That surely I can almost remember.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 41_

SPECTRES came dancing up the wind,
     Trailing down the long grass,
Shooting high, undisciplined,
     To join the sun and see you pass . . .
     The colors of the pointed glass.

Under a willow-maze you went
     Unsaddened . . . But a violet beam
Fell on the white face, backward bent,
     Of a body in a stream.

Into the sun you came again,
     With sun-red light your feet were shod . . .
And round you stood a ring of feathered men
     With naked arms acknowledging a god.

Indigo-birds and squirrels on a tree
     And orioles flashed in and out . . .
The yellow outline of Eurydice
     Waited for Orpheus in a black redoubt

With a beaded fern you waved away a gnat . . .
     And maidens, hung with vivid beads of green,
One of them bearing in her arms an orange cat,
     Held palms about a queen.

Then you were lost to sight
     And locking trees became the clouds of you,
Till you emerged, the moon upon your shoulder, and the night
     Bloomed blue.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 76_

YEARS are nothing;
Days alone count;
These, and the nights.
I have seen the grey stars marching,
And the green bubbles in wine,
And there are Gothic vaults of sleep.

     My cathedral
Has one great spire
Tawny in the sunlight.
Gargoyles haunt its nave;
High up amid its dark-arches
Forgotten songs live shadowy.
Gold and sardonyx
Deck its altars.
Its mighty roof
Is copper rivering with the rain.

     Tomorrow lightning swords will come
And thunder of cannon.
They will unrivet this roof
Of mighty copper.
Before the eyes of my gargoyles,
In the sound of my forgotten songs,
They will take it.
And as the rain sluices down
I shall have to follow my roof into the war.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 15_

DESPAIR comes when all comedy
     Is tame
And there is left no tragedy
     In any name,
When die round and wounded breathing
     Of love upon the breast
Is not so glad a sheathing
     As an old brown vest.

Asparagus is feathery and tall,
And the hose lies rotting by the garden-wall.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 118_

IF bathing were a virtue, not a lust,
I would be dirtiest.

     To some, housecleaning is a holy rite.
For myself, houses would be empty
But for the golden motes dancing in sunbeams.

     Tax-assessors frequently overlook valuables.
Today they noted my jade.
But my memory of you escaped them.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 7_

BEYOND her lips in the dark are a man's feet
     Composed and dead . . .
In the light between her lips is a moving tongue-rip sweet,
     Red.

Her arms are his white robes,
     They cover a king,
His ornaments her crescent lobes
     And two moons on a string.

Sheba, Sheba, Proserpina, Salome,
     See, I am come!--king, god, saint!--
With the stone of a volcano O show that you know me,
     Pound till the true blood pricks through the paint!

Twitch of the dead man's feet if he remembers
     A bunch of grapes and a ripped-open gown.--
And the live man's eyes are night after embers,
     Two black spots on a white-faced down  . . .

And in the dawn, lava . . . rolling down . . .
Down-rolling lava on an up-pointing town.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 67_

I WOULD not in the early morning
Start my mind on its inevitable journey
Toward the East.
There are white domes somewhere
Under that blue enameled sky, white domes, white domes;
Therefore even the cream
Is safest yellow.
Cream is better than lemon
In tea at breakfast
I think of tigers as eating lemons.
Thank God this tea comes from the green grocer,
Not from Ceylon.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 13_

O PEACOCK-FEATHER
     Drawn through a death-dim hole,
With colors blurred together,
     Persian pattern of a soul--

Is it enough to have belonged
     To the exaltation of a bird
Round whom they thronged
     Each time her high tail stirred?

. . . I loved a woman whose two eyes,
     One blue, one gray,
          Would block
Like cliffs my foothold in the skies . . .
     She is dead, they say--
          Dead as a peacock.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 126_

HIS eyes
Are the resurrection.
Once when beneath the moonrise
They looked into mine,
Grey mists held mastery between us,
And I knew that his soul
Had gone down into death.
But tonight a golden star-dust
Is pouring through space,
And the mist is burned away by it.
Tonight his soul awakens
Out of its splendid cerements,
And through his eyes the miracle
Arises to the earth.

     I have prayed long beside the tomb
And touched the grave-cloths
With living fingers.
I have lain my breasts
Against the granite
Of the sarcophagus
Where he was.
Prayers for the dead I offered up
And hecatombs.

     Today there was a wonder in the sunrise.
I knew that there were glories in the sky
And new branches of willow on the earth.
And my soul trembled with prophecy.

     I prophesied
The resurrection.
Now it has come.
And I lie shaken
Before its tumult.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 2_

HOPE
Is the antelope
Over the hills;
Fear
Is the wounded deer
Bleeding in rills;
Care
Is the heavy bear
Tearing at meat;
Fun
Is the mastodon
Vanished complete . . .

And I am the stag with the golden horn
Waiting till my day is born.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 151_

CANDLE, candle,
     Flicker and flow--
I knew you once--
     But it was not long ago,
          it was

Last night.
And you spoiled my otherwise bright
          evening.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 62_

THREE little creatures gloomed across the floor
     And stood profound in front of me,
And one was Faith, and one was Hope,
     And one was Charity.

Faith looked for what it could not find,
     Hope looked for what was lost,
(Love looked and looked but Love was blind),
     Charity's eyes were crossed.

Then with a leap a single shape,
     With beauty on its chin,
Brandished a little screaming ape . . .
     And each one, like a pin,

Fell to a pattern on the rug
     As flat as they could be--
And died there comfortable and snug,
     Faith, Hope and Charity.

That shape, it was my shining soul
     Bludgeoning every sham . . .
O little ape, be glad that I
     Can be the thing I am!



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 131_

I AM weary of salmon dawns
And of cinnamon sunsets;
Silver-grey and iron-grey
Of winter dusk and morn
Torture me; and in the amethystine shadows
Of snow, and in the mauve of curving clouds
Some poison has dwelling.

     Ivory on a fan of Venice,
Black-pearl of a bowl of Japan,
Prismatic lustres of Phoenician glass,
Fawn-tinged embroideries from looms of Bagdad,
The green of ancient bronze, cinereous tinge
Of iron gods,--
These, and the saffron of old cerements,
Violet wine,
Zebra-striped onyx,
Are to me like the narrow walls of home
To the land-locked sailor.

     I must have fire-brands!
I must have leaves!
I must have sea-deeps!



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 16_

DEATH on a cross was not the blade
     In Mary's heart . . .
For the mother of man and the son of the maid
     Had walked one night apart,
When his beard was not yet grown--and, afraid,
     She had seen his young words dart.

Between a mother and a son,
     The guillotine . . .
It falls, it falls, and one by one,
     Unseeing and unseen,
They face the great sharp shining ton
     That time has eaten green.

Between the shoulder and the head
     The guillotine must play
And cleave with clash unmerited
     The generating day . . .
Till the separated parts, not dead,
     Rise and walk away.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 134_

LISTEN, my friend,
That you may understand me.--

     In my earliest youth
I dreamed in hues volcanic.
I saw each day open
Like a curtain of flame.
Black slaves attended
My waking moments;
Three ebony slaves
Washed sleep from my white body.
Three ebony slaves
Around my ivory smoothness
Folded heavy robes
Of crimson and white.
And as I issued forth
Into the blue vault of the daylight
A grey ape pranced before me
And a leopard crept behind.

     This was the state
Of my young heritage.
Scarlet as the voice of trumpets
Was the pageant of my days.
Can I accept now
The twilight?
And soon the dark, where all colors
Die?

     Before I die, I will hold one last revel!
I will have golden cups and poppy curtains!--
And yet--

     No! . . . In a black hall
The black table shall spread far down before me
And all the feasters garbed in black.
Then, at the feast's height, I arising
Shall with a gesture like the midnight
Throw back my midnight robe and suddenly stand
Naked, the sole white flame of the world.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 63_

THE seven deathly spears of memory
Setting behind a god, a golden glorious
Halo of land and sea
Even for you and me,
     Even for us . . .

     The spear of Egypt,
Orange,
Through the sleeping lid,
With all the power of the bulk of a pyramid.

     The spear of Chile,
Yellow,
Through the thrilling cheek,
With all the push of an upturned Andean peak.

     The spear of Thibet,
Violet,
Through the eager hand,
The thrust of the iron of a silent land.

     The spear of the Ice-Poles,
Green,
Through the warm-breathing breast,
The glacial east and the glacial west

     The spear of Norway,
Blue,
Through the curved arm-pit,
The cheerless sun majestic in a jagged slit.

     The spear of India,
Indigo,
Through the holy side,
A heaven-touching temple-roof down a mountain-slide.

     The spear of Europe,
Red,
In the mouth's breath,
The million-splintering scream of death . . .

     Even to us,
The seven-spearing sun,
The sword of separation before our love is done;
     Even for us,
A simian shape
Throwing seven souls on the sea-wet cape;
     Even for us
Who smile mouth to mouth,
The full tornado from the seven-forked south;
     Even to us
Who clasp with our knees,
The scattering upheaval of the seven cold seas!

     And this is as near as lovers ever come,
Their words are dumb;
This is as near as they have ever kissed,
Their lips are ocean-mist.

     Yet what avail the seven
Spears of memory
Against the obstinate archery
Of light, the spears of heaven?



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 40_

I HAVE not written, reader,
That you may read. . . .
They sit in rows in the bare school-room
Reading.
Throwing rocks at windows is better,
And oh the tortoise-shell cat with the can tied on!
I would rather be a can-tier
Than a writer for readers.

     I have written, reader,
For abstruse reasons.
Gold in the mine . . .
Black water seeping into tunnels . . .
A plank breaks, and the roof falls . . .
Three men suffocated.
The wife of one now works in a laundry;
The wife of another has married a fat man;
I forget about the third.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 31_

THE night is growing deep with snow
     O put your hand in mine,
While the mirthful secrets that we know
     Bloom in the fire-shine--
Flakes falling with an undertow
     Of delicate design.

Hushed are the courts where ladies went
     Unquestioning to quaff
Goblets of liquid firmament--
     Thank God that we can laugh!

Hushed are the plains where Asia poured
     The blood of peacock kings--
But we can echo, thank the Lord,
     What the China teapot sings:

          Nothing bereaves
          The eternal tune
          Of little crisp leaves
          Green in the moon.

The night is deeper still with snow . . .
     O let us never stir
From the mirthful secrets that we know
     Of old diameter!
Eve laughed at Adam long ago,
     And Adam laughed at her.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 150_

SOUNDS, pure sounds--
Nothing--
Vibrancies of the air--
And yet--

     This summer night
There are crickets shrilling
Beyond the deep bassoon of frogs.
They cease for a moment
As the rattling clangor
Of the trolley
Bumps by.
I hear footsteps
Hollow on the pavement
Now deserted
And blank of sound.
They die.
The crickets now are sleeping;
Even the leaves
Grow still.

     And slowly
Out of the blankness, out of the silence
Emerges on soundless wings!
The long sweet-sloping
Rise and fall of far viol notes,--
The mad Nirvana,
The faint and spectral
Dream-music
Of my heart's desire.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 29_

KNIVES for feet, and wheels for a chin,
And the long smooth iron bore for a neck,
And bullets for hands. . . . And the root runs in,
The root of blood no stone can check,
From the breasts of the grinding crash of sin,
From engines hugging in a wreck.

A thousand round-red mouths of pain
Blaring black,
A twisting comrade on his back
In a round-red stain,
Clotted stalks of red sumac,
Discs of the sun on a bayonet-stack . . .

Blood, flame, a cataract
Thrown upward from a desert place:
Flame and blood, the one blind fact,
Contained, or spouting from the face,
Or coiling out of bellies, packed
In a stinking spent embrace . . .

Country, a babble of black spume . . .
Faith, an eyeball in the sand . . .
Mother, a nail through a broken hand--
A kissing fume--
And out of her breast the bloody bubbling milk-red breath
Of death.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 96_

YOU are the Delphic Oracle
Of the Under-World.

     As we sit talking,
All of us together,
You flash forth sudden utterance
Of buried things
That writhe in obscure life
Within our minds' last darkness.
That which we think and say not
You say and think not.
In us these thoughts
Like worms stir vilely.
But from you they depart as sudden butterflies
Crimson and green against the pure sky.

     Many are the revelers;
Few are the thyrsus-bearers;
And sole is Dionysus.

     This I inscribe to you,
Singer,
In memory of the crags of Delphi
And the Thessalian vales beyond.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 40_

TWO cocktails round a smile,
     A grapefruit after grace,
Flowers in an aisle
     . . . Were your face.

A strap in a street-car,
     A sea-fan on the sand,
A beer on a bar
     . . . Were your hand

The pillar of a porch,
     The tapering of an egg,
The pine of a torch
     . . . Were your leg.--

Sun on the Hellespont,
     White swimmers in the bowl
Of the baptismal font
     Are your soul.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 88_

SO we came back again
After some years--
Just revisiting
The scenes of our sin.
Nothing is there but the garden;
And we had expected
That we would be there.

     I heard a wind blowing
Down the sky.
It came with heavy auguries
And passed.
There was a soothsayer once in Rome
Who on a white altar
Inspected the purple entrails of victims.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 47_

GIVER of bribes in the brightness of  morning,
     Cities have wavered and rocked and gone down . . .
But the lamps of the altars hang round you, adorning
     The niche of your neck and the drift of your gown.

O bribe-giver, marked with purple metal--
     Cut in your naked contentment there shows
On the curve of your breast one carven petal
     From heaven's impenetrable rose!

You open the window to myriad windows,
     The high triangular door of the world . . .
Till the walls and the roofs and the curious keystone,
     The carven rose with its petals uncurled,

Are swayed in the swathe of the uppermost ether,
     Where stars are the columns upholding a dome,
And the edifice rolls on a corner of ocean,
     Lifts on a wave, poises on foam . . .

We stand on the rose, we are images golden,
     We move interchanging, attaining one crest:
One chin and one mouth and one nose and one forehead,
     One mouth and one chin and one neck and one breast . . .

I pull you apart from me, struggle to bind you,
     I free you, I rend you in seven great rays . . .
And we cling to them all . . . but we lose them, and slowly--
     We slip with the rainbow down the blue bays.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 122_

UPSTAIRS there lies a sodden thing
Sleeping.
Soon it will come down
And drink coffee.
I shall have to smile at it across the table.
How can I?
For I know that at this moment
It sleeps without a sign of life; it is as good as dead.
I will not consort with reformed corpses,
I the life-lover, I the abundant.
I have known living only;
I will not acknowledge kinship with death.
White graves or black, linen or porphyry,
Are all one to me.
And yet, on the Lybian plains
Where dust is blown,
A king once
Built of baked clay and bulls of bronze
A tomb that makes me waver.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 46_

I ONLY know that you are given me
     For my delight.
No other angle finishes my soul
     But you, you white.

I know that I am given you,
     Black whirl to white,
To lift the seven colors up . . .
     Focus of light!



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 1_

REITERATION! . . .

The seconds bob by,
So many, so many,
Each ugly in its own way
As raw meats are all ugly.
Why do we feed on the dead?
Or would at least it were with cries and lust
Of slaying our human food
Beneath a cannibal sun!
But these old corpses of alien creatures! . . .
I loathe them!
And too many heads go by the window,
All alien--
Filers of saws, doubtless,
Or lechers
Or Sabbath-keepers.
Morality comes from God.
He was busy.
He forgot to make beauty.
Why does he not call back into their hen-house
This ugly straggling flock of seconds
That trail by
With pin-feathers showing?



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 55_

WHY ask it of me?--the impossible!--
     Shall I pick up the lightning in my hand?
Have I not given homages too well
     For words to understand?--

Words take you from me, bring you back again,
     Dance in our presence, cover your proud face
With the incredible counterpane,
     Break our embrace . . .

No, not to you
     Your wish,
But to some kangaroo
     Or cuttle-fish

Or octopus or eagle or tarantula
     Or elephant or dove
Or some peninsula
     Let me speak love--

Or call some battle or some temple-bell
     Or many-curving pine
Or some cool truth-containing well
     Or thin cathedral--mine!



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 200_

IF I should enter to his chamber
And suddenly touch him,
Would he fade to a thin mist,
Or glow into a fire-ball,
Or burst like a punctured light-globe?
It is impossible that he would merely yawn and rub
And say--"What is it?"



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 17_

MAN-THUNDER, woman-lightning,
     Rumble, gleam;
Refusal,
     Scream.

Needles and pins of pain
     All pointed the same way;
Parellel lines of pain
     When the lips are gray
     And know not what they say:
Rain,
Rain.

But after the whirl of fright
     And great shouts and flashes,
     The pounding clashes
     And deep slashes,
     After the scattered ashes

Of the night,
Heaven's height
     Abashes
     With a gleam through unknown lashes
Of delicious points of light.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 191_

THE black bark of a dog
Made patterns against the night.
And little leaves flute-noted across the moon.

     I seemed to feel your soft looks
Steal across that quiet evening room
Where once our souls spoke, long ago.

     For that was of a vastness;
And this night is of a vastness . . .

     There was a dog-bark then--
It was the sound
Of my rebellious and incredulous heart
Its patterns twined about the stars
And drew them down
And devoured them.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 45_

AN angel, bringing incense, prays
     Forever in that tree . . .
I go blind still when the locust sways
     Those honey-domes for me.

All the fragrances of dew, O angel, are there,
The myrrhic rapture of young hair,
     The lips of lust;
     And all the stenches of dust,
Even the palm and the fingers of a hand burnt bare
     With a curling sweet-smelling crust,
And the bitter staleness of old hair,
     Powder on a withering bust . . .

The moon came through the window to our bed.
     And the shadows of the locust-tree
     On your white sweet body made of me,
     Of my lips, a drunken bee. . . .
O tree-like Spring, O blossoming days,
I, who some day shall be dead,
     Shall have ever a lover to sway with me.
For when my face decays
     And the earth moulds in my nostrils, shall there not be
     The breath therein of a locust-tree,
     The seed, the shoot of a locust-tree,
     The honey-domes of a locust-tree,
     Till lovers go blind and sway with me?--

O tree-like Spring, O blossomy days,
To sway as long as the locust sways!



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 14_

BESIDE the brink of dream
     I had put out my willow-roots and leaves
As by a stream
     Too narrow for the invading greaves
Of Rome in her trireme . . .
     Then you came--like a scream
Of beeves.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 80_

OH my little house of glass!
How carefully
I have planted shrubbery
To plume before your transparency.
Light is too amorous of you,
Transfusing through and through
Your panes with an effulgence never new.
Sometimes
I am terribly tempted
To throw the stones myself.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 1_

THEY enter with long trailing of shadowy cloth,
     And each with one hand praying in the air,
And the softness of their garments is the grayness of a moth--
     The lost and broken night-moth of despair.

And they keep a wounded distance
     With following bare feet,
A distance Isadoran--
     And the dark moons beat
Their drums.

More desolate than they are Isadora stands,
     The blaze of the sun on her grief;
The stars of a willow are in both her hands,
     And her heart is the shape of a leaf.

And they come to her for comfort
     And her black-thrown hair
Is a harp of consolation
Singing anthems in the air.

With the dark she wrestles, daring alone,
     Though their young arms would aid;
Her body wreathes and brightens, never thrown,
     Unvanquished, unafraid . . .

Till light comes leaping
     On little children's feet,
Comes leaping Isadoran--
     And the white stars beat
Their drums.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 195_

HER soul was freckled
Like the bald head
Of a jaundiced Jewish banker.
Her fair and featurous face
Writhed like
An albino boa-constrictor.
She thought she resembled the Mona Lisa.
This demonstrates the futility of thinking.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 6_

IF I were only dafter
     I might be making hymns
To the liquor of your laughter
     And the lacquer of your limbs.

But you turn across the table
     A telescope of eyes.
And it lights a Russian sable
     Running circles in the skies. . . .

Till I go running after,
     Obeying all your whims--
For the liquor of your laughter
     And the lacquer of your limbs.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 9_

WHEN frogs' legs on a plate are brought to me
     As though I were divinity in France,
I feel as God would feel were He to see
     Imperial Russians dance.

These people's thoughts and gestures and concerns
     Move like a Russian ballet made of eggs;
A bright-smirched canvas heaven heaves and burns
     Above their arms and legs.

Society hops this way and that, well-taught;
     But while I watch, in cloudy state,
I feel as God would feel if he were brought
     Frogs' legs on a plate.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 187_

I DO not know very much,
But I know this--
That the storms of contempt that sweep over us,
Ready to blast any edifice before then
Rise from the fathomless maelstrom
Of contempt for ourselves.
If there be a god,
May he preserve me
From striking with these lightnings
Those whom I love.

     Saying which,
Zarathustra strolled on
Down Fifth Avenue.

     The last three lines
Are symptomatic.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 104_

HOW terrible to entertain a lunatic!
To keep his earnestness from coming close!

A Madagascar land-crab once
Lifted blue claws at me
And rattled long black eyes
That would have got me
Had I not been gay.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 182_

"HE'S the remnant of a suit that has been drowned;
That's what decided me," said Clarice.
"And so I married him,
I really wanted a merman;
And this slimy quality in him
Won me.
No one forbade the banns.
Ergo--will you love me?"



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 101_

HE not only plays
One note
But holds another note
Away from it--
As a lover
Lifts
A waft of hair
From loved eyes.

The piano shivers,
When he touches it,
And the leg shines.



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 181_

SKEPTICAL cat,
Calm your eyes, and come to me.
For long ago, in some palmed forest,
I too felt claws curling
Within my fingers . . .
Moons wax and wane;
My eyes, too, once narrowed and widened
Why do you shrink back?
Come to me: let me pat you--
Come, vast-eyed one . . .
Or I will spring upon you
And with steel-hook fingers
Tear you limb from limb. . . .

There were twins in my cradle. . . .



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 78_

I AM beset by liking so many people.
What can I do but hide my face away?--
Lest, looking up in love, I see no eyes or lids
In the gleaming whirl of day,
Lest, reaching for the fingers of love,
I know not which are they,
Lest the dear-lipped multitude,
Kissing me, choke me dead!--

O green eyes in the breakers,
White heave unquieted,
What can I do but dive again, again--again--
To hide my head!



ANNE KNISH
_Opus 135_

IN a tomb of Argolis,
Under an arch of great stones,
Where my eyes were sightless, groping,
I touched this figment of clay.

     Forgotten vase of immemorial Greece,
Colorless form!
I have entered to the blind dark
Of the tomb where you have slept forever
And with the dreams of my importunate hands
I touch you in the profound darkness.

     You are cold and estranged;
Yet the ends of my fingers cling to your porous surface.
You are thin and very tall;
My palm can cover your mouth.
Your lip curves but a little;
Around your throat
My two hands meet,
And then part as I follow the swelling
Rhythm that downward widens,
And I pass around and under,
And the returning line
Ebbs home.

Beneath your feet I touch cold marble;
My hand returns
To sleep upon your breast
Dreaming it warm.



EMANUEL MORGAN
_Opus 79_

ONLY the wise can see me in the mist,
     For only lovers know that I am here
After his piping, shall the organist
     Be portly and appear?

Pew after pew,
     Wave after wave . . .
Shall the digger dig and then undo
     His own dear grave?

Hear me in the playing
     Of a big brass band . . .
See me, straying
     With children hand in hand . . .

Smell me, a dead fish . . .
     Taste me, a rotten tree. . . .
Someday touch me, all you wish,
     In the wide sea.








End of Project Gutenberg's Spectra, by Arthur Ficke and Witter Bynner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPECTRA ***

***** This file should be named 26918.txt or 26918.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/9/1/26918/

Produced by Ruth Hart

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
