The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Defence of Stonington (Connecticut)
Against a British Squadron, August 9th to 12th, 1814, by J. Hammond Trumbull

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Defence of Stonington (Connecticut) Against a British Squadron, August 9th to 12th, 1814

Author: J. Hammond Trumbull

Release Date: October 18, 2008 [EBook #26946]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEFENCE OF STONINGTON ***




Produced by Jane Hyland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









THE

Defence of Stonington

(CONNECTICUT)

AGAINST A BRITISH SQUADRON,

AUGUST 9TH TO 12TH, 1814.


"Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona."




HARTFORD: 1864.




ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIVE COPIES PRINTED.

FOR PRIVATE DISTRIBUTION.


[Transcriber's Note: the various spellings of Ramilies have been retained
in the text. Similarly, some opening quotes are not always matched with
closing quotes.]


CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE,                                            page v

RECORD OF THE EXTRAORDINARY ATTACK ON STONINGTON,                  9

NAMES OF VOLUNTEERS, FROM THE CONNECTICUT GAZETTE,                20

MUSTER-ROLL OF CAPT. WM. POTTER'S COMPANY,                        22

ACCOUNT OF THE ATTACK, PUBLISHED BY THE BOROUGH AUTHORITIES,      24

LETTER FROM CAPT. AMOS PALMER TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR,            33

EXTRACT FROM GEN. ROOT'S SPEECH IN CONGRESS, 1817,                37

THE BATTLE OF STONINGTON, BY PHILIP FRENEAU,                      38

CELEBRATIONS OF THE ANNIVERSARY,                                  42

NOTES,                                                            47




INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


The repulse of a British squadron, at Stonington, by a few undisciplined
volunteers, having only two effective guns, imperfectly protected by a
low earth-work,--and this repulse accomplished without the loss of a
single life,--was not the least glorious achievement of the War of
1812-14. The fiftieth anniversary of the action is close at hand. Few
who witnessed,--only three or four who participated in it, survive. In
this day of great events, when armies and navies are gathered on a scale
of magnitude of which our fathers never dreamed,--when from the heights
of modern science, we look back to the guns and the ships of war of the
last generation, as to the toys of childhood,--when we are in the very
crisis of a war greater in itself, and waged for a grander issue, than
the world has hitherto witnessed,--it is not surprising that so few find
leisure or inclination to look from the present to the past, or to
recall to memory the heroism of their fathers.

Yet there are some for whom the story of _The Attack_ has not yet lost
its interest. They learned it in childhood, from the lips of those who
shared the perils and the glory of the action. They grew up, amid
associations which could hardly fail to kindle an honest pride in their
birth-place. To them, the "Tenth of August" was not merely a
school-holiday, but an anniversary entitled to equal honors with
Independence Day itself. They have helped draw the "old Eighteens,"
through the streets of the Borough, in solemn procession to the site of
the demolished Battery. They have seen the cherished Flag--pierced and
torn in a dozen places by the enemy's shot,--float again from the
flag-staff, in honor of the day: and some of them were standing by when
"Old Hickory" bared his head to salute it, and bade the citizens
preserve, with all care, this precious memorial of the courage and
patriotism of their townsmen.

It is for these--the companions of my own school-days,--and in honor of
the volunteers of 1814, that I have reproduced some of the contemporary
accounts of the attack and defence of Stonington. The first (pp. 9-20)
was written by Col. Samuel Green, the publisher of the _Connecticut
Gazette_, who visited the Borough during the action, and obtained his
knowledge of facts of which he was not an eye-witness, from the actors
themselves and from official sources. This account, printed in the
_Gazette_, of August 17th, was copied into many of the newspapers in the
northern states, and appeared in Niles's _Weekly Register_, November
5th, with some additional particulars.

Following this, are copies of the muster-roll of the Borough company of
militia; the official account furnished for publication by the
magistrates, warden and burgesses (pp. 24-32); and a letter from Capt.
Amos Palmer, chairman of the citizens' committee of defence, to Mr.
Crawford, secretary of war, containing a concise narrative of the
action. Philip Freneau's _Battle of Stonington_,--though not of the
highest order of lyric excellence,--challenges favorable comparison with
many of the loyal effusions which have found their way to the public,
during the present war; and will be welcomed as an old friend by some
who value patriotism more than poetry.                           T.

   _Hartford, Conn., July 28th, 1864._




THE DEFENCE OF STONINGTON.


[From the Conn. Gazette, Aug. 17th, 1814.]

RECORD OF THE EXTRAORDINARY ATTACK ON STONINGTON.[1]


                                        NEW LONDON, AUGUST 17, 1814.

On Tuesday the 9th instant, at 5 P. M. the _Ramilies_, 74, _Pactolus_,
38, a bomb ship, and the _Dispatch_, 22 gun brig, arrived off
Stonington, and a flag was sent on shore with the following note--


                                "_On board his Majesty's Ship, Ramilies,
                                                    Stonington, Aug. 9._
TO THE MAGISTRATES OF STONINGTON.

Gentlemen--One hour is allowed you from the receipt of this
communication, for the removal of the unoffending inhabitants.

                                                     THOMAS M. HARDY.[2]


This notification was received by two magistrates[3] and Lieutenant
Hough of the drafted militia, who went off to meet the flag. The officer
was asked whether a flag would not be received on board. He said no
arrangements could be made. They inquired whether Com. Hardy had
determined to destroy the town. He replied that such were his orders
from the Admiral, and that it would be done most effectually.

When the gentlemen reached the shore, a crowd waited with great anxiety
for the news; which being stated, consternation flew through the town.
An express was despatched to General Cushing,[4] at New London. A number
of volunteers hastened to collect ammunition; others ran to the battery,
which consisted of two 18 pounders and a 4 pounder, on field carriages,
with a slight breast work, 4 feet high. The sick and the aged were
removed with haste: the women and children, with loud cries, were seen
running in every direction. Some of the most valuable articles were
hastily got off by hand, others placed in the gardens and lots, or
thrown into wells, to save them from the impending conflagration. The
sixty minutes expired, but the dreaded moment did not bring the attack.
Nelson's favorite hero and friend was seized with the compunctions of
magnanimity;--he remembered what ancient Britons were; he remembered
that something was due to the character of Sir Thomas M. Hardy. Three
hours in fact elapsed, when at 8 in the evening the attack was commenced
by a discharge of shells from the bomb ship. Several barges and
launches had taken their stations in different points, from whence they
threw Congreve rockets, and carcasses. This mode of attack was continued
incessantly till midnight; and the fire was returned occasionally from
the battery, as the light of the rockets gave opportunity with any
chance of success.

The few drafted militia which had been sometime stationed there, under
command of Lieutenant Hough, were placed in the best directions to give
an alarm in case a landing should be attempted. During the night the
volunteers and militia had assembled in considerable numbers; and the
non-combatant inhabitants had generally removed to the neighboring
farm-houses, in the momentary expectation of seeing their abandoned
dwellings in flames. It was a night of inexpressible anguish to many a
widow and orphan, to many aged and infirm, whose little pittance they
were now apparently to lose forever. But Providence directed otherwise.
This compact little village of 100 buildings had been for four hours
covered with flames of fire and bomb shells, and not a single building
was consumed nor a person injured.

At the dawn of day on the 10th, the approach of the enemy was announced
by a discharge of Congreve rockets from several barges and a launch,
which had taken their station, on the east side of the town, and out of
reach of the battery. Several volunteers, with small arms and the four
pounder, hastened across the point, supposing the enemy were attempting
a landing. Colonel Randall of the 13th regiment, who at the time was
moving towards the battery with a detachment of militia, ordered them to
assist the volunteers in drawing over one of the 18 pounders to the
extreme end of the point; the fire of which in a few minutes compelled
the barges to seek safety in flight. During this time the brig was
working up towards the Point, and soon after sunrise came to anchor,
short of half a mile from the battery, (or more correctly, the
breastwork). Our ammunition being soon exhausted, the guns were spiked,
and the men who fought them, being only about 15 or 20,[5] retired,
leaving them behind for want of strength to drag them off.

The brig now continued deliberately to pour her 32 pound shot and grape
into the Village, without our having the power of returning a shot, for
an hour, and the bomb ketch occasionally threw in shells. A fresh supply
of ammunition being obtained, the 18 pounder was withdrawn from the
breastwork, the vent drilled, and the piece taken back again, when such
an animated and well directed fire was kept up, that at 3 o'clock the
brig slipped her cable and hauled off, with her pumps going, having
received several shots below her water line, and considerable damage in
her spars, &c. During this action between the eighteen pounder and the
brig, Mr. Frederick Denison was slightly wounded in the knee,[6] by a
fragment of a rock, and Mr. John Miner, badly burnt in his face by the
premature discharge of the gun. The flag, which was nailed to the mast,
was pierced with seven shot holes,[7] the breast-work somewhat injured,
and 6 or 8 of the dwelling-houses in the vicinity essentially injured.
At this time a considerable body of militia had arrived, and
Brigadier-General Isham[8] had taken the command; the inhabitants had
recovered from the consternation of the first moments; and were
deliberately moving off their furniture and goods. At 1 o'clock the
Ramilies and Pactolus had taken stations about two and a half miles from
the town, when resistance appearing hopeless, the Magistrates as a last
resort applied to the General for permission to send a flag off, being
impressed with the opinion that there must exist some latent cause of a
peculiar nature to induce a commander who had heretofore distinguished
himself for a scrupulous regard to the claims of honorable warfare,--to
induce him to commit an act so repugnant to sound policy, so abhorrent
to his nature, so flagrant an outrage on humanity. The General, we
understand, would not sanction, nor did he absolutely prohibit, a flag
being sent. They, therefore, on their own responsibility, sent on board
the Ramilies, Isaac Williams and Wm. Lord, Esquires, with the following
letter.


Copy.)                                  _Stonington August 10, 1814._
TO SIR THOMAS M. HARDY,

SIR--Agreeable to notice received from you yesterday, this town is now
cleared of "unoffending inhabitants," and they feeling anxious about the
fate of their village, are desirous to know from you, your determination
respecting it. Yours, &c.

                                             _Amos Denison_, Burgess.
                                             _William Lord_, Magistrate.


The deputation proceeded on board the Ramilies, and shortly after an
officer informed the boatmen that they might return to the shore, as the
gentlemen would be landed in a boat from the ship; and that Captain
Hardy had declared that no further hostilities would be committed
against the town. After remaining on board an hour, or more, the
deputation were conveyed in a flag from the ship, which was met by one
from the shore. They brought with them a very singular and extraordinary
communication. An exact copy cannot at present be obtained, as official
etiquette will not permit; but having read it when it was received on
shore, as far as memory serves us, it was as follows:


_On board H. M. Ship Ramilies, off Stonington, Aug. 10._

GENTLEMEN--You having given assurances that no torpedoes have been
fitted out from Stonington; and having engaged to exert your influence
to prevent any from being fitted out or receiving any aid from your
town: If you send on board this ship tomorrow at eight o'clock, Mrs.
Stewart, wife of James Stewart esq. late His Majesty's Consul at New
London, and their children, I engage that no further hostilities shall
be committed against Stonington; otherwise I shall proceed to destroy it
effectually.--For which purpose I possess ample means.

                                                     T. M. HARDY, Capt.


This letter was received indignantly. No answer was given. It was a fact
well known that no torpedoes have been fitted out at Stonington, and
that the inhabitants are unfriendly to the system; but neither
individuals nor the town have power to prevent their resorting to that
place. The condition _sine qua non_, is truly _tragi-farcical_. Neither
the town of Stonington or the State of Connecticut, had any legal power
to comply with it, which Capt. Hardy well knew. And if Stonington Point
with its rocky foundations had been in danger of being blown up,
scarcely a voice would have been raised to have saved it on such
disgraceful terms. The first duty of a citizen we are taught in
Connecticut, is to obey the laws. Mrs. Stewart is under the protection
of the government of the United States, and the petition of her husband
for a permission for a departure is in the hands of a proper authority,
who will undoubtedly decide correctly in the case.[9]

Our countrymen at a distance, from the importance Capt. Hardy has
attached to the circumstance of Mrs. Stewart's being sent off to the
British squadron, may possibly apprehend that she has received insult,
or signified some fears for the personal safety of herself and
children.--So far from this being the fact, no lady ever experienced
greater civilities from the citizens; as no one has better deserved
them. And her feelings during the proceedings at Stonington, demanded
the sympathy of her friends.

By the terms offered by Capt. Hardy, it was impossible to discover
whether he was most doubtful of his ability to accomplish the
destruction of the town, or desirous of a pretext to save it. He assured
the gentlemen who accompanied the flag that this was the most unpleasant
expedition he had undertaken.

The truce on the part of the enemy having expired at 8 o'clock on
Thursday morning, a flag was soon after observed at the battery to be
coming on shore, and there not being sufficient time to give information
of the fact at head quarters and receive instructions, it was determined
by the officer then commanding to send a boat off to receive the
communication. Mr. Faxon, of Stonington, took charge of the boat, met
the flag, and offered to convey the dispatch agreeable to its
directions. The British officer, Lieut. Claxton, questioned his
authority to receive it; enquired whether Mrs. Stewart would be sent
off; and said he would go on shore. Mr. Faxon replied, that he knew
nothing of Mrs. Stewart; and that if he attempted to proceed for the
shore, he would undoubtedly be fired on. He continued his course, when
a centinel was directed to fire forward of the boat, but the ball passed
through the after sail. They immediately put about and steered for the
ship; the lieutenant swearing revenge, for what he termed an insult to
his flag.

An explanation of the circumstance was immediately transmitted by
General Isham to Capt. Hardy, which he received as satisfactory.

At the moment, a flag had started for the Ramilies,[10] from the civil
authority of the town, which was received on board; by which was sent
the following letter:--


                                    _Stonington Boro', Aug. 14, 1814._
TO THOMAS M. HARDY, _Commander of H.B.M. Ship Ramilies_.

Sir--Since the flag went into New London for Mrs. Stewart, and family,
General Cushing, who commands at New London, has written, we are
informed, to the Secretary of War on the subject, and it is our opinion
that the request will be complied with. But whatever may be the result
of the communication from Gen. Cushing, you will be satisfied it is not
in our power to enter into any arrangement with you respecting her.

From yours, &c.

Isaac Williams,               }
William Lord,                 } _Magistrates._
Alexander G. Smith,           }
Joseph Smith,  _Warden._
Geo. Hubbard,} _Burgesses._
Amos Denison,}


To this letter, Capt. Hardy replied verbally, that he should allow till
12 o'clock for Mrs. Stewart to be brought on board.[11] At this time the
principal part of three regiments of militia had arrived, and the town
was perfectly secure against a landing.

At 3 o'clock, the bomb ship commenced throwing shells into the town; and
being out of reach of our cannon, the General withdrew the militia,
excepting a guard of 50 men who were ordered to patrol the streets for
the extinguishment of fire, should any happen. The bombardment continued
till evening.

On Friday morning the bomb ship renewed her operations a little before
sunrise, while the Ramilies and Pactolus were warping in. At eight
o'clock the frigate opened her fire and was soon followed by the
Ramilies. At this time the cannon were ordered to be moved to the north
end of the town, where they would have been serviceable if an attempt
had been made to land under cover of the ships. This was a very
hazardous service, as the party would be entirely exposed to the fire of
the enemy. Volunteers in sufficient numbers instantly offered their
services; among whom were upwards of twenty of the Norwich artillery.
The command of the party was entrusted to Lieutenant Lathrop,[12] of
that corps. They marched to the battery and brought off the pieces
without the smallest accident; exhibiting all the steadiness which
characterises veteran soldiers.

This tremendous cannonade and bombardment continued till nearly noon,
when it ceased; and about four o'clock the ships hauled off to their
former anchorage.

During the succeeding night a large force was kept on guard, in the
expectation and hope that a landing would be attempted. The militia
during this afflicting scene discovered the very best disposition, and
were eager to take revenge of the enemy or sacrifice their lives in the
contest.

It may be considered miraculous that during the several attacks, while
so many were exposed to this terrible and protracted bombardment and
cannonade, not a person was killed, and but five or six wounded, and
those but slightly. Among the wounded is Lieutenant Hough[13] of the
drafted militia.

On Saturday morning the enemy relinquished the hope of burning the town,
weighed anchor, and proceeded up Fisher's Island sound.

The volunteers who so gloriously fought in the battery, deserve the
thanks of their country. No men could have done better. Their example
will have the happiest influence.

About forty buildings are more or less injured, 8 or 10 essentially so;
and two or three may be considered as ruined. The damage was principally
done by the brig. Many shells did not explode, several were
extinguished. The Congreve Rockets which were frightful at first, lost
their terrors, and effected little.

The inhabitants, fearing another attack, have not returned to their
dwellings, and their desolate situation calls loudly upon the
philanthropy of their fellow citizens. If a brief should be granted for
collections in the churches of the State we trust very essential aid
will be furnished. Nineteen-twentieths of the inhabitants, it is said,
have no other property than their dwellings.

A Nantucket man has been on board the British fleet to redeem his boat,
and learned that the Dispatch had 2 men killed and 12 wounded; her loss
was undoubtedly much greater.


       *     *     *     *     *


NAMES OF VOLUNTEERS.

[From the Conn. Gazette, Aug. 24th.]

The following is handed us as a list of the volunteers (tho' presumed
not entirely perfect,) of those who so bravely stood the brunt of the
attack of Stonington Point:--

Of _Stonington_:--

Capt. George Fellows,       Gurdon Trumbull,
Capt. Wm. Potter,           Alex. G. Smith,
Dr. Wm. Lord,               Amos Denison jun.,
Lieut. H. G. Lewis,         Stanton Gallup,
Ensign D. Frink,            Eb. Morgan,
                 John Miner.

Of _Mystic_:--

Jesse Deane,                Jeremiah Holmes,
Deane Gallup,               N. Cleft,
Fred. Haley,                Jedediah Reed.

Of _Groton_:--

Alfred White,               Frank Daniels,
Ebenezer Morgan,            Giles Moran.

Of _New London_:--

Major Simeon Smith,
Capt. Noah Lester (formerly of the Army),
Major N. Frink,             Lambert Williams.

From _Massachusetts_:--

Capt. Leonard, and Mr. Dunham.


[From the Conn. Gazette, Aug. 31st.]

By an error of the compositor, the following names were omitted in the
list published in our last paper, of volunteers who so greatly
contributed to the glorious defence and preservation of Stonington,
viz.:--

Simeon Haley,               Thomas Wilcox,
Jeremiah Haley,             Luke Palmer,
Frederick Denison,          George Palmer,
John Miner,                 Wm. G. Bush,
Asa Lee.

There were probably others, whom we have not learnt.


[From the original in the Comptroller's office, at Hartford.]

MUSTER ROLL of the 8th Company of Infantry under the command of CAPTAIN
WM. POTTER in the Thirtieth Regiment of Con. Militia in service of the
United States, at Stonington, commanded by Lieut. Col. WM. RANDALL, from
the 9th of August when last mustered, to the 27th of August 1814.--

_Names and Rank.        Commencement    Expiration   Alterations and Remarks
                         of service.    of service.  Remarks since last
                                                     muster._

_Captain_, William Potter,      Aug. 9   Aug. 27
_Lieut._ Horatio G. Lewis,       "   9    "   27
                                                    {detached for service
_Ensign_, Daniel Frink,          "   9    "   23    { and ordered to N.
                                                    { London, Aug. 22.
  _Sergeants:_
Francis Amy,                     "  19    "   27
Charles H. Smith,                "   9    "   27
Peleg Hancox,                    "  22    "   27
Gurdon Trumbull,                 "   9    "   27
  _Corporals:_
Azariah Stanton jr.,             "  16    "   27
Junia Cheesebrough,              "   9    "   27
Joshua Swan jr.,                 "  22    "   27
  _Privates:_
                                                    {detached for service
Phineas Wilcox,                  "   9    "   23    { and ordered to N.
                                                    { London, Aug. 23.
Hamilton White,                  "   9    "   27
                                                    {detached for service
Henry Wilcox,                    "   9    "   23    { and ordered to N.
                                                    { London, Aug. 23.
Nathan Wilcox,                   "   9    "   27
Samuel Burtch,                   "   9    "   27
Jonathan Palmer,                 "   9    "   27
Andrew P. Stanton,               "   9    "   27
James Stanton,                  Aug. 9   Aug. 27
Thomas Breed,                    "   9    "         {Volunteer exempt,
                                                    {discharg., Aug. 17.
Amos Loper,                      "   9    "         {Volunteer exempt,
                                                    {discharg., Aug. 20.
Samuel Bottum, Jr.,              "   9    "   27
                                                    {Produced certificate
Benj. Merritt,                   "   9    "         {of parole on 15th
                                                    {Aug. & discharged.
Elisha Cheesebrough Jr.,         "   9    "   27
                                                    {detached for service
Christopr. Wheeler,              "   9    "   23    { & ordered to New
                                                    { London, Aug. 23.
Amos Hancox,                     "   9   "   27
Zebadiah Palmer,                 "  15   "   27
Nathl. Waldron,                  "  15   "   27
Thomas Spencer,                  "  19   "   27
Nathl. M. Pendleton,             "  20   "   27
Simon Carew,                     "  22   "   27
Elisha Faxon Jun.,               "  22   "   27
                                                    {detached for service
Ebenezer Halpin,                 "  22   "   23     { & ordered to New
                                                    { London, Aug. 23.
                                                    {detached for service
Asa Wilcox Jun.,                 "  22   "   23     { & ordered to New
                                                    { London, 23 Aug.
Warren Palmer,                   "  22   "   27
                                                    {Waiter to Capt.
Joseph Bailey Jun. }             "   9   "   27     {Wm. Potter.
                   }_Waiters_,   "       "   23     {Waiter to Lieut.
Nathl. Lewis,      }                                {G. Lewis


I certify, upon honor, that this Muster Roll exhibits a true statement
of the 8th Company; and that the remarks set opposite the men's names
are accurate and just.

                                            WILLIAM POTTER, _Capt._

We certify upon honor, that the foregoing Muster Roll exhibits a true
statement of Captain William Potter's Company; and that the remarks set
opposite the men's names are accurate and just.

                       JOHN JAMIESON JR., _Asst. Adjt. Genl. &
                                           Mustering Officer, per order_.

                       WM LORD, _Regimental Surgeon_.


ACCOUNT OF THE ATTACK, FURNISHED FOR PUBLICATION, BY THE MAGISTRATES,
WARDEN AND BURGESSES.[14]

[From the Conn. Gazette, Sept. 7th,]

                                _Stonington Borough, Aug. 29, 1814._

_Mr._ Green--In relation to the extraordinary attack of the enemy, of
the 9th inst., on this village, the public have been furnished with
various accounts; and though the circumstantial and generally correct
account given in your paper [of the 7th of August,] precludes the
necessity of a recapitulation of the whole transaction, yet this village
having been the object of the attack and resentment of Sir Thomas, the
Magistrates, Warden and Burgesses residing therein, feeling deeply
interested that some official document comprehending a supply of some
facts not given, and alteration of others, and a general statement
relative to the whole, should be published,--offer the public the
following statement:


On Tuesday afternoon of the 9th inst. anchored off our harbor, the
frigate _Pactolus_, the _Terror_, a bomb ship, and the brig _Dispatch_
of 20 guns. From the difficulty of the navigation in Fisher's Island
Sound, we have been generally impressed that such ships of war dare not
approach us; but the presumption of the enemy has created new fears, and
we think it our duty to say, that further means of defence and
protection ought to be afforded us; this we have often requested.
Various were the opinions respecting the object of the enemy, but soon
all was settled. A flag was discovered to leave the frigate and row
towards the town. The impropriety of suffering them to come on more was
suggested; and a boat was immediately obtained, Capt. Amos Palmer,
William Lord Esq., and Lieut. Hough of the detachment here, selected,
and the flag of the enemy met by ours, when we received the following
unexpected and short notice--(This not having been furnished the public
correctly we give it at length:)


                            _His Britannic Majesty's ship_ PACTOLUS,
                      _9th of August, 1814, halfpast 5 o'clock, P. M._

Not wishing to destroy the unoffending inhabitants residing in the town
of Stonington, one hour is given them from the receipt of this, to
remove out of the town.

                                      T. M. HARDY, _Capt. of H. B. M.
                                               Ship_ RAMILIES.

_To the Inhabitants of the Town of Stonington._


From the date of this communication it will appear that Commander Hardy
was himself on board the Pactolus to direct the attack; the _Ramilies_
then laying at anchor at the west end of Fisher's Island. The people
assembled in great numbers to hear what was the word from the enemy;
when the above was read aloud. The enemy in the barge lay upon their
oars a few moments, probably to see the crowd and if some consternation
might not prevail. Whatever effect was produced, this we know, that Sir
Thomas's "unoffending inhabitants" did not agree to give up the ship,
though threatened by a force competent, in a human view, to destroy
them, when compared with the present means of defence in their power. It
was exclaimed, from old and young, _We will defend_. The male citizens,
though duly appreciating the humanity of Sir Thomas, in not wishing to
destroy them, thought proper to defend their wives and their children,
and, in many instances, all their property; and we feel a pleasure in
saying that a united spirit of defence prevailed, and, during the short
hour granted us, expresses were sent to Gen. Cushing at New London, and
to Col. Randall,[15] whose regiment resided nearest to the scene of
danger. The detachment stationed here under Lieut. Hough was embodied;
Capt. Potter, residing within the Borough, gave orders to assemble all
the officers and men under his command that could be immediately
collected. They cheerfully and quickly assembled, animated with the true
spirit of patriotism. The ammunition for our two 18-pounders and
4-pounder was collected at the little breast-work erected by ourselves.
The citizens of the Borough, assisted by two strangers from
Massachusetts, manned the 18-pounders at the breast-work, and also the
4-pounder. One cause of discouragement, only, seemed to prevail, which
was the deficiency of ammunition for the cannon. This circumstance,
however, together with the superior force arrayed against us, did not
abate the zeal for resistance. Such guards of musketry as were in our
power to place, were stationed at different points on the shores. In
this state of preparation we waited the attack of the enemy. About 8
o'clock in the evening they commenced by the fire of a shell from the
bomb-ship, which was immediately returned by a shot from our 18-pounder.
This attack of the enemy was immediately succeeded by one from three
launches and four barges, surrounding the point, throwing rockets and
shot into the village. This also was returned as often as, by the light
of the rockets streaming from the barges, we could discover them.
Assisted by the above military force, the inhabitants alone, some
seventy years old, defended the town until about 11 o'clock; and had it
not been for the spirited resistance manifested, a landing no doubt,
would have been effected. At this time Col. Randall had arrived, and
having issued orders to the militia under his command, they began to
assemble, and from the short notice given them were truly prompt and
active in appearing at the post of danger: some volunteers had also
arrived. From this additional strength, the apprehensions of the enemy's
landing, in a measure vanished. Their shells, rockets and carcasses,
having been prevented from spreading the destruction intended, they
ceased firing them about 12 o'clock. All was still from this time until
day-light. A fire of rockets and shot from the launches and barges again
commenced, which was spiritedly returned from our artillery taken from
the breast-work, in open view of the enemy and exposed to their shot, on
the end of the point, and they [were] compelled to recede. This truly
hazardous service was nobly performed. Col. Randall having been prompt
in his appearance, as were all the officers and soldiers of his
regiment, they were now organized, ready and eager to receive our
invaders. From the spirit manifested among the citizens, volunteers and
soldiers, and the judicious arrangements made of the troops assembled,
had a landing been attempted a good account would no doubt have been
given of them. We were now also assisted by numbers of volunteers. The
barges having receded from the fire of our four and eighteen-pounder on
the Point, they were taken back to the breast-work.

About 8 o'clock in the morning of Wednesday, the Brig [_Dispatch_]
hauled within half a mile of our breast-work, and opened a well directed
and animated fire. Our few guns being now well manned by citizens and
volunteers, from Stonington, New London, Mistick and Groton, they were
ready to receive her. Her fire was returned with a spirit and courage
rarely to be equalled,--and of those gallant souls who stood this
conflict, we can only say, they gloriously did their duty. Heroes having
so nobly acted, with ours, will receive the plaudit of their country.
What effect such bravery had on the enemy, will appear from the fact,
that the brig was compelled to cut her cable and retire out of reach of
our shot. Her anchor has since been taken up, with a number of fathoms
of cable. No attack was afterwards made by the brig. This contest with
the brig (called the _Dispatch_), continued on our part from the
breast-work until the ammunition was expended. To this circumstance,
unfortunately for the village and mortifying to those so gallantly
engaged in the defence, may be attributed the principal injury sustained
by the buildings. For two hours or more, she kept up a constant fire
without having it in our power to return a shot: during which time, we
are confident, had there been a supply of ammunition, she would have
been taught the use and meaning of her name.

The further particulars which transpired on Wednesday and Thursday,
having been noticed by you, in the publication above referred to, very
correctly, the public must be satisfied without any comments from us. In
the publication of the transactions of Friday, we have discovered one
error. Amidst the combined fire of the Ramilies, frigate and bomb-ship,
Lieut. Lathrop and volunteers from the Norwich Artillery, in fact did
proceed, to undertake in assisting to get off the cannon from the
breast-work, but they met other brave lads who had accomplished this
hazardous duty. The praise therefore of this performance, however they
may have distinguished themselves in other duties, is not correctly
bestowed.

In passing the proceedings of Thursday and Friday, we would not overlook
the singular communication received from Commodore Hardy, which preceded
the fire on Thursday. Two subjects esteemed very important by Sir Thomas
seem connected, Torpedoes and Mrs. Stewart,--a lady we presume worthy of
the notice even of Commodore Hardy. But a demand made on those with
whom, it was well known, no power existed to comply, is not a little
extraordinary: besides, this communication is totally different from and
unconnected with the one it was sent as an answer to. It would appear
from reading the documents, that assurances were given that no torpedoes
ever did, or ever should, go from this place. This was not the fact; no
promises or confessions of any kind were ever made. To this singular
letter no general reply was given; that part, only, [was] noticed,
relative to Mrs. Stewart.

The enemy left us on Friday, without having accomplished that
destruction which they told us was to be effected. The damage done the
buildings is estimated at about four thousand dollars. This would
undoubtedly have been much greater, had not the volunteer vigilant
firemen[16] from Capt. Potter's company before mentioned, and others,
continued firm at their posts, determined that not a flame kindled by
those fiery engines of the enemy but should be extinguished,--and it was
done. This duty, perhaps, was as important and useful for the salvation
of the village, as any performed during the conflict.

The list of individuals given to the public as distinguishing themselves
during the contest, we esteem very imperfect. To give a correct list of
all those who did distinguish themselves in the various duties that were
performed, is not easy to do; we shall therefore forbear. Having thought
proper to bestow a just tribute of praise on the officers and soldiers
of the 30th Regiment, who first arrived at the scene of action, it
becomes us to express, also, the high sense which we entertain of the
services and judicious and soldier-like conduct of Brigadier-General
Isham, and the officers and soldiers of the 8th and 20th Regiments,
assembled under his command.

During this protracted bombardment, nothing more excites our
astonishment and gratitude than this, that not a man was killed on our
part. We understand from good authority, the enemy had a number killed
and several badly wounded,[17] in this unprovoked attack upon us.

We have made some estimate of the number of shells and fire carcasses
thrown into the village, and we find there has been about three hundred.
The amount of metal fired by the enemy will exceed, we think, fifty
tons. About three or four tons of bombs, carcasses and shot have been
collected.[A]

WILLIAM LORD,    }_Magistrates._
ALEX. G. SMITH,  }
JOSEPH SMITH,     _Warden._
AMOS PALMER,          }
AMOS DENISON,         }
GEO. HUBBARD,         } _Burgesses._
THOMAS ASH,           }
REUBEN CHESEBROUGH,   }

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: "Some respectable citizens from motives of curiosity
weighed several shells &c., and found their weight to be as follows.

One of the largest carcasses, partly full of the combustible, 216 lb.
One of the smallest sort          do.                         103
One of the largest kind empty,                                189
One of the largest bomb shells,                               189
One of the smallest               do.                          90
One, marked on it (fire 16 lb)                                 16

One of the largest carcasses partly full, was set on fire, which burnt
half an hour, emitting a horrid stench; in a calm the flame would rise
ten feet. Some of the rockets were sharp pointed, others not, made of
sheet iron very thick, containing at the lower end some of them a fusee
of grenade, calculated to burst, and if they were taken hold of before
the explosion, might prove dangerous; one or two persons received injury
in this way. They appear to contain a greater variety of combustibles
than the fire carcasses.]


LETTER FROM CAPT. AMOS PALMER, TO THE SECRETARY
OF WAR.

[From Niles's Weekly Register, Oct. 21, 1815.]

DEFENCE OF STONINGTON.

The defence of Stonington by a handful of brave citizens was more like
an effusion of feeling, warm from the heart, than a concerted military
movement. The result of it, we all know, and it afforded sincere delight
to every patriot. But the particulars we have never seen so accurately
described as in the following concise narrative from the chairman of the
committee of defence, to the Secretary of War, of which we have been
provided with a copy for publication.--_Nat. Intelligencer._


                                    "Stonington Borough, Aug. 21, 1815.
To the Hon. Wm. H. Crawford,
Secretary of War.

SIR:

The former Secretary of War put into my hands, as chairman of the
committee of defence, the two 18-pounders and all the munitions of war
that were here, belonging to the general government, to be used for the
defence of the town,--and I gave my receipt for the same.

As there is no military officer here, it becomes my duty to inform you
[of] the use we have made of it. That on the 9th of August last [year],
the _Ramilies_ 74, the _Pactolus_ 44, the _Terror_ bomb-ship, and the
_Despatch_ gun brig, anchored off the harbor. Commodore Hardy sent off a
boat, with a flag; we met him with another from the shore, when the
officer of the flag handed me a note from Commodore Hardy, informing
that one hour was given the unoffending inhabitants, before the town
would be destroyed.

We returned to the shore, where all the male inhabitants were collected,
when I read the note aloud; they all exclaimed, they would defend the
place to the last extremity, and if it was destroyed, they would be
buried in the ruins.

We repaired to a small battery that we had hove up--nailed our colors to
the flag staff--others lined the shore with their muskets.

At about seven in the evening, they put off five barges and a large
launch, carrying from 32 to 9 lb. carronades in their bows, and opened
their fire from their shipping, with bombs, carcasses, rockets, round,
grape and cannister shot, and sent their boats to land under cover of
their fire. We let them come within small grape distance, when we opened
our fire upon them, from our two 18-pounders, with round and grape shot.
They soon retreated out of grape distance, and attempted a landing on
the east side of the village; we dragged a six-pounder that we had
mounted over, and met them with grape, and all our muskets opened fire
on them, so that they were willing to retreat the second time. They
continued their fire 'till 11 at night.

The next morning at seven o'clock, the brig _Despatch_ anchored within
pistol shot of our battery, and they sent five barges and two large
launches to land under cover of their whole fire (being joined by the
_Nimrod_ 20 gun brig). When the boats approached within grape distance,
we opened our fire on them with round and grape shot. They retreated and
came round the east side of the town. We checked them with our six
pounder and muskets, 'till we dragged over one of our 18 pounders. We
put in it a round shot and about 40 or 50 lbs. of grape, and placed it
in the centre of their boats as they were rowing up in a line and firing
on us. We tore one of their barges all in pieces; so that two, one on
each side, had to lash her up, to keep her from sinking. They retreated
out of grape distance, and we turned our fire upon the brig, and
expended all our cartridges but five, which we reserved for the boats,
if they made another attempt to land. We then lay four hours without
being able to annoy the enemy in the least, except from muskets on the
brig, while the fire from the whole fleet was directed against our
buildings. After the third express to New London, some fixed ammunition
arrived. We then turned our cannon on the brig, and she soon cut her
cable and drifted out.

The whole fleet then weighed, and anchored nearly out of reach of our
shot, and continued this and the next day to bombard the town.

They set the buildings on fire in more than twenty places, and we as
often put them out. In the three days' bombardment they sent on shore 60
tons of metal, and, strange to say, wounded only one man, since dead. We
have picked up 15 tons, including some that was taken up out of the
water, and the two anchors that we got.[18] We took up and buried four
poor fellows that were hove overboard out of the sinking barge.

Since peace, the officers of the _Despatch_ brig have been on shore
here: they acknowledge they had 21 killed, and 50 badly wounded; and
further say, had we continued our fire any longer, they should have
struck, for they were in a sinking condition: for the wind then blew at
S. W. directly into the harbour. Before the ammunition arrived, it
shifted round to north, and blew out of the harbour. All the shot
suitable for the cannon we have reserved. We have now more 18 pound shot
than was sent us by government. We have put the two cannon in the
arsenal, and housed all the munitions of war."


EXTRACT FROM THE SPEECH OF GEN. ERASTUS ROOT, OF NEW YORK,

In the House of Representatives, on the Bill to provide for the payment
of Militia called out by State authority, and not placed under the
command of the United States.

[After animadverting with great severity on the affair at Pettipaug
point,[19] and the course pursued by Governor Smith, of Connecticut, for
the defence of New London]--

"There was _one_ achievement, said Mr. R., which brightened the annals
of Connecticut and shed lustre on the American character. He alluded to
the _Defence of Stonington_. A more brilliant affair, said he, had not
taken place during the late war. It was not rivalled by the defence of
Sandusky, the glorious triumph on the Niagara, nor the naval victories
on Erie and Champlain. And yet that heroic exploit is claimed in favor
of Governor Smith's militia, and is to gild the pill which we are called
upon to swallow. The detached militia, said Mr. R., had nothing to do in
that affair. It was achieved by fourteen democrats, _volunteer_
democrats, who were determined to defend the town or perish in its
ruins. Commodore Hardy, fearful that that democratic town would send
torpedoes among his squadron, demanded a pledge that no harm should be
done to his ships. No pledge being given, and after advising the
removal of women and children from the town, the enemy made a vigorous
attack, first in barges, and afterwards in a brig of war. This heroic
little band, with a single gun mounted on a small battery, drove off the
brig as they had before driven off the barges. They sent havoc and death
among the enemy,--saved the town,--and crowned themselves with never
fading laurels."--_The (Hartford) Times, March 18, 1817._

       *     *     *     *     *

THE BATTLE OF STONINGTON, ON THE SEABOARD OF CONNECTICUT.

BY PHILIP FRENEAU.

_In an attack upon the town and a small fort of two guns, by the
_RAMILLIES_, seventy-four gun ship, commanded by Sir Thomas Hardy; the
_PACTOLUS_, 38 gun ship; _DESPATCH_ brig, and a razee, or bomb
ship,--August, 1814._

    Four gallant ships from England came
    Freighted deep with fire and flame,
    And other things we need not name,
          To have a dash at Stonington.

    Now safely moor'd, their work begun,
    They thought to make the Yankees run,
    And have a mighty deal of fun
          In stealing sheep at Stonington.

    A deacon then popp'd up his head,
    And Parson Jones's sermon read,
    In which the reverend doctor said
          That they must fight for Stonington.

    A townsman bade them, next, attend
    To sundry resolutions penn'd,
    By which they promised to defend
          With sword and gun old Stonington.

    The ships advancing different ways,
    The Britons soon began to blaze,
    And put th' old women in amaze,
          Who feared the loss of Stonington.

    The Yankees to their fort repair'd,
    And made as though they little cared
    For all that came--though very hard
          The cannon play'd on Stonington.

    The _Ramillies_ began the attack,
    _Despatch_ came forward--bold and black--
    And none can tell what kept them back
          From setting fire to Stonington.

    The bombardiers with bomb and ball
    Soon made a farmer's barrack fall,
    And did a cow-house sadly maul
          That stood a mile from Stonington.

    They kill'd a goose, they kill'd a hen,
    Three hogs they wounded in a pen--
    They dash'd away,--and pray what then?
          _This_ was not taking Stonington.

    The shells were thrown, the rockets flew,
    But not a shell, of all they threw,
    Though every house was full in view,
          Could burn a house at Stonington.

    To have _their_ turn, they thought but fair;--
    The Yankees brought two guns to bear,
    And, sir, it would have made you stare,
          This smoke of smokes at Stonington.

    They bor'd _Pactolus_ through and through,
    And kill'd and wounded of her crew
    So many, that she bade adieu
         T' the gallant boys of Stonington.

    The brig _Despatch_ was hull'd and torn--
    So crippled, riddled, so forlorn--
    No more she cast an eye of scorn
          On the little fort at Stonington.

    The _Ramillies_ gave up th' affray,
    And, with her comrades sneaked away.
    Such was the valor on that day,
          Of British tars, near Stonington.

    But some assert, on certain grounds,
    (Besides the damage and the wounds,)
    It cost the King ten thousand pounds
          To have a dash at Stonington.

[Few of Freneau's earlier and _better_ poems were so popular as this of
"The Battle of Stonington," in its day. All Connecticut boys knew it by
heart, and it had an established place among the 'declamations' of
school exhibitions. Until within a few years it was to be found in the
assortment of every street vender of ballads and patriotic
poems,--sometimes in its original form, but more often, with
'emendations and corrections.' In the broad-side from which I first
learned it (bought at a stall in the neighborhood of Fulton market, some
thirty years ago,) for the twelfth and thirteenth verses was substituted
this:--

    "They bored the _Despatch_ through and through,
    And kill'd and wounded half her crew;
    'Till crippled, riddled, she withdrew,--
          And curs'd the boys of Stonington."]


CELEBRATIONS OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE ATTACK.

1815.

Thursday, Aug. 10th, the first anniversary of the battle, was observed
as a day of thanksgiving and prayer. The old flag was again hoisted on
the flag-staff at the battery: and a procession, formed at that place,
marched to the Congregational meeting-house, to listen to a discourse by
the pastor, Rev. Ira Hart. On its conclusion, the procession returned to
the battery, where the exercises of the day were closed by prayer. "On
Friday evening a grand anniversary ball was given; the assembly being
both numerous and brilliant."--_Conn. Gazette, Aug. 23d._

1818.

Celebration at the Borough, on Monday, Aug. 10th. "The company was very
numerous, and the business of the day went off with great eclat."--_Id.
Aug. 12th, 1818._

1824.

An Oration was delivered at the Congregational meeting-house, by Rev.
David Austin, "characteristic of his talents, patriotism, and
eloquence." The concourse of citizens from Stonington and the
neighboring towns was unusually large and respectable. An excellent
dinner was provided by Major Babcock, at the Borough Hotel, to which a
large number of citizens and invited guests did ample justice. The
following were among the volunteer toasts:

By Capt. Edmund Fanning. _The Grasshopper Fort_[B]--may it never be
forgotten by those whom it defended.

By Samuel Copp, Esq. _American Eighteen-pounders_--as handled in the
Grasshopper Fort.

By Gen. J. Isham. _August 10th, 1814_--May no vile calumniator hereafter
attempt to tarnish the hard earned fame of the heroes of that day.

By Gurdon Trumbull, Esq. _John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson_--Their
elevation to the first offices of our government, will demonstrate that
sovereignty is yet with the _people_, and guarantee the defence of our
national rights, whether assailed by the _pen_ or the _sword_.

By Dr. Swift. _Capt. Amos Palmer_--His memory; his energy and
perseverance.

By W. Storer Jun. _Gen. La Fayette_[C]--Whom God doth bless, we will
honor.

By Jesse Dean, esq. _Major Simeon Smith_--Who made cartridges of his
stockings, for our defence, on the day we celebrate.--_New London
Gazette, Aug. 18th._

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote B: "Alluding to a term used by the Rev. Orator of the day."]

[Footnote C: Gen. La Fayette's arrival at New York was daily expected.
He landed at Castle Garden, Aug. 16th.]


1826.

The installation of Benevolent Chapter of Royal Arch Masons took place
at Stonington, on the anniversary of the attack. The revenue cutters
Eagle, from New Haven, the Newport cutter, and the steamboat
Long-branch (Capt. Mather), from New London, brought numerous masonic
and other guests,--military companies,--and a band of music. A
procession of some three hundred brethren and companions was formed, by
order of Doct. Thomas Hubbard, M. E. G. H. P., under the direction of
Companions Gen. W. Williams, Samuel F. Denison, and others, as marshals.
The procession marched to the site of the battery, where a spacious tent
had been erected, with seats for 2500 persons,--and listened to a prayer
from the Gr. Chaplain, Rev. Seth B. Paddock, and an Oration by Asa
Child, Esq.; after which the new chapter was dedicated in ample form,
and the several officers duly installed. A grand dinner closed the
exercises of the day.--_N. L. Gazette, Aug. 16th._

1827.

A grand celebration, on the battle ground, where a large tent had been
erected. Among the guests were his Excellency Governor Tomlinson and his
staff. The procession formed early in the morning, and marched through
the principal streets, escorted by the Stonington artillery and Norwich
rifle companies, to the tent,--where an address was delivered by Gurdon
Trumbull, Esq.: after which, the procession re-formed, and proceeded to
the dinner table (spread in Mr. Faxon's rope walk, under the supervision
of Major Paul Babcock). Samuel F. Denison, Esq., presided at the table,
assisted by Major General Wm. Williams, George Hubbard and B. F.
Babcock, Esquires. A long account of the celebration, with the toasts
drank at the dinner, &c.--is given in the _New London Gazette_, of
August 15th.




NOTES.


NOTE 1, page 9.

Stonington Borough, incorporated by the Legislature [of Connecticut,] in
1801, is situated on a narrow point of land about half a mile in length,
at the eastern extremity of Long Island sound. On its eastern side lies
Paucatuck bay, and on its west the harbour, terminating in Lambert's
Cove. It has four [two] principal streets running north and south,
intersected at right angles by nine cross streets, and contains about
one hundred and twenty dwelling houses and stores. It has also two
houses for public worship, an academy, where the languages are taught,
and two common schools; two rope-walks, commodious wharves, and ware
houses for storage.... In the census of 1810, the _town_ contained 3043
inhabitants, and there are now [1819], 335 qualified electors.--_Pease &
Niles's Gazetteer of Connecticut._


NOTE 2, page 9.

Sir Thomas Masterman Hardy, Bart.--afterwards Vice-Admiral, and G. C.
B.,--was at this time not far from thirty-five years of age. He entered
the British navy, as a midshipman, at twelve; and was promoted to the
rank of commander in 1797, for distinguished gallantry in the capture of
a French brig, under the walls of Vera Cruz. He commanded the _Mutine_
brig, in the battle of the Nile,--became the favorite of Nelson, and was
appointed to the command of his flag-ship, serving with him,
successively, in the _Vanguard_, the _Namur_, the _St. George_, (at the
battle of Copenhagen), the _Iris_ and _Amphitrion_, and the _Victory_,
on board which Nelson conquered and fell at Trafalgar. Capt. Hardy was
created a baronet, in February, 1806; from which period, until 1824, he
was almost constantly on active duty in the West Indies and on American
stations. He was made a knight commander of the Bath, Jan. 1815, and
knight grand cross, in 1831. In October, 1827, he retired from the
service; was appointed a lord of the admiralty in 1830; and governor of
Greenwich Hospital, in 1834, retaining that office until his death,
Sept. 20th, 1839.--_Annual Register_, vol. LXXXI, p. 363. _Dispatches &
Letters of Nelson._

[Col. Green gave the _substance_ of this note, from memory. A correct
copy of it was published with the official account, in the _Gazette_ of
Sept. 7th. Commodore Hardy wrote from on board the _Pactolus_,--his own
ship, the _Ramilies_, then lying at anchor off the west end of Fisher's
Island.]


NOTE 3, page 10.

Capt. Amos Palmer, and Dr. Wm. Lord. The former was the senior warden of
the Borough, and chairman of the committee of citizens who had been
entrusted, some months previously, with the preparations for defence.
"He was distinguished for his integrity, his republican principles, and
his patriotism."--_Pease & Niles's Gazetteer, 1819._ Capt. Palmer's own
account of the attack (in a letter to the Secretary of War,) will be
found on pages 33-36. He died at Stonington, March 1, 1816, aet. 69.


NOTE 4, page 10.

Brigadier-General Thomas H. Cushing, who commanded at New London. After
the ratification of peace, in 1815, General Cushing received the
appointment of collector of the port of New London, and retained the
office till his death, Oct. 19th, 1822, aet. 67.--_Hist. of New London_,
p. 649.


NOTE 5, page 12.

An account of the "Bombardment of Stonington" [by the Rev. Frederick
Denison] printed in the _Mystic Pioneer_ of July 2d, 1859, contains many
interesting particulars, "gathered from the lips of prominent actors in
the battle." This account says, "The first men, so far as remembered,
that took stations in the battery, were four, William Lord, Asa Lee,
George Fellows, and Amos Denison. Just before six o'clock, six
volunteers from Mystic, Jeremiah Holmes, Jeremiah Haley, Ebenezer
Denison, Isaac Denison, and Nathaniel Clift, reached the place, on foot,
and ran immediately to help to operate the gun in the battery."...

... "The battery being small, but few men could work in it, and at this
time [later in the morning of the 10th,] it was operated, as nearly as
remembered, by Jeremiah Holmes, Simeon Haley, Jeremiah Haley, Isaac
Denison, Isaac Miner, George Fellows, and Asa Lee." This list is not
_complete_, but is doubtless correct so far as it relates to the
_Mystic_ volunteers.


NOTE 6, page 12.

The wound proved mortal. Mr. Denison died November 1st, 1814. He was the
fourth son of Isaac and Eunice [Williams] Denison, of Mystic, born Dec.
27th, 1795. On the morning of the attack, Frederick,--a youth not yet
nineteen years old,--hastened, on foot, to the Borough, to join the
little band of volunteers, with whom were already his two elder
brothers, Ebenezer and Isaac, and his brothers-in-law, Capt. Jer. Holmes
and Capt. Nath. Clift. He went immediately to the battery, where he
helped to work the guns, and during the heat of the action, when the
match-rope proved unserviceable, volunteered to go out to procure a new
supply. While on this dangerous errand, he was struck by a shot from the
brig, or, as other accounts say, by a fragment scaled from a rock by a
passing ball. The wound was not considered dangerous, and if surgical
aid could have been promptly obtained, Mr. Denison's life might have
been spared.

In May, 1856, the Legislature of Connecticut made an appropriation for
a suitable monument to his memory, which was erected in Elm Grove
Cemetery, at Mystic.--F. D. [_Rev. Fred. Denison_,] in _Mystic Pioneer_,
Aug. 27th, 1859.


NOTE 7, page 13.

"The colors on the flag staff were shot through nine times. A fence near
by was pierced by _sixty-three_ balls."--_Mystic Pioneer._ The flag has
been carefully preserved, and was in the keeping of Francis Amy,
Esq.,--orderly sergeant of Capt. Potter's Company, at the time of the
attack,--until his death in 1863. Its future preservation should be
insured by depositing it with the Connecticut History Society.


NOTE 8, page 13.

Jirah Isham, Esq., commanding the 3d Brigade of the State Militia,--in
the 3d Division, (William Williams, Esq., Major General.)


NOTE 9, page 15.

"On Sunday [Aug. 7] a flag came up [to New London] from the frigate
_Forth_, Com. Hotham. The object was to obtain permission for James
Stewart, Esq., formerly consul here, to take off his family. Mr. Stewart
was on board. General Cushing, we understand, replied that the request
would be forwarded to Washington."--_Conn. Gazette_, Aug. 10th.


NOTE 10, page 17.

Mr. Gurdon Trumbull was the bearer of this flag, and was accompanied by
Dr. Wm. Lord. The boat was rowed to the _Ramillies_ by Noyes Brown and
Jabez Holmes. Gen. Isham's explanation of the firing on Lieut. Claxton,
under a flag of truce, had not been received by Com. Hardy when the boat
with this letter from the civil authority came along side. The bearer
of the letter was met, at the head of the gang-ladder by a lieutenant,
and informed that the Commodore was much incensed at the insult offered
to the flag, and would not receive any communication from the shore
until it should be explained. Mr. Trumbull replied that he came as a
messenger from the _civil_ and not the _military_ authorities, and was
not instructed to offer any explanation: but, as an eye-witness of the
transaction, he would state the circumstances, as they occurred. The
lieutenant reported these to the Commodore, and returned with a message
that the latter was "perfectly satisfied;" that the defenders of the
place were fully authorized to prevent the nearer approach of the
flag-boat; and that his officer [Lieut. Claxton] was in the wrong. Mr.
Trumbull was then conducted to the cabin, where he found the Commodore,
in consultation with all the other commanders of the squadron, and
delivered the letter from the Borough authorities.


NOTE 11, page 18.

This is not exactly correct. He said nothing of Mrs. Stewart; but, after
reading the letter, remarked, "I learn from this, Sir, that I am under
the necessity of resuming hostilities,--which I shall do, at one
o'clock."


NOTE 12, page 18.

Lieut. John Lathrop, of the Norwich Artillery or "Matross Company"
(Capt. Charles Thomas). It will be seen, by the narrative of the
magistrates, that Lieut. Lathrop was anticipated in the execution of
this service, by a party of volunteers.


NOTE 13, page 19.

Lieut. Samuel L. Hough, of Canterbury, Lieutenant of the L. Infantry
Company (Capt. James Aspinwall), detached from the 21st regiment of
militia,--in the service of the U. States. Lieut. Hough's wound was not
serious. He is still living (June, 1864),--and in receipt of a pension
from the U. States.


NOTE 14, page 24.

This account was written by Alex. G. Smith, Esq.


NOTE 15, page 26.

Col. Wm. Randall, of Stonington, commanding the 30th Regiment of State
Militia.


NOTE 16, page 31.

Too much praise can hardly be awarded to the volunteer firemen, who,
during the whole of the engagement, continued to patrol the streets,
watching the fall of every rocket and shell, and extinguishing fires as
soon as lighted. Two of this band may be named without injustice to
others, as having rendered efficient and constant service,--Capt.
CHARLES H. SMITH and FRANCIS AMY, Esq., both serjeants in Capt. Potter's
company. Capt. THOMAS SWAN was not less active or persevering. He
remained in the Borough, (except for an hour's visit to his family,
placed in safety at a farm house, a mile distant,) from the beginning of
the attack till the departure of the ships; serving, as necessity
required, with the volunteer firemen, and with the guard stationed on
the east side of the Point to prevent a landing of the enemy from their
boats.


NOTE 17, page 32.

See Capt. Palmer's letter to the Secretary of War, next following.


NOTE 18, page 36.

The anchor left by the _Dispatch_ brig, at Stonington, when she 'cut and
run,' has been got up and brought to New London. It weighs upwards of 20
_cwt._--_Niles's Weekly Register, Sept. 10, 1814._

"Mr. Chalmers, late master of the _Terror_, bomb-vessel, employed in the
attack on Stonington, has been captured in a British barge and sent to
Providence. He says 170 bombs were discharged from that ship in the
attack on Stonington, which were found to weigh 80 lb. each; the charge
of powder for the mortar was 9 lbs.; adding to this the wadding, that
vessel must have disgorged eight tons weight."--_Ibid._

       *     *     *     *     *

"The following appears in a New York paper, in the shape of an
advertisement:

_English Manufacture, and Memento of the "Magnanimity" of Commodore
Hardy._

Just received, and offered for sale, about

THREE TONS OF ROUND SHOT,

consisting of 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, and 32 lbs., very handsome, being a
_small_ proportion of those which were fired from his Britannic
Majesty's ships, on the unoffending inhabitants of Stonington, in the
recent _brilliant_ attack on that place.

LIKEWISE, a few _Carcasses_, in good order, weighing about 200 lbs.
each.

        Apply to                      S. TRUMBULL, 41 _Peck-slip_.

N. B. The purchaser of the above can be supplied with about _two tons
more_, if required.

New York, November 19th, [1814.]"
                              _Niles's Weekly Register, Dec. 3d, 1815._

       *     *     *     *     *

INDUSTRY.--Many of our readers will recollect the anecdote of the
thrifty American who asked Commodore _Hardy_, when he would attack
_Stonington_ again? so that he might have his cart ready to carry off
the shot; and also the accounts we have had of the mighty mass of metal
collected there and sold at New York, &c. It seems, however, that the
_iron mine_ is not yet exhausted, for certain persons with a diving
machine have raised no less than 11,209 lbs. of shot, which was thrown
overboard from the _Pactolus_, when she was in such a hurry to get away
from the two guns of Stonington! They have also picked up a quantity of
copper.--Niles's _Weekly Register, June 3, 1815._


NOTE 19, page 38.

Capt. Coote, of H. B. M. brig _Borer_, landed two hundred men at
Pettipaug, (Saybrook,) in barges and launches, on the 8th of April,
1814, and destroyed upwards of twenty sail of vessels, without meeting
any opposition (until after they had re-embarked,) and without the loss
of a man.--_Conn. Gazette, April 13, 1814._




LETTERS OF COMMODORE HARDY.


Since the foregoing pages were printed, my friend Professor D. C.
Gilman, has brought to my notice the original letters of Commodore
Hardy, to the inhabitants of Stonington and to General Isham, which are
now in the Library of Yale College. The first (of August 9th) was copied
with sufficient accuracy in the account published by the magistrates,
warden and burgesses (page 25), I reprint it here, but with a facsimile
of the signature.


                                     _His Britannic Majesty's Ship_,
                                    PACTOLUS, _9th August, 1814.
                                        1/2 past 5 o'clock, P. M._

Not wishing to destroy the unoffending Inhabitants residing in the Town
of Stonington, one hour is granted them from the receipt of this to
remove out of the town.

[Illustration: (Hardy Signature)]

_To the Inhabitants of the Town of Stonington._


The second, is in reply to the letter from the magistrates which was
sent on board the _Ramillies_, by Col. Isaac Williams and Dr. William
Lord, on Wednesday, the 10th. As "official etiquette" did net permit
Col. Green to obtain "an exact copy," he could only print its substance
"as far as memory served" (see page 14). The magistrates allude to it,
in their published account (p. 30), as "the singular communication
received from Commodore Hardy, which preceded the fire on Thursday." It
is evident that the British commander was strangely in error as to the
assurances and engagements which he professed to have received, or that
the gentlemen entrusted with the delivery of the letter from the
magistrates must, in their conference with the Commodore, have exceeded
their instructions.


                                         _Ramillies, off Stonington,
                                                   10th August, 1814._
GENTN

I have received your letter and representation of the State of your
Town, and as you have declared that Torpedoes, never have been harbored
by the Inhabitants or ever will be, as far as lies in their power to
prevent--and as you have engaged that Mrs. Stewart the wife of the
British vice consul late resident at New London, with her family, shall
be permitted to embark on board this Ship to-morrow morning, I am
induced to wave the attempt of the total destruction of your Town, which
I feel confident can be effected by the Squadron under my Orders.

I am
    Gentn
        Your most obedient servant,
          T. M. HARDY, Captain.

_To Doctor_ LAW [_Lord_] _and Colonel_ Williams,
_Stonington_.


In reprinting the response of the civil authorities of Stonington, to
the foregoing letter, on page 17, _ante_, an error in the date should
have been corrected. It was written and despatched on the _eleventh_ of
August.

The following note acknowledges the explanation sent by General Isham,
of the circumstances under which a flag of truce from the _Ramillies_,
was fired upon by a sentinel at the Battery, on the morning of the 11th
(see pages 16, 17, and note 10).


                                       _Ramillies, off Stonington_,
                                           _11th August, 1814._

Sir,

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, apologizing
for the Flag of Truce I sent on shore this morning, having been fired
at; and I beg to assure you that under the Circumstances you have
stated, the apology is perfectly satisfactory.

    I have the honor to be, Sir,
        Your most obedient
            humble Servant,
              T. M. HARDY, Captain.

_To Brigadier_ ISHAM--_Commanding at Stonington_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Defence of Stonington
(Connecticut) Against a British Squadron, August 9th to 12th, 1814, by J. Hammond Trumbull

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEFENCE OF STONINGTON ***

***** This file should be named 26946.txt or 26946.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/9/4/26946/

Produced by Jane Hyland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
