The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898
       Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the
       islands and their peoples, their history and records of
       the catholic missions, as related in contemporaneous books
       and manuscripts, showing the political, economic, commercial
       and religious conditions of those islands from their
       earliest relations with European nations to the close of
       the nineteenth century, Volume XXVI, 1636

Author: Various

Editor: Emma Helen Blair

Release Date: November 2, 2008 [EBook #27127]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, 1493-1898 ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/










                   The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898

   Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the islands and
   their peoples, their history and records of the catholic missions,
    as related in contemporaneous books and manuscripts, showing the
   political, economic, commercial and religious conditions of those
   islands from their earliest relations with European nations to the
                    close of the nineteenth century,

                           Volume XXVI, 1636



 Edited and annotated by Emma Helen Blair and James Alexander Robertson
  with historical introduction and additional notes by Edward Gaylord
                                Bourne.





CONTENTS OF VOLUME XXVI


    Preface   9
    Documents of 1636

        The nuns of St. Clare at Manila. Miguel Perez, O.S.F., and
        others; Manila, 1635-36   19
        Relation of 1635-36. [Unsigned; Manila?]; June   31
        Letters to Felipe IV. Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera; Manila,
        June 30   60
        Letter to Father Felipe de Cardenas. Cristobal de Lara, S.J.;
        Manila, July 3   265
        Letter to Felipe IV. Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, Cavite,
        July 11   269
        Hospitals and hospital contributions. Sebastian Hurtado de
        Corcuera, and others; Manila, July-August   291

    Bibliographical Data   315





ILLUSTRATIONS


    View of city of Manila; photographic facsimile of engraving in
    Valentyn's _Oud en Nieuw Oost Indien_ (Dordrecht and Amsterdam,
    1724), i, p. 154; from copy in library of Wisconsin State
    Historical Society   33
    View of Malacca; photographic facsimile of engraving in _Recueil
    des voiages ... de la Compagnie des Indes orientales_ (Amsterdam,
    1725); from copy in library of Wisconsin State Historical
    Society   45
    Map of Molucca Islands; photographic facsimile of map in Bellin's
    _Petit atlas maritime_ (Paris, 1764), iii, no. 68; from copy in
    library of Wisconsin State Historical Society   229
    View of the city of Macao; photographic facsimile of engraving in
    _Recueil des voiages Comp. Indes Orient. Pais-Bas_ (Amsterdam,
    1725), v, facing p. 208; from copy in the library of Wisconsin
    State Historical Society 275







PREFACE


The scope of the present volume is confined to the year 1636, but
enough of interest occurs within that time--thanks to the overflowing
energy of the new governor, Corcuera, who promptly reorganizes all
departments of the government; his controversies with the archbishop
and the friars; and the difficulties and dissensions which affect
the orders themselves. The greater part of this volume is occupied
by Corcuera's report for the first year of his governorship.

The nuns of St. Clare ask (probably in 1635) for certain favors from
the royal treasury; and their agent avails himself of this opportunity
to ask favors for his own order, the Franciscan Recollects. The nuns
themselves write to the king (June 30, 1636), through their abbess,
Ana de Christo, informing him of their progress and growth in the
Philippines, and other matters. They have founded a convent of
their order at Macao; and have built a house at Manila for their
residence. They complain that Governor Corcuera has driven the
Franciscans from the administration of the royal hospital, and coerced
the archbishop--the story of whose ill-treatment by the governor
they briefly repeat, asking the king to grant the prelate redress
therefor. They also ask that their confessor may have a cell at the
hospital, which is near them; and complain that their convent is
much injured by the walls and buildings that are being erected about
it--some of these arbitrarily ordered by the governor, who ignores
the needs and comfort of the nuns. They close with another appeal
for royal aid to finish the building of their convent, and thanks
for the king's effort to secure the canonization of their foundress.

A relation for the year 1635-36 describes the arrival at Manila
of Governor Corcuera, and narrates his controversies with the
archbishop. The account is more detailed and circumstantial than that
of Diaz (given in Vol. XXV); and the two constitute an interesting
chapter, not only of ecclesiastical history but of human nature. The
friars finally send secret envoys to the king, to inform him of
their troubles. News comes from Japon of renewed persecutions of
Christians there, and of the apostasy of the Jesuit provincial for
that kingdom--who has even, it is said, married a heathen woman. At
the end of this document is added a copy of a pasquinade which appeared
at that time in Manila, lampooning the governor and his adherents.

A group of letters from Corcuera (June 30, 1636) constitute his first
annual report to the home government.

Ecclesiastical affairs engross a large part of this document, as would
be expected from the recent occurrence of Corcuera's controversy
with the archbishop. The governor's account of this affair will be
found especially interesting when compared with those presented, in
Vol. XXV, from Jesuit and Recollect sources. We have given more space
to this episode than usual--partly because this contention between the
civil and ecclesiastical authorities is, although but one of many, a
typical and important one; and partly because it affords a favorable
opportunity to view such an episode from the different standpoints
of that time in Manila--a necessary mental process for obtaining
a correct knowledge, not only of this affair, but of all others in
which the like elements of human nature are concerned. The resemblance
of Corcuera's account to that by "a citizen of Manila" is more than
casual, and incidentally throws considerable light on the situation
(as well as on social conditions in Manila). It contains attested
copies of the various documents connected with the controversy.

Another section is devoted to an account of the governor's
difficulties with the religious orders in "subduing the religious to
the understanding that your Majesty alone is their natural seignior;
and the seignior of the said islands." He claims that the Dominicans
are most active of the orders in opposing the government, while
certain proceedings of the Franciscans have scandalized the Spanish
colony. The Augustinians are in need of reform, as their proceedings
are unscrupulous and selfish, and they are trying to usurp the royal
authority among the Indians. Corcuera advises that a coadjutor be
appointed for the aged archbishop Guerrero, and that hereafter no
more friars be made bishops in the islands. The orders have brought
over more religious than the government had allowed them, to which
the governor objects; he also recommends that those who do come
should be procured from Mexico, to save unnecessary expense in their
transportation, and that seculars be preferred to friars. Moreover,
this will provide occupation for the theological students in the
Mexican colleges, who now are set aside, in ecclesiastical appointments
there, for the friars. The governor appeals to the king for support
in his contest with the friars. In another letter, he recounts the
annoyances which he has experienced with the Dominicans, and asks
for the king's orders therein. Still another is devoted to the recent
difficulties in the Franciscan order, wherein the Observantines have
been trying to oust the discalced friars; Corcuera asks the king
to interpose his influence with the heads of the order in Spain to
check these schemes, and to restrain the arrogance of these friars
in the islands. In a brief letter regarding the Mexican trade of the
islands, the governor urges that the government double the amount
of this trade allowed to the islands. Considerable attention is
given to the Chinese who come to the islands; Corcuera describes
their present location and status, and proposes further imposts on
them in order to replenish the Philippine treasury. He relates the
controversy between the Dominicans and Jesuits over the salary paid to
the Santa Cruz cura from the Parian fund, and his settlement of the
case. Corcuera also proposes the names of several persons from whom
may be chosen a protector for the Chinese residents, and announces
that he has made a temporary appointment for this office. He states
the action that he has taken in regard to certain vacant encomiendas;
and asks that these rewards be more strictly assigned, and that the
large encomiendas be divided into smaller ones.

Another part of this first report of Corcuera concerns administrative
and financial matters. He complains that the royal treasury has been
recruited, and afterward depleted, by illegal and unjust means;
and that its poor creditors have been shamefully treated by royal
officials. He urges that vacancies in the post of governor be filled
by persons appointed and sent to the islands before such emergency
arises; and that these be sent from Europe, and not from Nueva
Espana. To this is appended a full and itemized account of pay-warrants
which have been drawn from the royal treasury during the past year,
but were commuted to one-third of their face value, as a "voluntary
contribution" to his Majesty's impoverished treasury. This is followed
by another list, showing what sums were paid out of the treasury
during 1632-35. Much light is thus thrown on the peculiar financial
methods of the royal officials, and the general administration of
the colony's affairs. Corcuera relates the manner in which he has
reorganized the military forces of the colony--doing all in his power
to save expenses and to supply deficiencies. He has enrolled several
companies of Pampango Indians, who will make good soldiers, and cost
much less than do the Spaniards. Soon after his arrival, he revises
both the civil and military pay-rolls and other costs of government,
making all changes that he considers necessary for greater economy
and efficiency. He sends the king a copy of the new regulations thus
made, with a statement of all salaried offices and paid employments,
and the amounts paid in each formerly and now. From these data is
deduced the statement that the amount saved to his Majesty's estate
is nearly forty-two thousand pesos a year.

Cristobal de Lara, a Jesuit, writes (July 3) to a friend in Europe;
he describes the hardships and perils of missionary life in the
islands, and mentions various friends. A week later, Corcuera, having
received various royal decrees, sends to the king a statement of what
he has done or intends to do in regard to the matters mentioned in
the decrees. In several of these, he takes pains to mention that
he had done what was required, even before receiving the royal
command. Corcuera personally attends to the lading of the Acapulco
galleons; he remonstrates against the order that they shall sail
by June 1 of each year, explaining that the middle of July is the
proper time; and asks that the commanders of the galleons be given
disciplinary authority over their men while in the port of Acapulco. He
has forbidden the Portuguese of Macao to trade with the Philippines;
and advises that the occupation of Formosa be abandoned. Corcuera
has formed and armed companies of natives to resist the Moro pirates,
and has done much to improve the efficiency of both his military and
naval forces. He complains that the friars are disobedient and unruly,
but commends the obedience and good-will of the secular clergy. The
natives of the islands cannot endure the burdens imposed upon them
by the construction of ships; and the governor asks that vessels may
be sent thither from Peru, to meet this difficulty.

A group of papers regarding the hospitals of Manila is dated
July-August, 1636. Governor Corcuera writes to the king regarding the
conduct of these institutions. The expenses therein are too great;
and Corcuera has levied an assessment on the pay of the officers
and soldiers, to aid the hospital fund. He finds mismanagement in
the royal hospitals, and dismisses from their charge the Franciscan
brothers who have administered their affairs. He recommends that
they be placed in the care of the hospital order of St. John of God,
and of secular officials. He has established a hospital at Cavite,
supported mainly by assessments on the sailors and workmen there;
and a convalescent ward in the hospital for Spaniards at Manila. Then
follow the comments on Corcuera's suggestions, made by the royal
Council, approving some, and criticising others; the act issued by
the governor for the establishment of the aforesaid convalescent ward,
to which he assigns an encomienda of Indians; and a statement of the
amounts contributed for the hospital fund by each of the companies
and garrisons in the islands, with official attestations, etc.

The Editors

May, 1905.







DOCUMENTS OF 1636


    The nuns of St. Clare at Manila. Miguel Perez, O.S.F., and others;
    1635-36.
    Relation of 1635-36. [Unsigned; Manila?]; June.
    Letters to Felipe IV. Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera; June 30.
    Letter to Father Felipe de Cardenas. Cristobal de Lara, S.J.;
    July 3.
    Letter to Felipe IV. Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera; July 11.
    Hospitals and hospital contributions. Sebastian Hurtado de
    Corcuera, and others; July-August.



Sources: All but two of these documents are obtained from MSS. in
the Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla. The second and fourth are
from MSS. in the Academia Real de la Historia, Madrid.

Translations: The first, third, and sixth are translated by James
A. Robertson; the second and fourth, by Robert W. Haight; the fifth,
by Emma Helen Blair.






THE NUNS OF ST. CLARE AT MANILA


_Petition of their procurator_


Sire:


Fray Miguel Perez, discalced Recollect of the Order of St. Francis,
procurator and vicar for the nuns of the convent of St. Clare of
the city of Manila, in virtue of the authority which he holds from
the said convent (which he presents) says that, as is apparent from
the said authority, Captain Gaspar Mendez and other devout persons,
who have served and serve your Majesty in military affairs in the
Philipinas Islands, have done the same to the said convent for the
building of it and of the church, by giving them seven thousand ducados
in warrants for what your Majesty owes them from their pay. That has
served as an aid in their building. Having petitioned your Majesty to
grant favor to the said convent by ordering the royal officials to
pay the said warrants, by a decree of the Council of April sixteen
(which he presents), it was decreed that he should present the
warrants and declare whence they proceeded. As he has declared in
the same memorial that they proceed from the pay of soldiers, those
warrants, as they are unnecessary here, have not been brought. Hence,
since that money is to be used for a work so holy, he is confident
that your Majesty will grant them the favor whom they entreat, and
which they will receive as a special kindness from your Majesty.

Further, he says that your Majesty has ordered the viceroy of Nueva
Spana and the royal officials there that, in consideration of the
poverty which the discalced Recollect fathers in Philipinas profess
in accordance with their rule (as they cannot possess incomes), there
be given to them annually from the royal treasury what is necessary
for their sackcloth, medicines, breviaries, missals, and other things,
as is now given to them every year. The said order has a procurator in
Mexico who is urging that those articles be sent every year. Inasmuch
as the nuns of the said convent of St. Clare have no income, because
they profess the first rule of St. Clare, and in their case is found
the same cause and reason [for the royal bounty] as in the discalced
fathers, and some others, they petition your Majesty to have the
royal officials of Mexico give them annually what is necessary for
sackcloth, breviaries, missals, wine, and oil; and that also the
governor of Philipinas be ordered to give to the said convents the
medicines that may be needed, from the royal hospital which your
Majesty has in the city of Manila. Thereby will they receive a very
generous alms, and your Majesty, as patron (as is the case) of that
convent, ought to concede them that favor, since they are so poor.

[_Endorsed:_ "June 13, 636. Have the warrants here mentioned paid
in the subsidy allotted to those sisters, and let it be paid in
their sacristy and place. In regard to the alms that they request,
have the governor notified to aid those nuns with all manner of care
and attention; and, as they are so needy, to aid them with goods and
spare articles that shall not be taken from his Majesty's treasury." "I
received the authorization.


Fray Miguel Peres Corvera"]



_Petition of the abbess_

Sire:

The abbess and nuns of the convent of St. Clare of the city of Manila
declare that his Majesty, King Don Phelipe Second, ordered that
convent to be founded, and your Majesty is patron of it. That convent,
following the rule of the glorious St. Francis, has no income, but is
sustained by the alms given to it by devout persons. Benefactors of
the said convent--among them Captain Gaspar Mendes, treasurer of the
said convent--have given certain pay-warrants which amount to about
six or seven thousand pesos, in order that with it the said nuns may
attend to some necessary works in the said house (and especially in the
church), of which they are greatly in need. In consideration of that,
the said abbess petitions and beseeches your Majesty, since this is so
proper a work, to order the governor and royal officials to pay the
said warrants above mentioned, for the said purpose; and those nuns
will receive that as a special alms from your Majesty's royal hand.

[_Endorsed:_ "April 16, 636. Let her present the warrants of which
she speaks, and let her declare whence they proceed."]



Don Juan Grau, who is the person who is attending to this matter,
declares that, according to the knowledge of it which he possesses,
these warrants have not been sent to him; and that those which are
cited in the memorial were given by soldiers from their pay, and by
other persons which proceed from the same source. They have done it in
their zeal to see so holy a work progress, as the need of those nuns
is so great, and their institute so poor, since they cannot possess
incomes. Consequently, they live solely on the alms given to them by
devout persons.


Don Juan Grau y Monfalcon



_Letter from the nuns_

Sire:

His Catholic Majesty the king our sovereign, your Majesty's father
(who is in the enjoyment of Paradise), gave us permission to come here
to found a convent of the first rule of our mother St. Clare in these
islands. Upon our arrival at this city we founded a convent, and have
continued to receive in it the daughters of citizens, conquistadors,
and old settlers, many of them very poor. By that method, God our Lord
has aided them with so perfect an estate as is that of the religious
life. We, as founders, rear these girls and teach them to observe
and follow our rule, so that, if we nuns who come from Espana pass
away, they may teach the same to, and cause it to be observed by,
those who shall take the habit hereafter. God has been pleased to
cause all those who have taken the habit to flourish in virtue--so
greatly that they furnish an example to the old nuns--who are now
all daughters of our mother St. Geronima, whom they follow closely,
imitating her in devotion and penances. We inform your Majesty of this,
as we have heard that you will rejoice greatly, as one who knows and
has information of the great results that God has obtained from our
coming, and which He is continuing to obtain through the new foundation
[we refer to those of our number] who went to train nuns, who left this
convent for that purpose to go to the city of Macan--which belongs to
the crown of Portugal, at the entrance and mainland of China--where
there are at present many nuns of especial devotion who have taken
our habit, which had had no convent there any more than at this place.

As soon as we arrived, our holy mother undertook the building of a
convent, where we might live with modesty and humility, and with the
aid of alms which were given to us by some citizens; and orphan nuns
sent what they possessed. We have been building a house and church
near the wall which overlooks the river of this city--in the part
that appeared the most remote from trade and very secluded, and with
no other view than that of the heavens. In front of it is the street
in the middle of which is the royal hospital of the Spaniards, which
has been administered since its foundation by the religious of our
seraphic father St. Francis. There the religious who is vicar of this
convent, who administers to us the holy sacraments, had a cell. From
the alms given us we provide for his support. Lately, Governor Don
Sevastian Hurtado de Corcuera, without cause or reason for it, drove
the religious from the said hospital by force and violence and the
arms of soldiers, to the contempt of our sacred order, saying that he
prefers to have it administered by a secular priest, whom he brought
with him as his chaplain. This prohibition, as it is not befitting
the service of God and your Majesty, has cost great suffering to the
archbishop of these islands, grief to all this Christian community, and
wonder to the heathen Chinese--who even among themselves respect those
whom they call "bonzes," who are the same as archbishops among us.

The governor, joining to the matter of the hospital other
reasons--unworthy that he should assign them because he did not act
upon them--had enough power, with only one auditor who is in this
royal Audiencia, to take away from the archbishop his temporalities,
banish him from the kingdoms, and condemn him to a fine of two
thousand ducados. The governor took charge of the execution of the
banishment, one night, with a large body of infantry with matches
lighted. The orders and their superiors came out to attend their
prelate, who was clad in his pontifical robes. While he had the most
holy sacrament in his hands, it happened that the chief constable of
the court, one Bartolome Thenorio, tried to take it away from him,
and used so much force that he wounded the finger of a discalced
religious of St. Augustine (who was aiding the archbishop to hold the
monstrance) against the foot of the monstrance, drawing blood from his
hand. The archbishop fell to the ground, as did the lunette of the
monstrance. When the governor (who was in the street in disguise)
learned of it, he sent infantry to drive out forcibly all the
religious, with orders to leave the archbishop all alone. They were
not to allow him to take food or drink. Thus did they, dragging away
the religious, upon whom the vilest men in the world laid hands, since
now they could. Finally the archbishop, having been arrested, sent
the most holy sacrament to the church next day; and, having decreed
a suspension of religious functions, allowed himself to embark and
was taken by twenty-five soldiers and an adjutant to an island called
Mariveles, seven leguas from the city. The soldiers were ordered not
to allow him to place on the vessel either bed, food, or drink. No
one was to talk to him there, or give him anything to eat. This
was moderated afterward. He was detained there twenty-seven days,
and he returned after that with a party of soldiers who asked for
him--as your Majesty will learn more minutely from the relations that
will be sent of everything, and from that one which the governor will
send. According to what we believe, his relation will not be the most
authentic, but that which, he thinks, can accomplish for him most,
for the discharge of so heavy a responsibility as God will have
placed upon him, for the time when he shall go to give account to
Him. Will your Majesty look carefully into this cause, as a father,
patron, and defender of the Church, so that in the future others may
not take this as a precedent, and a greater evil befall us--if it be
that an evil greater than this has [ever] occurred. It may [again]
occur, under the sole pretext that it is service to your Majesty, and
that alone must be accomplished--which is the governor's sole excuse,
and the pretext that they give for the evil deed. The Church remains
very much dejected, the orders and inhabitants very disconsolate,
and the Indians wretched; and every estate of the people of these
islands is afflicted over the new administration of the governor--all
through anxiety of acquiring for your Majesty; so that in a short
time it will all be drained, and there will be no more to drain,
and this Christian Church will be ruined. The governor seems to be
striving for its ruin rather than its advancement. It is a matter
that demands a speedy remedy, as your Majesty will learn by letters
and relations from well-intentioned persons, which will be sent
secretly. For neither the Audiencia, nor the city, nor anyone else
dare send openly, because of their fear of the governor's harshness;
and, from the Council, certain agents usually send the governors
the original letters written from this place, in which account of
government matters is given. Of this we inform your Majesty, although
in brief and succinctly, because of our desire that God may send us
protection and consolation through the wise decisions of your Majesty.

Because of the governor having removed the religious from the hospital,
it became necessary for our vicar to retire to the convent of our
father [St. Francis]; which is quite distant from here. On account
of the difficulties caused by the excessive heat, and the severity
of the rains during the rainy season, he cannot come at all hours
to confess us and to administer the holy sacraments as we need,
especially at night. What is worse is, that the governor is building
a ward at the hospital, on the side that faces our convent--which
he says is for convalescents. It is so high that because of its so
close proximity to the convent, we think that one will be able to
see the beds of the nuns in our infirmary and dormitory. That is a
thing that ought to be carefully considered. But the governor has only
thought about proceeding with his own purpose, leaving us surrounded
on streets without any exits; for one that was near the wall--by which
the parents and relatives of the nuns came, and which served for the
use of the convent--has been taken by the governor for the building,
thereby doing us much damage. For many structures are now being built
about us, and that by the most prominent people in the city.

In another part, the passage-way inside the wall--which was a street
for passengers, and of service to the convent--has been closed by
the governor by placing against it, and across our very threshold,
another building, which he is having erected as lodgings for the
cavalry and as stables, so that the company that he has organized
may keep their horses.

Accordingly, we humbly beseech your Majesty to be pleased to have the
hospital returned to the religious of our order, as it has always been
[in their charge], and that a cell be given therein to our vicar. By
so doing, God our Lord will be greatly served, and the poor aided
spiritually and corporally. After those religious left, the nuns
were very disconsolate for lack of ministers to attend to them. The
secular priest appointed for them thinks that he has fulfilled his duty
by saying mass. We trust that your Majesty, through your Christian
zeal, will furnish relief to so pious causes as these we mention,
at the first opportunity. Will your Majesty order that the street be
left free, from the place where we have our porter's lodge to the
wall--without [permitting] any hospital building or windows--as an
enclosure for the convent and for its guard; so that if there should
be no place for the father-vicar to live, a low dwelling may be made
for him, and for the men who serve in the convent--making a gate at
the wall for [receiving] the food for the convent.

The poverty of our order and rule is well known to your Majesty. The
lack of comfort in which we live is very great, as we are without
sufficient funds to finish the house and church, and the citizens
are so needy that they cannot help us with the alms that we
need--[although] they do not a little in aiding us with what is
necessary for our ordinary support. Some devout people have given us
as alms some pay warrants and other debts owed to them by the royal
treasury. These amount to about twelve thousand pesos, and we could
finish the work with that sum. We entreat your Majesty to be pleased
to have your royal decree promulgated, ordering the governor to pay us
up to the said sum of twelve thousand pesos in the certified warrants
which we have. That will constitute a very great blessing and be an
alms which your Majesty will bestow upon this convent.

We also petition your Majesty to be pleased to show us favor by
having us given alms of sackcloth, oil, an apothecary-shop in the
royal hospital, wine for the masses, and wheat or flour for bread for
the support of the nuns--as is done with the orders of the discalced
religious; for we have no other protection or security besides that
of your Majesty, which is everlasting. [_In the margin_: "Observe
this matter, and give a copy of this section to Licentiate Leon, so
that he may make a report of it, when the matter is considered." "It
was given."]

We thank your Majesty for the favors that you have shown this convent
and the nuns in it, in having so thoroughly taken in your charge
the beatification and canonization of our holy mother Geronima
de la Assumpcion, whereby we, her daughters, hope to behold such
a day as that of her canonization. We keep her body, with all the
veneration and line of succession that is possible to us; and every
day God works new miracles by her. The nuns, in and out of the choir,
in all their prayers, discipline, and fasting, make special mention
of your Majesty, and of the queen our mistress. We beseech God our
Lord to preserve your Majesty in health, peace, and quiet, with your
kingdoms, for the protection of Christendom and of the Church, and for
happy victories against the heretics and enemies of the Church. This
convent will supplicate this from God constantly, as it has ever done,
according to our obligation.

May God preserve the Catholic person of your Majesty, as we, these
humble nuns, desire, with increase of greater kingdoms. May He
prosper the succession to them, so that, by means of it, all heathen
kingdoms may come to the true knowledge of the holy faith. Manila,
June 30, 1636.


Ana de Christo, abbess.
Sister Magdalena de Christo, vicar.
Sister Maria de los Angeles


[_In the margin_: "Have the governor notified concerning the complaint
of these nuns, and the injury that they say has been done them in his
having shut their street; and in the view that their apartments have
which opens toward the cells, stables, and lodgings, which are near
their house; and of the other things that they mention--so that no
injury or discomfort may be caused to them in any manner. Also say
that, if the warrants which they say that they possess are certified
they shall be paid in the value that shall belong to them and at the
proper time. And since it is the usage to write to this convent,
let it be done, advising them of what is ordered, and saying that
care will always be taken of everything that pertains to them; and
that we esteem their commendation of their Majesties to God, which
they shall continue."]

[_Endorsed_: "Seen, and decreed within. June 16, 638."]






RELATION OF 1635-36

_Relation of events in the city of Manila from the year 1635 until
the month of June, 1636_


On the twenty-third of June, 1635, the ships from Castilla arrived at
the port of Capite, in which came Don Sevastian Hurtado de [C]orquera,
knight of the Habit of Alcantara, as governor and captain-general
for his Majesty. On the twenty-fourth of the said month and year, on
St. John's day, about four o'clock in the afternoon, he entered Manila
to take possession of the government--first taking the customary oath,
on entering through the gate of the Bagungaiabar, [1] which is one
of the chief gates of this city, accompanied by the city government
and the cabildo, with the rest of the citizens who escorted him,
until he reached the buildings of the palace, where he was received
with much pomp, as arranged by the regimiento of this city. A few days
after his arrival he reviewed all of the Spanish infantry in the camp
(together with the rest that he brought in his company), where he made
sweeping changes, leaving the four captains in the camp. He named as
sargento-mayor of the regiment Don Pedro de Corquera, his nephew; and
to the man who had held that office he gave the governorship of Ermosa
Island. He likewise appointed, as captain and governor of his company,
Alferez Don Juan Francisco de Corquera, his nephew. He immediately
decided that the ships (which were ready to make the voyage) should
not go to Castilla, saying that it was not expedient for them to go;
and thus it came about, for no one dared to oppose him.

At this time occurred an event which, as it was the beginning of
everything which has taken place, must be remembered. An artilleryman
had a slave girl whom he had brought from Yndia, saying that he was
going to marry her, as he had taken her while she was a maiden. But
she became angry and left the house, going to that of Juan de Aller,
a kinsman of Dona Maria de Franzia, wife of Don Pedro de Corquera, whom
she asked to buy her. The sargento-mayor besought the captain-general
to negotiate with the said artilleryman. He had the latter called,
and asked him whether he wished to sell her. He answered that he
did not keep her for sale, and the matter was left thus for several
days. Then he was again asked to sell her, and answered resolutely
that he did not wish to sell her, as he was keeping her in order to
marry her. Thereupon it was ordered that he be placed in the stocks,
and he was ill-treated. The man cried out that they were unjustly
trying to take his slave from him; and order was given that he be
taken into the house of Pedro Guerrero, and there punished as if he
were mad. There he was so ill-treated that they would have driven him
mad if he was not, until he saw fit to cease his obstinacy in regard
to the slave woman--although he refused to receive the money which he
was ordered to take from the said house, and immediately determined
on a rash plan. On the eighth of August, which was Sunday, at three
o'clock in the afternoon, the governor was going to the residence
of the Society, to see the comedy which the fathers there were
presenting; and with him was riding Dona Maria de Franzia, the wife
of his nephew the sargento-mayor, in a coach, having the slave woman
behind. When they arrived at the corner of the Augustinian church,
the artilleryman came out to meet them; and, seizing the slave woman
by the arm, struck her with a dagger so that she died straightway,
and he retired again into the said convent of St. Augustine. The
news was conveyed to the governor, who had already gone into the
Society's house; and he sent an adjutant and a captain of his guard,
together with the sargento-mayor, and some soldiers, with an order
to surround the church and bring out the guilty man, and take him to
the headquarters of the guard. This was done accordingly; but, as the
religious had hidden him, the soldiers were unable to find him. The
convent was left surrounded with soldiers, who remained there two
days, so that if the artilleryman came out they could get him and
bring him back; and likewise the soldiers were ordered not to allow
any religious to enter or leave, or any food to be brought in to them,
under penalty of death--on which account the religious found themselves
in very hard straits. On the third day the guard was withdrawn, and
on the fourteenth of the said month a decree was published promising
[reward] to whoever should discover where the guilty man was--if he
were a person of quality, an office as sergeant or standard-bearer,
according to his position; or, if he were not such a person, three
hundred pesos and permission to go to Espana. On the twenty-seventh
of this month, a negro belonging to the said convent gave information
that the guilty man was in a cell therein. The governor sent Adjutant
Don Juan de Frias and Alferez Don Diego de Herrero with soldiers,
giving them the order to take away the man, even though the religious
tried to hinder him. This they did, and could not be resisted; and
as a reward for taking him out, a post of sergeant was given to the
adjutant, and a military command to the alferez.

Having taken him out, they brought him the next day to confession,
and on the following day sentenced him to death. The most illustrious
lord archbishop, Don Fray Fernando Guerrero, learning of this, made a
formal demand for the prisoner on behalf of the church; but they were
rebellious, and refused to surrender him. On the sixth of September of
this said year the most illustrious archbishop sent a requisition to
General Molina, who was the judge of this case, directing him to send
back the prisoner, but to no effect; on the contrary, that very day
the gallows was erected in front of the Augustinian convent, so that
the execution would be in sight of the house. When the archbishop saw
this contumacious act, he sent to notify the judge again, at seven
o'clock at night, to send back the prisoner under penalty of major
excommunication, _latae sententiae_. Seeing that he would not do so,
at eleven o'clock at night the archbishop sent another requisition
and notification to General Molina, and from there to the palace to
notify the said governor--who ordered the churchmen who went to do
this to be arrested, and taken to the guardhouse until morning. On
this said day of the said month, four companies marched out with the
prisoner. Fresh notifications were sent that, if he were not returned
to the church within one hour, suspension of religious functions would
be imposed, and heavy pecuniary penalties for the Holy Crusade. All
this did not suffice to keep them from continuing the work; and, the
time set having expired, the interdict was declared when the prisoner
arrived at the corner of the plaza. The night before the bells
had rung for the interdict, and the sound of the bells struck the
Christians with fear. But none of this was sufficient, for at about
twelve o'clock in the morning, they finished hanging him--so close
to the sacred place that the ladder was placed on a level with the
portico, in such manner that it could not help being in the sacred
place. They took him away after hanging him, and threw the body
at the door of the convent, which is at the gate of the church of
St. Augustine. They rapped upon the door, and, as it was not opened,
they left the body there; it remained without burial for two days,
until the brothers of holy La Misericordia buried it in the cemetery
of the cathedral church, so that the body would not be corrupted and
become a disgusting object. The interdict lasted two or three days,
and was raised on the day of St. Nicholas of Tolentino, at about ten
o'clock in the morning. As Don Pedro de Monroy was provisor at the
time, and the one who pronounced the excommunications, the governor
decided to seize him and send him by ship to Machan, [_i.e.,_ Macao]
or to Ermossa Island; but, becoming aware of this intention, he found
a place of safety, to escape from this severe action. An order was
given at all the gates that; if he should go out or enter them, he
should be arrested. But a few days ago he was sent out of the gate
which is called Santo Domingo, in the habit of a friar. When the guard
who recognized him would have seized him, two Franciscan religious,
who were with him, defended him and gave him an opportunity to enter
the Dominican convent. When the governor learned this, irritated
because his order of arrest had not proved effectual, he ordered the
soldiers to be arrested who constituted the guard, and would have
had them garrote the alferez Don Francisco de Rivera, who was in
command at that gate, because they had not killed a friar and taken
prisoner Don Pedro de Monroy. The said governor sent immediately to
the convent of Santo Domingo to have them deliver the said provisor,
and to say that, if they did not do so, he would go in person and take
him away. To this father Fray Domingo Gonzalez, the provincial, and
commissary of the Holy Office, answered that it was not the provisor
who was there, but Don Pedro de Monroy, adviser of the Holy Office,
which was not situated there; and, as such, he had kept him busy with
matters pertaining to that holy tribunal, as might be seen by these
disagreements which existed between the two heads [of government].

The most illustrious lord archbishop decided to call a council of the
most grave and learned men of all the religious orders, in order to
determine what was expedient. When he sent to ask the fathers of the
Society, they refused to go. After this, seeing that things were going
from bad to worse, it was necessary to call another assembly of the
religious orders; and when the said fathers were summoned it was not
possible for them to go. Thereupon, seeing that they were separating
themselves from the affairs of the church, the lord archbishop ordered
that they be notified of an act by which they were deprived of the
right of preaching in all the churches subject to his jurisdiction. The
said fathers, by virtue of a brief which they claim to have from
his Holiness, answered that they could preach without permission,
and _contradicente episcopo_. Without showing the said brief, they
appointed a judge-conservator for the most illustrious archbishop,
who was Don Fabian de Santillan y Avelanes, the schoolmaster of
the cathedral. The latter notified his most illustrious Lordship
that he must revoke the said act within two hours, under penalty of
major excommunication and four thousand Castilian ducados. The lord
archbishop went before the royal Audiencia with a plea of fuerza,
to declare whether the appointment made had been made legally and
justly, as it had been presented before no judge, as is provided by
law. The next day several religious, who were the attorneys of his
illustrious Lordship in the royal Audiencia, having come together
there, [Father] Badilla of the Society took up the case, and through
the continuance given him to inform himself of his rights, the other
religious, who were acting on behalf of the lord archbishop, could do
nothing until the next day, when they pleaded for him. During that
time the said archbishop was posted as excommunicated, the notices
being fixed on the doors of the churches of this city, by order
of the judge-conservator. These notices remained posted until the
twenty-fourth of January, because the royal Audiencia declared that
fuerza had not been committed [by the judge-conservator]. At the end of
this time, which was a period of more than three months, it was decided
to absolve his most illustrious Lordship. The governor went to his
house, on St. Polycarp's day; and together they went to the cathedral,
and made their peace. But meantime, in the proceedings against him,
he had been condemned, by formal act of the judge-conservator, to pay
another four thousand ducados; and the government of the archbishopric
was to be taken from him for four years. All this was declared null
by the lawyers, who said that the judge and the fathers of the Society
had thus incurred the penalties of the law.

Considering the differences which every day arose, the councils
decided that it was necessary to send a despatch to his Majesty
secretly, remitting all the documents--although there was no more in
the affair than as the proverb goes, the fear of a cat scalded with
cold water. The governor began to suspect this, and left an order
at all the gates to arrest father Fray Francisco Pindo and father
Fray Domingo Collado, of the Dominican order; for he thought that,
being persons who were not well disposed to him, it would be they who
would carry the despatches. But his shrewd schemes were frustrated, [2]
and, when no one was thinking about it, a cha[m]pan had left with two
religious--one a Dominican and the other a Recollect of St. Augustine,
named father Fray Nicolas de Tolentino and father Fray Graviel de
Porto Carrero--and a few sailors. These went to the island of Cayo,
where they provided themselves with everything necessary for their
support, without anyone hindering them. On New Year's day they sailed
in the direction of Malaca, as was afterwards learned with certainty,
because they arrived a short time after at Machan. They arrived at
so favorable an opportunity that within a few days they embarked on
an English ship that was about to leave for Yndia, saying that they
were leaving on business of the Holy Office. May God grant them a
good voyage on this occasion.

A ship has come from Machan and brought news that there had been a
great persecution in the kingdom of Japon and the martyrdom of many
Catholic religious. It is also said that Father Christoval Ferreira,
the provincial at that time for the Society of Jesus in that kingdom,
had apostatized; and that he not only had recanted, but had married
a heathen woman, and that the wife of the said Portuguese father had
given birth to a child. Moreover, he had betrayed [to the authorities]
the few other religious who had remained there. Such things as these,
and worse, persons who abandon our holy faith usually do. The emperor
of Japon has ordered that no friar or other religious should enter
[that country], and has promised great rewards to those who should
learn of their entrance into his kingdom, and inform him thereof;
and he threatens severe punishment to those who do not do so.

During these troubles [in the diocese] Don Francisco Valdes resigned
the archdeaconry of this cathedral; and the governor, by virtue of the
royal patronage, appointed as archdeacon Don Andres Arias Giron, and
sent to the most illustrious archbishop to obtain his collation. The
latter answered that Master Don Andres Arias was under visitation;
and that he had exiled and excommunicated him for sufficient causes,
and could not give him possession. When he learned of this, Master
Don Andres Arias Giron presented himself with a plea of fuerza before
the royal Audiencia; and the governor ordered that his illustrious
Lordship be notified that, without fail, he should put Don Andres in
possession. He therefore called a council of religious, and all said
that he should not in conscience comply.

On Friday, the ninth of May, at seven o'clock at night, a royal
decree was issued that within an hour from the viewing of the said
royal decree Don Andres should be put in possession, on pain of the
archbishop being exiled from the kingdoms, and paying two thousand
Castilian ducados. Thereupon his most illustrious Lordship answered
that he would obey the said decree, as in the name of his king and
lord; but as for its fulfilment, there were reasons why he could
not accede to this, that the man was under visitation, and [the
ecclesiastical authorities] must not be hindered. At eight o'clock
at night, seeing that they were going on with the execution of the
decree, and had declared him exiled, fearing some further severity, he
sent for the most holy sacrament to the convent of St. Francis; and,
dressed in his pontifical robes, holding the elements in his hands,
in front of his episcopal chair, with all possible propriety, he
approached an altar, and there remained, waiting for the conclusion of
what had been begun. At ten o'clock at night the captain of artillery
and Alguazil-mayor Tenorio, with Adjutant Don Diego de Herrera,
and thirty musketeers, entered the archiepiscopal dwelling. At this
juncture an interdict was declared; on that night, therefore, the
confusions, disorders, and turbulence were greater than ever before
seen. Guards were posted above and below [the archbishop's house]
on all the street corners, so that no one could enter or go out;
and having found the lord archbishop in the aforesaid state, and
attended by many religious of all orders, word thereof was given to
the governor. He sent an order that all the religious and secular
priests who remained with his most illustrious Lordship should be sent
away. Although this was not executed, because it was not mentioned
in the warrant, the court-alguazil went to the palace to learn the
intention of the governor. The latter rectified the order anew;
and the said alguazil-mayor, coming to the archiepiscopal building,
executed it, directing the religious and secular priests to depart
from the house. As they did not do so, he commanded the soldiers to
obey him, under penalty of three doses of rope; [3] and to take the
religious out, dragging them, or in any way they could. This they
did, maltreating them and giving them rude pushes, tearing their
habits. They left two religious with his most illustrious Lordship,
to aid him to bear the imprisonment. The alguazil-mayor came to take
them away, and hurt one of them with the rays on the lunette, owing
to the force which he applied; for the religious were clinging to the
archbishop, whom they caused to fall to the floor, with the most holy
sacrament. It was only by great good fortune that he did not lose his
grasp upon it at this time. In this confusion a soldier drew his sword,
and threw himself upon it, intending to kill himself--saying that the
man who had seen the most holy sacrament upon the ground was no longer
fit to live. He lay there, wounded, and thus they took him prisoner,
and were about to garrote him; this, however, they did not do, but
sent him to exile at Samboanga. The archbishop was left alone with
the soldiers of the guard, and several of them, as good Christians,
remained on their knees before the most holy sacrament, shocked and
weeping to see that among Catholics such things could take place. At
this juncture the bishop of Camarines told his most illustrious
Lordship that the governor said that if he wished to eat he must
abandon the holy sacrament, and that if he did not do so nothing was
to be given to him; and that these were the orders he had given to
the said adjutant, under pain of death. Thereupon the lord archbishop
answered, with much courage, that he was prepared to die with the
most holy sacrament in his hands, rather than do anything that would
be an offense against it. Thereupon they left him without a servant,
to the great indignation and sorrow of many soldiers, the governor
remaining as hard and obdurate as if he had not been a Christian.

At one o'clock at night there came a new order that the soldiers should
drive from the streets the religious, who had been upon their knees
with candles in their hands, worshiping the Lord of heaven and earth,
since the time when they had been driven from His presence. They
were driven away, by dragging them and tearing their garments; and
the cassock and cross were taken from the cross-bearer of his most
illustrious Lordship. He cried out to God, begging for mercy--a thing
which melted the hearts of all the city, so that nothing was heard
of but "Mercy!" accompanied by the tears and apprehensions of the
faithful. After this was done, at two o'clock at night there came
another order, that the friars should be made to go back to their
convents, which they had not done. The governor sent the sargento-mayor
to tell them to go back, and not cause any more disturbance. To this
they answered that they had left their convents determined to die
for God, and that whether they died there or in Japon was all one;
that they would not leave that place, because they were in front
of the most holy sacrament; and, if it should fall from the hands
of the lord archbishop, the soldiers must not approach to raise it,
as this was not lawful, but they themselves must do so, as priests.

The sargento-mayor went away with this answer; and as the governor was
at the corner of Santa Potenziana, on the square of the archiepiscopal
buildings, in disguise, he heard all that occurred. He sent another
order, commanding, in the name of his Majesty, that the religious
should retire to their convents; and that, if they did not do so,
they would be dragged thither. Seeing his accursed intention, they
thought it best to let themselves be taken away by the soldiers,
but with much sadness and weeping. The Franciscan friars remained in
their portico, to be near the house of the lord archbishop, so that
they might watch what passed. The governor himself came personally,
and made them retire and go within their convent.

The very next day, which was the eve of Espiritu Santo, his illustrious
Lordship, finding that the governor's obstinacy was continuing
and that he was being abandoned (for no one was allowed to enter),
and that he had had nothing to eat for twenty-four hours, and that
all this was in preparation for placing him on shipboard, sent to
call the guardian of the Franciscans, and entrusted to him the most
holy sacrament, which was taken to his convent with great ceremony,
and there deposited. At this time the archbishop was allowed to make
appointments of persons to govern his archbishopric. He appointed the
father reader Fray Francisco de Paula, of the Order of St. Dominic,
and the father reader and definitor Fray Pedro de Santo Thomas, of
the discalced Augustinians, ordering them not to raise the interdict
and suspension of religious functions, or absolve the governor,
Auditor Marcos Capata, and Don Andres Giron, as he reserved their
absolution to himself. Thereupon at eleven o'clock in the morning
the court-alguazil came with a carriage, and his illustrious Lordship
alone was placed in it, all the religious accompanying it with tears
at seeing such cruelty and severity. When they had come to the gate
known as Puerta de los Almazenes, [4] the archbishop alighted, and
again excommunicated all those who had caused his exile, and cursed
the city; and throwing stones at it, and shaking the dust from his
feet, he directed his steps to the water to board a champan. This was
provided with sixteen arquebusiers, and the said adjutant; but they
did not allow any of his servants to embark, nor consent that any
provision of food be placed aboard for the voyage. When he begged for
his cross, the said alguazil-mayor answered that there was no cross for
him. Thereupon he embarked, and although many religious desired to take
leave of him, they were not allowed to come. Thus they conveyed him
to the island of Maribelis, distant from this city some seven leguas,
more or less. Although many private citizens of this city made urgent
request to go in their boats to the champan, they were not allowed
to do so; for it was seen that they were carrying provisions for the
archbishop, being moved to pity by the cruelty with which they were
using him, for one would not expect infidels to do worse.

In this island he was kept prisoner, without being allowed to
communicate or to write letters, his treatment being such as might
be expected from dispositions so obstinate. On the eleventh of
this month of May the said governor appointed the said bishop of
Camarines to govern the archbishopric, contrary to [the law of] God
and with no permission, saying that the lord archbishop was a decayed
limb. The said bishop accepted the appointment, acting contrary to
[decrees of] the Council of Trent, and incurring its penalties. He
absolved the said governor, Auditor Capata, and Don Andres Giron: and
gave the last-named the collation for the archdeaconry, raising the
interdict imposed by the legitimate prelate. Those in the cathedral
and the fathers of the Society, who were followed by other churches,
besides the convents of St. Dominic, St. Francis, and the discalced
Augustinians, at once replied that they would observe the suspension
imposed on them, because they knew that a governor [of the diocese]
could not raise the interdict, or do anything of what he had done; for
he was suspended, interdicted, excommunicated, and under discipline,
for having exercised the pontifical office, raised the interdict,
and absolved the excommunicated--all this being reserved to the
lord archbishop, as was declared by all the learned men of this
city. Although the cathedral, the church of the Society, and the
Observantine convent of St. Augustine said mass, no one went to hear
it; but on the contrary the Catholics were scandalized that these
people should do such things through fear of the governor--things which
caused great scandal, and which it would take a long time to tell. [I
omit them] mainly because most of them are better left unsaid, because
of the cruelty involved in them, rather than told in a relation.

On the twentieth of May there came an order from the lord archbishop,
at the petition of religious and holy persons, that the suspension
should be raised for a fortnight, so that the feast of Corpus Christi,
which was on the twenty-second of the said month, might be celebrated;
and when the said period of time was past, he imposed the interdict
as before--although it was not observed except by the Dominicans,
the Franciscans, and the discalced Augustinians. The governors of the
archbishopric and of the islands respectively gave to the fathers of
the Society [the curacy of] Chiapo, which they demanded, as belonging
to the archiepiscopal court. It was donated to the lord archbishop
by the Franciscan fathers, on condition that it should be conferred
upon no-one, but should remain for the maintenance of the poor and of
secular priests; and that, in case it were given to any other order,
the condition and donation should not be valid which had been made
to the said lord archbishop, and accordingly it should revert again
to the said Franciscan fathers, as it was before. But the fathers
of the Society would listen to none of this, drawn on by ambition;
nor would the governor, who allowed them to demand what they wished.

A few days after this, on the fourth of June, the royal decree was
revoked; and father Fray Domingo Gonzalez, the Dominican provincial,
and other dignitaries, went to the lord archbishop, and asked him
not to change anything which had been done by the said bishop of
Camarines. The lord archbishop would not consent to this, as it was all
void, and opposed to conscience. But on the prayer and supplication of
grave religious, who besought his permission for this until his Majesty
should send a remedy sufficient for so many evils as had occurred,
his illustrious Lordship thereupon consented to this; and he entered
this city on the sixth of June, amid the general rejoicing of all,
for thereby the church was freed from schism and the administration of
an excommunicated bishop. In short, in order to remove greater evils
things remain thus, without anything being changed; we hope that God
our Lord and his Majesty will redress this, and that persons will be
sent to punish the guilty according to their crimes.





PASQUIN QUE SE PUSSO A LA PUERTA DEL GOUERNOR DE MANILA
DON SEUASTIAN VRTADO DE CORQUERA


    Quien la yglesia vitupera--Corcuera
    y quien la Birtud maltrata--Capata
    y quien se cisca de miedo--Ledo
      segun esso llorar Puedo
      yglesia tu triste suerte
      Pues Bienen a darte muerte
      Corcuera Capata y Ledo

    Quien la birtud a dejado--Collado
    quien obliga a tal traycion--ambizion
    y quien sigue tal de miedo--Pinedo [5]
      de que an labrado rezelo
      vna orca como aman
      do rabiando moriran
      Collado ambicion Pinedo

    quien apresta desatinos--tiatinos
    en que encubren excesos--en quesos
    pues de quesos que se espera--cera
      no entiendo aquesta quimera
      mas si es cosa de ynteres
      quemarlos a todos tres
      tiatinos quesos y cera

    quien dixo el vien por el mal--vn probinzial
    quien la fe dixo sin tino--vn tiatino
    y quien su ser tubo en poco--vn cojo
      pues a llorar me prouoco
      viendo vn tiatino casado
      y que fue Por su pecado
      probinzial tiatino y cojo

    Arcidiano sin razon--Jiron
    obispo con poco estudio--Camudio
    excomulgado notorio--tenorio
      Bien merezen Purgatorio
      de ynfierno estos tres amigos
      Pues son de Dios enemigos
      Jiron Camudio y tenorio

    A quien aorco de vn madero--vn artio
    en que razon se fundaua--Por la esclaua
    que le quita el omizido--la uida
      ynjustamte. Perdida
      fue pero ya me lamento
      que perdiese en vn momento
      artillero esclaua y vida

    quien bio Pagar de los frutos--tributos
    y quien aorcando Peros--yeros
    quien dar yco a las mulatas--natas
      todas estas papanatas
      an de uenir a parar
      en que el diablo a de lleuar
      tributos yeros y natas

    No ay para tanta malizia--Justizia
    ni pa tantos agrauios--labios
    ni para tantas locuras--Curas
      todas estas desuenturas
      los Cristianos Padezemos
      Pues que ya sin fuerca bemos
      Justicia labios y curas

    Que resulta en conclusion--Resoluzion
    y destas cosas no buenas--Penas
    y de tanto descontento--tormento
      No en bano yo me lamento
      Viendo la yglesia sinzera
      a ques otra por corquera
      Pasion penas y tormento.






PASQUINADE AFFIXED TO THE DOOR OF THE GOVERNOR OF MANILA,
DON SEVASTIAN VRTADO DE CORQUERA [6]


    Who vituperates the Church?--Corcuera.
    Who abuses Virtue?--Capata.
    Who soils himself through fear?--Ledo.
      Therefore, I can weep
      Thy sad fate, O, Church!
      For they come to deal thee death--
      Corcuera, Capata, and Ledo.

    Who has abandoned Virtue?--Collado.
    What leads him to such treason?--Ambition.
    Who imitates that one through fear?--Pinedo.
      Hence I fear that they have prepared
      A gallows as did Aman, [7]
      On which raging will die--
      Collado, Ambition, Pinedo.

    Who are preparing lawless acts?--The Theatines [_i.e._, Jesuits].
    Wherein do they hide their violations of law?--In cheeses.
    Therefore, what can be expected from cheeses?--Wax. [8]
      I do not understand such an extravagant idea;
      But if it is a question of profit,
      It would be best to burn them all three--
      Theatines, cheeses, and wax.

    Who said "Good" instead of "Bad"?--A provincial.
    Who explained the faith without discretion?--A Theatine.
    And who set little value on his own existence?--A cripple.
      Therefore am I moved to tears
      To see a Theatine who is married;
      And who was, because of his sin--
      Provincial, Theatine, and cripple.

    Archdeacon with no right--Jiron.
    A bishop with little learning--Camudio.
    A notorious excommunicate--Tenorio.
      Right well they deserve the Purgatory
      Of Hell, these three friends;
      For they are the enemies of God--
      Jiron, Camudio, and Tenorio.

    Who was hanged from a beam?--An artilleryman.
    On what was that action based?--On the slave-girl.
    Of what did the homicide deprive him?--His life.
      Unjustly lost
      It was; but still I lament
      That he should lose in one moment--
      That artilleryman--his slave-girl and his life.

    He who thought to pay from his profits--tributes;
    And he who in hanging dogs saw--fetters;
    And he who caused the mulatto women to bear--daughters:
      All these simpletons
      Must come to a halt;
      Because the devil will carry off--
      Tributes, fetters, and daughters. [9]

    For so great malice, there is no--justice;
    Nor for so many injuries--words;
    Nor for so many follies--cures. [10]
      All these misfortunes,
      We Christians must suffer;
      For powerless we see--
      Justice, words, and cures.

    What results finally?--Resolution.
    And from these evil things?--Punishments.
    And from so great discontent?--Torment.
      Not in vain do I lament,
      Seeing the sincere [11] Church
      Become otherwise because of Corcuera--
      Suffering, punishments, and torment.






LETTERS FROM GOVERNOR HURTADO DE CORCUERA


_Ecclesiastical_

Most potent Sir:

Although I have related to the tribunal of the holy Inquisition
of Mexico the disorders that have happened in this city this year
which were caused by the fathers of St. Dominic, and helped and
strengthened by the father commissary of the Holy Office, Fray
Francisco de Herrera--who has endeavored to avenge his passions and
those of his religious through the authority of so holy a tribunal,
but overstepping the manner of procedure and prudence that that holy
tribunal has in all its actions--yet I have thought it best to have
recourse to your Highness as to the supreme authority, so that you
with the ruling hand may apply an efficacious remedy to the said
disorders. Therefore, I shall give your Highness an account of them
in this letter, in detail, although briefly.

The archbishop of Manila and the three orders of St. Dominic,
St. Francis, and St. Augustine, were united against me. They went
about holding meetings, as they thought by that method to avenge
themselves for the injuries which they imagined that they had received
because they were not granted whatever they wished or what suited
their whims. They were convened in an assembly, where they must
have discussed nothing else than their own restless notions and the
disturbance of the community and opposition to the government. For
that reason, the bishop of Nueva Segovia, Don Fray Diego Duarte,
with the ecclesiastical cabildo, all the clergy, and the fathers
of the Society of Jesus, refused to attend the said meeting. The
archbishop and the three orders were very angry that the fathers
of the Society did not attend, although they took no notice of the
fact that the bishop of Nueva Segovia, the ecclesiastical cabildo,
and the clergy (who also were notified to attend the meeting) were
likewise absent; and they made their anger evident, since the first
topic that was discussed in the said meeting was [a plan to unite]
and conspire against the fathers of the Society. They issued a
decree against them (which I enclose herewith) [12] in which they
disfellowshipped them from the other orders, and commanded that no one
should go to their houses, or to feasts or other public ceremonies;
that those of the Society should not be admitted into their convents
for these functions; that they should not be allowed to preach in
the cathedral, or in any other place outside their own houses; and
other things like this. They all show the aversion and even hatred
which they have for the fathers of the Society. That decree was a
cause for great scandal throughout this community. It was approved
and signed by the said father commissary, Fray Francisco de Herrera,
thus making himself a party to all the quarrels and disturbances
that resulted from the said decree. Consequently, he could ill be
a dispassionate judge. The fathers of the Society were silent, and
overlooked such things, coming from that source. Some days afterward,
the archbishop, in accordance with the decision of the said meeting,
had the fathers of the Society notified of an act, ordering them,
under penalty of major excommunication, _late sentencie_, and a fine
of four thousand Castilian ducados, not to preach outside of their
houses throughout his archbishopric, not even in the barracks and
guardhouses. The fathers of the Society tried to procure means of
peace, but none of them succeeded. Seeing that there was no hope of
peace, and recognizing the injury that the archbishop was doing them
at the instigation of the three orders and the father commissary,
they were forced to speak out against the archbishop through their
judge-conservator, Don Fabian de Santillan y Gavilanes, schoolmaster
of this holy church and a person of good standing in this city. The
three orders, especially that of St. Dominic, took this cause against
the fathers of the Society as their own--although it did not concern
them, but was, on the contrary, in favor of all. The fathers of the
Society were defending what the orders were defending, since they were
defending their privileges and immunities, which are common to all
the mendicant orders. But the orders did not think of this, nor that
they were putting out both their eyes (as says the proverb) in order
to put out one of the Society. The aversion and hatred that they show
against the fathers of the Society is incredible, doing them all the
ill turns possible in all things, and talking maliciously of them. The
orders had recourse by a plea of fuerza to the royal Audiencia, which
declared that the judge-conservator had not employed it, and that he
was legally appointed. Thereupon, seeing that they had no means by
which to embarrass the judge-conservator, they tried to make use of the
authority of the Inquisition, the fathers of St. Dominic threatening
the judge-conservator with it. Those fathers spread the report that
they would seize him, and get even with him. At this juncture the
father commissary summoned him, and such was the aspect of affairs
that the said judge asked the said commissary for a testimony that he
had not been summoned for anything that could prejudice his person, in
order that he might not be left with any stain. The judge-conservator
had made complaint against the provisor, Don Pedro de Monroy, for
having declared that neither Luther nor Calvin, nor any other heretics,
did so much harm as did the members of the Society. That was a calumny
and insult, the remedy for which the judge thought concerned him. The
father commissary entered the lists, and asked for that cause. The
judge sent him the original complaint, reserving the testimony, to
present it to the holy tribunal of Mexico. The said father commissary
asked for the testimony, and it was also sent him. The purpose of the
father commissary seems to have been to deprive him of all the papers,
as your Highness will see from the following.

At this juncture the archbishop held a meeting with the religious of
the three orders of St. Dominic, St. Francis, and St. Augustine. There
under title of a protest, an insulting defamatory libel was made,
according to report, not only against the Society of Jesus,
but also against the judge-conservator himself, because he was
judge-conservator; and against the royal Audiencia, because it had
declared his appointment legitimate. The judge-conservator brought
force to bear against the archbishop in order to make him hand over
the protest, but the latter steadfastly refused to do so, or to show
it. Finally, although the archbishop agreed to deliver it, he could
not do so, because he had given it to father Fray Diego Collado,
of the Order of St. Dominic. The latter kept possession of it, in
such wise that it could never be recovered from him; and it is even
said (although I am not sure of this) that the said paper had been
delivered to the father commissary in order to secure it, so that
he might keep it with the papers of the Inquisition. For, as the
judge was urging the archbishop, the father commissary entangled the
affair by ordering the judge, with censures, to relinquish the cause,
and cease to ask for the said protest, and to hand over the papers
that had been made in this matter. The judge, seeing the malice of
the father commissary in preventing his jurisdiction, and taking from
him all the papers, continued to defend himself--and asking the father
commissary not to hinder his proceedings, since the trial of the said
protest or defamatory libel belonged to him, as it was an insult to
the Society, to the judge himself, and to the royal Audiencia, and
as it was a matter that concerned the principal cause. A thousand
notifications were served on the judge, and all of them by means of
different Dominican fathers, and with great noise and disturbance--a
matter which caused much comment, that one commissary should have
so many different secretaries, some of them being lay brothers,
others priests, and others very young; and that they should disturb
the community with their passions, under the mantle of the Inquisition.

The said defamatory protest or libel was authenticated by a royal
clerk named Diego de Rueda. The judge-conservator arrested him. The
father commissary went to ask for him, with censures, as he declared
that the clerk was a familiar of the Holy Office. The judge replied
that he had arrested the clerk to get his confession, because of
the said protest which he had authenticated; that he had already
taken that confession, and needed him no longer; and that the father
commissary should ask me for him, for I had arrested him. The father
commissary replied that he was not satisfied with that reply, and that
the clerk should be given to him. But the judge answered by producing
proof that he did not hold the clerk prisoner, and could not hand
him over. Thereupon, it appears that the father commissary calmed
himself, and turned upon me in good earnest. At the earliest light
he sent a youthful and somewhat impudent friar to me, to notify me of
the act--which I enclose herewith [13] so that your Highness may see
whether this is the way to treat one who occupies such a post as I,
and whom his Majesty has delegated in his place. Considering that the
cause pertained to me, because that clerk had committed an offense in
the exercise of his duty, and that the father commissary was exceeding
his commission--and still more did he whom the father commissary sent
to notify me so discourteously and impudently--I took the act from
his hands, and sent him to his superior of the convent at the port
of Cavite, with orders to keep him there and reduce him to order, as
I did not wish him to excite the community, as the friars were doing.

The fathers of St. Dominic took opportunity from this occurrence to
utter blasphemies against me, and to declare me excommunicated for
preventing the exercise of the Holy Office (as if the preservation of
the royal jurisdiction would be a hindrance to that holy tribunal,
which only undertakes what concerns it)--saying that I was deposed,
and was not governor, nor could I be governor. They declared that the
senior auditor should immediately assume the government, arrest me,
and send me to a fort. They confirmed this by the father commissary
bringing from Cavite father Fray Francisco Pinelo--an eloquent man,
and a bold preacher in the pulpit--whom he caused to preach in his
convent in this city on the second Sunday in Advent. At the beginning
of his sermon, he proceeded to read a bull, translated into Romance. He
declared that it was issued by Pius V, and that his Holiness ordered
therein that whoever should prevent the exercise of the Holy Office
should be infamous, and incapacitated from holding office. This he
said with such words and manner, and at such a time, that it had the
effect of pointing me out with the finger; and it was seen clearly
that everything was said for me, and that he was censuring me as
infamous, and saying that I was not governor. In order that your
Highness may see the freedom of these friars, and how they treat him
who is in the place of king--and this under cover of the Inquisition,
using the authority of so holy and upright a tribunal to avenge their
passions in matters that do not concern the Inquisition; and they
cannot see that to support it I have a sword at my side with which
to fight to the death in defense of this holy tribunal, as I have
done for twenty-five years in your Highness's service against the
enemies of the faith--in this same sermon, a thousand things were
said against me calling me Herod; and against the royal Audiencia
because it declared, contrary to the will of the father commissary,
that the judge-conservator was legal. Aspersions were uttered against
the fathers of the Society, censuring them as heretics; and against
the judge himself, calling him a London canon, besides a thousand
other impudent speeches in the same manner. Other preachers of his
order have followed the same style of preaching, and they have been
imitated by the Recollect fathers of St. Augustine--who style those
of the Society hypocrites and heretics; and they utter innumerable
satires on them in the pulpits, making the pulpit a lectureship of
vengeance, although it is the place that belongs to Christ for the
preaching of His holy word. How could the father commissary remedy
these disorderly acts, since he was at the head of them, and since
they were by his order, as can be understood from the above?

In this manner did they disturb and stir up the people, and even
excited them to revolt--so that if I had not had arms in my hands,
and the garrison which is here at my order, beyond question a greater
calamity would have been feared; and I fear one, if your Highness
do not take it in hand, and make a beginning in correcting such acts
of boldness. I will add that I had given orders at the gates of the
city that the said cleric Don Pedro de Monroy was not to be allowed
to enter, as he was a seditious man, and in union with the friars
he was exciting innumerable rumors and disputes in this city; and in
the time of Governor Don Alonso Faxardo he was declared exiled from
the kingdoms, and the temporalities had been taken away from him,
because of a riot that he caused. It happened on November 21 of the
past year, that he, clad as a Franciscan friar, together with another
of the same order as his companion, attempted to enter a gate at the
Ave Marias. The commandant, who recognized him, laid hold of him,
and ordered the soldiers to take their weapons in order to prevent
his entrance, and to obey their orders. But so many Dominican friars
(who were prepared for that emergency), charged down upon them and
defended the said cleric with their fists and with violence; and
forcing my guardhouse, they placed him within the city, in spite of the
soldiers, who had no opportunity to use their weapons. That appears
from a legal investigation which they made in their exoneration,
for I was intending to punish them for not having kept my order. I
was angry, as was natural, at that lawless act and the boldness of
the friars. I advised their superior of it; but he answered that
that friar had entered the city because he had been summoned by the
Inquisition and its commissary. For, even for such an outrage, which
would have been worthy of punishment in any other, those friars take
as a cloak such a holy institution as is the Inquisition--as if it
were not proper to advise me, and not to force my guardhouse, even
though it were a matter for the Inquisition. For it is certain that
in all that pertains to that holy tribunal, the father commissary
must find in me all protection and aid. But I was told nothing
except that the force and violence was practiced of which I have
given an account. It is to be presumed that it was not a matter that
pertained to so holy and righteous a tribunal; but to say that it
was a matter of the Inquisition was only a pretext and excuse for an
act of boldness like that. And in order that your Highness may see
more clearly what I state, the viceroy of Nueva Espana, the marquis
de Cerralbo, sent a surgeon named Don Garcia to this country for his
crimes. He came, condemned to serve for eight years at the will of the
governor, without pay. But as I had need of him to go in the fleet of
galleons that I was despatching to the forts of Terrenate, I tried to
have him prepare for that service. He took refuge in the convent of
St. Dominic, where the fathers aided and protected him. One of them,
named Fray Francisco de Paula, told me that among the multitude of
my affairs that were to be treated by the Inquisition was the fact
that I was trying to send the said Francisco Garcia in the fleet,
as its surgeon, since he was a familiar of the Holy Office. I had not
known that before, and I think that it is not so, since the viceroy,
in the presence of the tribunal of the holy Inquisition of Mexico,
condemned him and sent him here; or else his cause was such that,
even though he was a familiar of the Holy Office, that holy tribunal
did not think it advisable to prevent the punishment imposed by the
viceroy. And although the tribunal of Mexico, notwithstanding its
so great power, refused to prevent that punishment, a friar tries
to prevent it here and opposes me, the governor, and protects even
a criminal from me--not so much to protect him, as to turn upon and
oppose me. In truth, Sir, this is a grievous thing, namely, that in
whatever desires or whims these friars have, and for whomever they
wish to be aided and protected for them against the governor, they
immediately find a path by way of the Inquisition.

Those fathers gave the final touch to those annoyances by taking
from me, to my great vexation, a goodly number of sailors and some
soldiers, who had received their pay in order to make the voyage
in the said fleet of galleons to Terrenate. One of two friars of
St. Dominic fled with them in a boat and went by way of Macajar to
India, in order to go to Espana with serious complaints, as I am told,
for your Highness. However, the path that they are taking is very apt
to lead them into the hands of the Dutch or of the many other enemies
who infest the seas of Yndia. It is said, and I regard it as certain,
that that was the plan of the father commissary of the Holy Office;
and at least he concurred in and had a part in it. Let your Highness
consider the boldness and freedom of those friars in recklessly
entering a matter which is so to the disservice of your Highness;
and it is a kind of treason to take away the people who are in your
service, and who have been already paid to go in the royal fleet.

Many other things of this sort and of this same kind could be related
to your Highness, and all need the same remedy. It is one which
I think efficacious for the prevention of greater damages, namely,
that your Highness distinctly order the holy Inquisition of Mexico to
appoint no friar of any order as their commissary in these islands,
but some secular, since this function belongs to such. By that means
many troubles would be avoided, and greater disorders, which may be
feared if the friars act as commissaries, would be obviated; and we
shall have the peace that is desired among your people. I entreat your
Highness to be pleased to consider this matter, and how necessary is
what I represent for the exercise of so holy a tribunal, and for your
Highness's service; for I shall not assure you that the islands will
be free from any confusion or insurrection unless reform is given, and
it is at least certain that we shall never have peace [otherwise]. And
since this holy tribunal always brings peace to the kingdoms where
it is just, will your Highness do this for me, and grant this request?

I petition the above from you in consideration of the above mentioned
causes; and because my uncle, the inquisitor, Don Pedro Hurtado
de Gabiria--who served for thirty years in the Inquisition of the
Canarias, Granada, and Lograno, and in the royal Council as fiscal
and inquisitor--having reared me until I was old enough to go to
serve your Highness in the States of Flandes, in the course of his
training taught me to obey, to venerate, and to respect so holy a
tribunal. And wherever I have been since then, when your Highness
sent me from the States of Flandes to Piru, and thence to govern
the kingdom of Tierra Firme at Panama, the Inquisitions of the said
Piru and Cartaxena, and (when I passed through Mexico) that of Nueva
Espana, have shown me, for my great respect, courtesy, and submission,
many honors and favors for which I shall always be grateful--as also
to your Highness, from whom I hope for greater honors. May our Lord
preserve your Highness in your grandeur. Manila, the last of June,
1636. Sire, your vassal kisses your Majesty's feet.


Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


[The letter is followed by the appended documents:]

[The act of October 9, 1635, directed against the Society of Jesus,
which will be found in the "Letter written by a citizen of Manila,"
Vol. XXV, pp. 216-219. In the present document, the act is followed
by the following:]

Collated with the original records which are in possession of his
Excellency, and which I attest. Manila, October ten, one thousand
six hundred and thirty-five.

The bachelor Joan Fulgencio, notary.

This copy was collated with the copy of the original which is
authenticated by the bachelor, Joan Fulgencio, notary of the archbishop
of these islands, Don Fray Hernando Guerrero, which is in possession
of Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, governor and captain-general
of these islands. At his order I drew this copy. Manila, October
seventeen, one thousand six hundred and thirty-five; witnesses being
Simon Delgado, and Alferez Pedro de Arexita. In testimony of truth,
I sealed and signed it.


Andres Martin del Arroyo,
notary of the royal crown.


We, the undersigned notaries, attest that Andres Martin del Arroyo,
by whom this testimony appears to be signed and sealed, is a royal
notary; and, as such, entire faith and credit has been and is given,
in and out of court, to the writings, acts, and other papers, which
have passed, and pass, before him. So that that may be evident, we
give the present. Manila, June eighteen, one thousand six hundred
and thirty-six.


Augusto de Valenzuelo, notary-public.
Francisco de Rueda, royal notary.
Sebastian Damas, notary of the assembly.


[The order presented to the governor by the commissary of the
Inquisition, Francisco de Herrera, November 26, 1635, and already
presented in Vol. XXV, pp. 243-244, follows. In the present document,
it is followed by the attestation of the notary, Andres del Arroyo
(dated April 26, 1636), who made the present copy from the original
presented to the governor by the commissary. Following his attestation
is one by the three notaries, Baptista de Espinosa, Alonso Baeza del
Rio, and Francisco de Casares, attesting the copy of Arroyo.]


In the city of Manila, April two, one thousand six hundred and
thirty-six, Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, knight of the Order
of Alcantara, member of his Majesty's Council, his governor and
captain-general of these Philipinas Islands, and president of the
royal Audiencia therein, declared that Licentiate Manuel Suarez de
Olivera entered a complaint against Alferez Don Francisco de Rivera,
the corporal of the soldiers of the guard at the gate of Santo Domingo,
for having allowed Licentiate Don Pedro de Monrroy to enter this
city, contrary to the order of his Lordship; and because it appeared
that the said Don Pedro, accompanied by other persons and disguised
in the habit of a Franciscan friar, entered through the said gate,
although the said corporal recognized and stopped him and obstructed
his entrance, calling the guard. But the said Don Pedro forced his way
through the guard violently, and entered the convent of St. Dominic,
of this city. For that reason the said corporal and the soldiers with
him were not condemned. And in order that his Majesty may know what
happened in this matter, and order his pleasure, the governor ordered
Juan Soriano, notary-public, before whom the said complaint was made,
to give two or three authorized copies of it. Thus did he enact and
order, and he affixed his signature.


Before me:
Francisco de Ortega


_Head of the process._ In the city of Manila, November twenty-one,
one thousand six hundred and thirty-five, Licentiate Manuel Suarez
de Olivera, auditor-general of war, declared that it had come to
his notice that although the governor and captain-general of these
islands had ordered that no corporal at the gates of the city should
allow Licentiate Don Pedro de Monrroy to enter this city, Alferez Don
Francisco de Rivera, corporal at the gate of Santo Domingo, with three
soldiers had allowed him to enter into the said city contrary to the
said order. In order that he might chastise the aforesaid corporal
and the others who appeared to be guilty, the auditor ordered the said
complaint to be entered, with a process according to military usage,
and that the witnesses should be examined according to the tenor of
it. Thus did he enact, and he affixed his signature.


Licentiate Manuel Suarez de Olivera

Before me:
Juan Soriano, notary-public.


Then the said investigation passed to the said auditor-general, who
caused Domingo de Ayamonte, who has been alferez and is a soldier
of the company of the master-of-camp, to appear before him. I, the
present notary, received from him the oath in due form of law before
God our Lord, and with the sign of the cross; and under that obligation
he promised to tell the truth. Being questioned, in accordance with
the head of the process, he declared that he was a witness of what
occurred. He declared that in regard to the said order contained in
the head of the process, he did not know it, and that he had not stood
guard in this city or in any other place, as he had but lately come
from the island of Hermosa. What this witness saw was, that while he
was seated outside the gate of Santo Domingo he heard a noise on the
part of the wall inside the city, and that some person was calling
out to the guard. Upon going to see who was calling, and hastening to
take part in whatever might arise, he found that the one calling was
Alferez Don Francisco de Rivera, the corporal; and that the friars of
St. Dominic and three of St. Francis were leading him a lively dance,
dealing him many knocks and blows with their fists. After the noise
had subsided, this witness asked what the matter was; and some soldiers
whom he does not know told him that they had the order mentioned in the
said head of the process, and that the said Don Pedro had entered clad
as a religious of St. Francis. This witness knows nothing else, nor
what soldiers were at the gate; for, as he has but recently arrived,
he knows no one. He declared this to be the truth, on the oath that
he has taken, and affirmed and ratified it, and declared that he is
fifty years old and competent to be a witness. He did not affix his
signature, as he could not write. The said auditor-general signed it.


Licentiate Manuel Simrez de Olivera

Before me:
Juan Soriano


In the city of Manila, on the said day, November twenty-one, one
thousand six hundred and thirty-five, the said auditor-general caused
Pedro Gutierrez, a soldier of the company of the master-of-camp, to
appear before him for the said proof. I, the present notary, received
from him the oath in due form of law, before God our Lord and with the
sign of the cross; and under that obligation he promised to tell the
truth. Being questioned, in accordance with the head of the process,
he declared that what he knows and what passes is as follows: On
this the said day, after nightfall, and while the witness was on
guard with the corporal, Alferez Don Francisco de Rivera, at the
gate of Santo Domingo of this said city; at that time there were two
Dominican religious outside the gate and two others on the inside--lay
brothers of the said order; and at the same time a small champan, with
three other religious of St. Francis, arrived. Having disembarked,
they asked for a jug of water; and answer was given them to enter the
city and drink. While they were entering the city by the said gate,
the said alferez and corporal thought that one of the said Franciscans
was walking somewhat as if he wished to be unknown. Recognizing him, he
began to call out to the guard and to lay hold of the Franciscan. The
witness, having hastened, saw many religious who were fighting the
said corporal and the other soldiers with their fists. They did that
with this witness, for they gave him many blows and tore his jerkin
and shirt from him, showering many insulting words upon this witness
and the others. At this juncture he heard the said corporal say that
Don Pedro de Monrroy was one of the said friars who was clad in the
habit of St. Francis. This witness knows that the order contained
in the said head of the process was given to him and the others at
the said gate, so that they might not allow the said Don Pedro de
Monrroy to enter thereby. This witness saw that two of the three
Franciscan religious who came in the said small champan, and entered
this city, tried to go out, and that one of them was left inside. All
the above is the truth, on the oath that he has taken. He affirmed
and ratified his deposition, and declared that he is forty years
of age and competent to be a witness. He signed the above, together
with the said auditor-general. Further this witness who has made his
deposition declares that he saw that a crowd of Dominican friars came
out, by a little bridge which extends to the guardhouse, and joined
the others whom he had mentioned; and these latter are the ones who
maltreated the said corporal and the other soldiers. He affirmed
that, etc. This witness believes that even if they had had many more
soldiers, they could not have resisted the said religious, because of
the great force with which they defended the said Don Pedro de Monrroy.


Licentiate Don Manuel Suarez Olivera
Pedro Gutierrez

Before me:
Juan Soriano, notary-public.


In the city of Manila, on the said day, November twenty-one, one
thousand six hundred and thirty-five, the said auditor of war caused
Manuel de Campos, a soldier of the company of the master-of-camp, to
appear before him for the said investigation. I, the present notary,
received from him the oath in due form of law, before God our Lord,
and with the sign of the cross; and under that obligation he promised
to tell the truth. Being questioned as to the tenor of the process,
this witness declared that what he knows and what occurred is
as follows: He knows that the order contained in the head of the
process was given at the gate of Santo Domingo. On the above date,
after nightfall, as he was at his post, and with orders from Alferez
Don Francisco de Rivera, the corporal at the said gate, there were
at that time, outside the said gate three Dominican religious and
one secular, and inside one Dominican lay brother. At that juncture
came a small champan with three religious of St. Francis aboard,
who joined those others who were outside; and all together began to
enter by the said gate--the two Franciscans, and one muffled in his
mantle. The said commandant came up and looked sharply at the one
who was muffled up in the said mantle, saying to him, "I pray you,
Father, to uncover." The latter answered, "He who meddles in this
is a base villain;" and, lowering his head, the said commandant
recognized the said Pedro de Monrroy. Seizing him, he called out,
"Ho, the guard!" This witness hastened to him, and laid hold of the
friar whom the said corporal had seized. At that same instant, the
father guardian of Dilao gave him a blow; while many other friars,
who were behind the gate which leads to the convent, charged down upon
the said corporal and this witness, and dealt them many blows--dragging
them even to the doors of the church, and saying many insulting words
to them, telling them that they were excommunicated rogues, who were
committing a very great outrage against the Church. Things were in
that condition when the said corporal ordered that witness to go to
report to the sargento-mayor; and he did so. The above is the truth,
on the oath that he has taken. He affirmed all the above, and declared
that he is thirty years old, and competent to be a witness. He signed
it, together with the said auditor-general:


Licentiate Manuel Suarez de Olivera, master-of-camp.
Juan Soriano, notary-public.


In the said city of Manila, November twenty-one, one thousand six
hundred and thirty-five, the said auditor-general caused a [certain]
man arrested for this complaint to appear before him, in order that
he might take his deposition. I, the present notary, received the
oath from him in due form of law, before God our Lord and with the
sign of the cross and under that obligation he promised to tell the
truth. Being questioned, he stated and declared the following. Being
asked his name, his age, and his calling and why he is arrested,
he stated and declared that his name is Don Francisco de Rivera y
Oseguera; that he is a soldier of the company of Don Lorenzo de Olaso;
that he is twenty-nine years old; and that the reason for his arrest
was that, having entered this day to guard the Parian, this deponent
went as corporal to guard the gate of Santo Domingo, with orders not
to allow Don Pedro de Monrroy to enter by the said gate. While he was
at the said gate, and three Dominican religious were outside of it,
and inside it one, at that juncture arrived a small champan, with
three religious of St. Francis. They and the others started to enter
the said gate, all with their faces covered. In the midst of them
was a Franciscan friar muffled in his mantle. On that account this
deponent was mistrustful, and going to him said: "I pray you, Father,
to uncover." Thereupon the father shrank further within his mantle,
but the deponent, going nearer, recognized that it was Don Pedro de
Monrroy, who was disguised as a Franciscan friar; and this deponent,
grappling with him, called out for the guard. Thereupon, one of the
said religious attacked the said Don Francisco, and shoved him about,
and struck him. And after the said [Franciscans] came many other
Dominican religious, who came out of their convent (which is near
the guardhouse); and they began to drag this deponent and the other
soldiers to the door of the church. That made the soldiers let go
of the said Don Pedro de Monroy; for, even had there been many more
soldiers, the religious would have taken him away, as there were many
of them, and they came headlong to the encounter. He had a report of
all the above made to the sargento-mayor. This, and naught else, is the
cause of his arrest; and this is his answer. This deponent being asked
whether he saw the disembarkation of the said Don Pedro de Monrroy
from the champan, and whether he knew that he was coming disguised as
a Franciscan friar before he entered the gate, he declared that he did
not know it, as night had already fallen; for if he had known it before
his arrival at the said gate, he would have prevented his entrance
or have shut the gate, and have tried with all his might to obey the
order given him. And he would have done that, had not the said friars
hastened to him. He stated that he recognized the said Don Pedro de
Monrroy only as he was about to enter the said gate in the guardhouse,
after which succeeded the aforesaid incidents. This is his response.

Being asked whether he knows the gravity of the offense which he
commits who breaks any military order, this deponent declared that
he knew it; but that he kept the said order to the utmost, and no
more, because the emergency that he has related occurred. This is
his response.

Being asked whether he knows and recognizes that the said religious
were aided by any secular persons in getting the said Don Pedro de
Monroy inside the gate, he declared that he had not seen or recognized
any secular persons except the said soldiers, his companions, who
aided him, and the said religious. This is his response.

Other questions were asked and brought forward touching the matter;
but to all he answered that which he has declared as above, under
obligation of the oath that he has sworn. He affixed his signature,
together with the auditor-general.


Licentiate Manuel Suarez de Olivera
Don Francisco de Rivera y Oseguera

Before me:
Juan Soriano, notary-public.


[The following is contained in the documents enclosed, in another
letter of like date with the above letter (also by Corcuera to the
king, and which will be given, _post_), and gives details omitted by
the present document.]

_Act._ In the city of Manila, November twenty-two, one thousand
six hundred and thirty-five, Licentiate Manuel Suarez de Olivera,
auditor-general of the war department of this royal camp, declared that
it is advisable, for the greater justification of this complaint, to
make investigation among the persons who were about the guardhouse at
the gate of Santo Domingo of this city, in order to ascertain and find
out more fully what happened last night at the said gate, by examining
more of the witnesses who were present or who knew something of the
aforesaid; and that the present notary should record the results
as a testimony in this cause, so that it might be apparent for all
time. Thus did he enact and order, and he signed the same.


Licentiate Manuel Suarez de Olivera

Before me:
Juan Soriano


_Testimony._ In fulfilment of the above act, I, Juan Soriano,
notary-public, one of the registered notaries of this city of Manila,
in the Filipinas Islands, for the king our lord, attest and assert
truthfully to those who may see these presents that on this day of
the above date, at the hour of ten in the morning or thereabout, I,
in company with the said auditor-general, went to the gate of Santo
Domingo of this said city, where there is generally a guardhouse of
soldiers. I made an investigation among the persons near the said
gate, and asked them whether any of them were present at what is
contained in these records, and which happened at this gate last
night, which is reckoned the twenty-first of this month. No one was
found who could tell me anything about the aforesaid; and I gave the
present because of what is contained in the commandment of the said
auditor-general. Given in the city of Manila, November twenty-two,
one thousand six hundred and thirty-five. Witness, the said constable,
Francisco Gutierrez. I seal it in testimony of the truth,

Juan Soriano, notary-public.



_Act of accusation and proof_. In the city of Manila, November
twenty-two, one thousand six hundred and thirty-five, [14] Licentiate
Manuel Suarez de Olivera, auditor-general of the war department of
this royal camp, declared that having examined this complaint and
the verbal process and investigation of it, he would charge--and he
did charge--the said alferez Don Francisco de Rivera with what has
resulted against him from the said verbal process; and that he would
immediately receive--and he did receive--this suit and complaint and
the parties to it, for proof within the time-limit of the two days
next following, common to the said parties, with all responsibility of
publication and direction, and all the rest, with citation. Within that
time, they may prove and investigate whatever is expedient for them,
and be cited in due form for sentence. Thus did he enact and order,
and he signed the same; and the witnesses of the verbal process shall
be notified before the said auditor-general, etc.


Licentiate Manuel Suarez de Olivera

Before me:
Juan Soriano, notary-public.




_Notification_. In the city of Manila, November twenty-two, one
thousand six hundred and thirty-five, I gave notice of the above
act of proof, according to its contents, to Alferez Don Francisco de
Rivera, in his own person. He declared that he has no more proof to
give than what he has given already; for, when the affair occurred,
there were no other witnesses than the soldiers his companions, who
have told and sworn the truth of what occurred. He gave the above as
his reply, and I attest the same.

Juan Soriano, notary-public.



_Ratification_. In the city of Manila, November twenty-two, one
thousand six hundred and thirty-five, the said auditor of war caused
Pedro Gutierrez, a soldier of the company of the master-of-camp,
to appear before himself. I, the present notary, received an oath
from him in due form of law, before God our Lord and with the
sign of the cross. He promised to tell the truth, and, under that
obligation, his testimony and the deposition that he made last night,
the twenty-first of this month, before Licentiate Manuel Suarez de
Olivera, auditor-general of war, and before me, the present notary,
having been read and shown to him, he, having understood and read
it word for word, declared that all therein contained, exactly as it
is written and testified, was declared and asserted by him; and that
the signature at the foot is in the hand and writing of this witness,
and he recognizes it as such. If necessary, he again declares it in
this plenary act, and he affirms and ratifies it in every point. He
affixes his signature, and declares that he is forty years old,
and competent to act as a witness. It is signed by the said auditor,


Licentiate Suarez
Pedro Gutierrez

Before me:
Juan Soriano


[A like declaration is received from the soldier Martin de Campos.]

_Act._ In the city of Manila, November twenty-five, one thousand
six hundred and thirty-five, Licentiate Manuel Suarez de Olivera,
auditor-general of the war department of this royal camp, having
examined this complaint which he made officially, for the royal justice
of war, against Alferez Don Francisco de Rivera, in regard to his
allowing Don Pedro de Monrroy to enter the gate of Santo Domingo of
this city, while he was corporal at it, in violation of his orders
from the governor and captain-general, Don Sebastian Hurtado de
Corcuera, to the effect that he was not to allow him to enter this
city, etc., said that in consideration of what had been recounted by
the investigation of this cause, the said alferez was not guilty in
regard to the said entrance. On the contrary, he had done everything
in accordance with his obligation to keep the said order. The auditor
said that he declared--and he did so declare--the said alferez to be
free and acquitted from the said charge; and said that he had done
what his duty demanded in the fulfilment of his order, as a faithful
soldier. By this act so did he enact, and he signed the same.


Licentiate Manuel Suarez de Olivera

Before me:
Juan Soriano, notary-public.

Remission in testimony of truth.
Juan Soriano, notary-public.

Fees gratis.


[An attestation of the authenticity of all matters that pass before
Juan Soriano, dated November 29, 1635, [15] and signed by three
notaries, follows.]

Sire:

Justice in this country was in the worst [possible] condition, because
no one looked to your Majesty for it, and some of your vassals were
committing outrages on others without fear of God or respect for your
Majesty's officials. There was great license and looseness of life,
in both men and women. That has been corrected by exiling some of the
men, and arresting others; and by rebuking and threatening the women
of quality, and sheltering others of less standing, in the seminary
of Santa Potenciana, until they are sought in marriage from that
house. I have done that with despatch, considering only the service
of God and of your Majesty. By that means many of the laymen have been
restrained, as well as many of the ecclesiastical estate and regulars,
who likewise have caused scandal in this direction. Two men have been
punished by hanging--one for having stolen the monstrance of the most
holy sacrament; and the other for the murder of a slave girl whom he
had owned, and whom the archbishop had caused to be sold because he
was living with her in illicit relations. In order that he might not be
deprived of her, he declared that he would marry her, although he had
said the year before that he had been married in Nueva Espana. The
slave girl said that she preferred to belong to another than to
be his wife. The slave girl going carelessly behind her mistress's
carriage, that man, deliberately and very securely, approached her
by stealth; and, embracing her from behind, he stabbed and killed
her treacherously. He took refuge in the convent of St. Augustine,
where neither the master-of-camp nor the sargento-mayor could find
him. But a few days after that, when the affair had died down somewhat,
because of the reward offered to my adjutant of the camp, the latter
found him and took him from the convent. I referred the cause to the
general of artillery, as the man was his subordinate, so that he might
try it in the first instance. The general condemned him to death. He
appealed to his commander-in-chief; but the auditor-general returned
the cause, saying that it had no appeal, as he was convinced of the
man's treachery and perfidy. Thereupon the general of artillery set
about the execution of the sentence of death. The archbishop of this
church excommunicated the general of artillery; and his provisor,
one Don Pedro de Monrroy, a restless man, and a friend of revolution,
sent twice to excommunicate me. But I gave them no opportunity to
notify me at all. They declared interdicts and the cessation of divine
services. The sentence was executed, and the dead man was returned to
the door of the church. I wrote to the archbishop with all courtesy,
entreating him to be pleased to have the churches opened and not
to leave this community without mass and consolation on a day such
as the nativity of our Lady; and that, as justice was already done,
there was nothing else to do. The archbishop called a meeting of the
religious of all the orders. They thinking in this way to avenge
themselves for insults that they imagined they had received--the
fathers of St. Dominic because I did not allow them to place benches
in the principal chapel of their church when the royal Audiencia was
present, for other persons, and on matters touching the communal funds
[of the Sangleys]; those of St. Francis, because of the hospitals; and
those of St. Augustine, because of what I had already written--carried
the torch into that meeting, making a political argument from the
fact that the archbishop and I were at swords' points. Accordingly,
they were of the opinion that the censures should be raised under no
circumstances, and they talked very unbecomingly of my person. Only
the fathers of the Society defended the royal jurisdiction, being
followed by one of the Franciscans. They showed clearly that the
execution that had been performed was a good thing, as the murder had
clearly been a treacherous one. Therefore the other religious gave
them cause for merit by uttering insults toward them; and from that
instant took so great an aversion to them that it was the beginning
of the disturbances that happened afterward. I went twice and thrice
to request the archbishop to raise the interdict and the cessation
of mass, but he was so far from doing it that he even refused to
answer my letters. So I left him; but afterward, for certain reasons
or at the request of others, he raised the censures and interdict,
and absolved the general of artillery _ad cautelam_--for the latter
did not consider himself as excommunicated, nor did learned men even
consider him as such. That was very evident; for, having appealed to
the bishop of Camarines, the sentence was in his favor, and he was
absolved from the pecuniary fines imposed by the archbishop.

Thereupon that tempest was quieted. The principal instigator of it
had been the provisor, Don Pedro de Monrroy, and its fomentors were
the religious of St. Dominic, St. Francis, and St. Augustine. I,
recognizing the naturally turbulent spirit of the said provisor,
thought that we would be involved in other storms soon, unless
something were done to prevent it, and some scheme found so that he
might not be provisor. For that purpose, I wrote the archbishop to
observe a decree of your Majesty in which you order, in the time of
Don Juan Nino de Tabora, that provisors be lettered, and that, since
this man was not so, the office be given to another who was, thereby
obeying your Majesty's orders. He did not answer me, but called a
meeting of the religious of the three orders. All decided not to remove
the provisor, and, in good Romance, not to obey the royal decree, but
to oppose it--as they said, even to the death, if necessary. In order
that your Majesty may see for whom the archbishop and religious made
so great a pledge, Don Pedro de Monrroy is a secular priest, who does
not possess, as your Majesty orders, the education that provisors must
necessarily have (since he possesses no degree in any faculty); still
more, it is apparent to this whole community that his house is a public
gaming-house for all this city, where the gambling is so extravagant,
and men lose their possessions so recklessly and preposterously that
I am obliged to correct it efficaciously by forbidding all persons,
under penalty of fines, from going to play in his house. He is a
secular priest who says mass throughout the year, except now and then;
and is, finally, a restless fellow and one who likes [to stir up]
revolutions. In the time of Governor Don Alonso Faxardo, he was the
cause of a great disturbance in the community, by excommunicating the
auditors. He was sentenced to exile from the kingdoms for that reason
and the temporalities were taken from him, as your Majesty will see
by the enclosed testimony of the royal decree that was despatched for
that purpose. But since justice in these islands is in the charge of
protectors, the said decree, at the request of certain persons, was
not executed. Although I might execute it, in order to cut the root of
the disturbances, I did not do so, in order to obviate difficulties
and murmurs in a community so small. Therefore, seeing that there
was no other way that was milder, I offered the said provisor the
chaplaincy-in-chief and vicariate of the island of Hermosa--as will
appear by my letter and his reply, which I enclose herewith for your
Majesty. [16] That was with the intent of getting him away from Manila,
so that he might not embroil us. But that offer which I made to the
said provisor aroused innumerable disputes. The archbishop declared
that I was the violator of the ecclesiastical immunity. He immediately
convoked a meeting of the religious, the ecclesiastical cabildo,
and other seculars. The seculars, and the bishop of Nueva Segovia,
Don Fray Diego Duarte, excused themselves--the fathers of the Society
of Jesus, in very courteous terms, also begging to be excused from
attending meetings where nothing else was discussed save opposition to
the government. The archbishop and the members of the orders were so
angry because the fathers of the Society did not attend that meeting
(not taking into consideration at all that the bishop of Nueva Segovia
and the ecclesiastical cabildo did not attend, either), that they
turned against the said fathers of the Society. The first thing done
in the said meeting was to enact an act which I enclose herewith. [17]
In it they are separated from the other orders, and the latter were
prohibited from admitting the Jesuits into their convents for feasts
or other ceremonies. The other orders were not to go to the convent of
the Society for public ceremonies or for feasts; while those fathers
could not preach in the cathedral, or in any other churches outside of
their house, throughout this archbishopric--which was equal to exiling
them from its territories. To such a height did passion--not to say
the hate of the archbishop and orders--rise against the Society of
Jesus, that one must pass by what was determined against them in the
said meeting, in which all that was done was to discuss the government
and royal jurisdiction.

The archbishop and the religious seeing that the fathers of the
Society were not disturbed--for which object the former were
striving--because of the resolution made in the said meeting, the
archbishop, twenty days later, sent a notary with a notification to
the superiors of the Society, ordering that they should not preach
outside their house, not even in the plazas and the guardhouses,
under penalty of major excommunication, _late sentencie_, and a fine
of four thousand ducados for the Holy Crusade--a thing which greatly
scandalized all this community. The fathers of the Society answered
with moderation that they would obey whatever was not contrary to the
privileges and immunities given them by the Roman pontiffs; but that,
since the tenor of this act was hostile to those rights, and manifest
injuries were being caused to the Society--first, because all of them
had been deprived of the preaching, without other fault than having
defended the royal jurisdiction, and the truth; second, in ordering
this with [penalty of] excommunication and pecuniary fines; third,
by prohibiting them from giving instruction, even in the plazas
and guardhouses--they were obliged to appoint a judge-conservator;
for although they had tried all means of peace they had succeeded in
none, or in finding any method by which peace could be secured. On
the contrary, they were notified of another act on the part of the
archbishop, on the third day after, ordering them not to instruct
certain Indians, of whom they had legitimate control by provisions of
two former prelates and of the royal patronage. From that they feared
new notifications and insults, and therefore they appointed their
judge-conservator on the second of November, of the past year 1635. He
was a dignitary of this holy church, one Don Fabian de Santillan y
Gavilanes, a qualified person of this country, and son of a treasurer
of the royal exchequer. The judge-conservator ordered the archbishop
to take back the acts made against the Society of Jesus, as they were
a manifest injury. The archbishop had recourse to the royal Audiencia
with a plea of fuerza. The acts were requested, and the fathers of the
Society went to maintain their just claims, as did those of the other
orders on the part of the archbishop. For, although what the Society
was defending was in favor of all the other orders, they did not think
of that. On the contrary, they preferred to lose two eyes, in order
as the saying is, to tear one from the Society--against whom the fear
and aversion which they cherish is remarkable, as they show by word
and deed. They do the Society ill turns whenever possible. After the
secretary had made a report of the cause, those of the Society brought
forward the arguments in favor of their side; they proved also that a
manifest injury had been done them in the decrees of the archbishop,
and that the judge-conservator was legally appointed. The religious,
who had gone on the archbishop's behalf, had nothing to say, and asked
for another day in which to state their case. The following day was
granted them. They summoned many more religious, and six of them were
heard in the archbishop's behalf. Those of the Society replied to
what the others opposed to them, but those of the opposing side did
not satisfactorily answer those of the Society. Thereupon, the royal
Audiencia declared that the judge-conservator had not employed fuerza,
and that he was legally appointed. Therefore, the latter continued
to press the archbishop with censures, in order to make him withdraw
the acts issued against the Society. The archbishop did so; but,
when the matter was in a condition to be disposed of and finished in a
few days, it was discovered that the archbishop and some of the three
said orders of St. Dominic, St. Francis, and St. Augustine, had held
a conference, and had drawn up a defamatory libel under the title
of a protest. They had included in it, according to public report,
not only those of the Society, but also the judge-conservator himself,
and the royal Audiencia, because they had passed judgment contrary to
their will. That protest or libel was authenticated by a royal notary
named Diego de Rueda, who is also a familiar of the Holy Office. The
judge-conservator arrested him, and with the aid that he requested,
the commissary of the Holy Office--who here is a Dominican father,
named Fray Francisco de Herrera--went to ask the said judge-conservator
for his familiar, the said notary. The judge-conservator answered that
he had already taken his deposition, and had no further need of him;
but that they should demand him from me, for he had been arrested by my
order. I answered that he had been delinquent in the exercise of his
duty, for having authenticated, as royal notary, a defamatory libel;
and that the punishment therefor pertained to the royal jurisdiction.

The father commissary sent two young and impudent friars to me, to
notify me of the act which I enclose herewith for your Majesty, and
laid his orders on me as imperiously as if he were the supreme tribunal
of the Inquisition. I, on the contrary, before the completion of the
notification, took the act from the hands of his agent with mildness,
and sent him to the port of Cavite, charging his superior there to
keep him in that place and treat him well. This I did purposely,
because it is not proper for a youthful friar to talk with so great
freedom to the representative of your Majesty--especially in a cause
which is so peculiar to the royal jurisdiction as is this offense,
which concerns the office of a notary.

On that account, the fathers of St. Domingo took occasion to utter
blasphemies against me. They declared that I was excommunicated
for hindering the service of the Inquisition; that I was deposed,
that I was not governor; that I could not act as governor; that
the senior auditor was to assume the government immediately; that
he was to imprison me and lock me up in a fort. In confirmation of
what they were saying throughout the city, they brought a friar from
Cavite, named Fray Francisco Pinelo, whom, being bold, eloquent,
and satirical in the pulpit (as is well known in this community),
they caused to preach the second Sunday in Advent. He read a bull
in the pulpit, which was said to be by Pius Fifth, and which was in
Romance. Therein the pontiff orders that he who should prevent the
exercise of the Holy Office should be infamous and incapacitated
from office, etc. That he declared in such a tone and manner that
it was clearly seen that it was all for the governor, and that he
was censuring me as infamous. In order that your Majesty may see the
license of the friars in this country, and how they treat those who
exercise this office--and this under protection of the Inquisition,
hiding under the authority of so holy a tribunal, to avenge their
passions in things which, truly, neither belong to the Inquisition
nor are at all connected with it--in that same sermon, innumerable
other things and satires were uttered against me and against the
royal Audiencia for having declared, contrary to the pleasure of the
friars, that the judge-conservator was not employing fuerza against
the fathers of the Society, censuring them as heretics; and against
the judge-conservator himself, calling him a canon of London. They
have made use of this style of preaching in many sermons throughout
this time. The Recollect fathers of St. Augustine imitated him, and
I am told that this is no new thing; for whatever the governors do
that is displeasing to them they immediately take into the pulpits,
thus making the pulpit the professorship of vengeance, while it
is the seat of Christ for the preaching of His holy word. The
disorder that has always existed in this regard is very great, and
the matter demands an efficacious remedy. What occurs to me is, for
your Majesty to send a decree to the governor, ordering that, when the
said orders preach in this manner, he shall advise their provincial,
so that the latter may deprive them of the privilege of preaching,
and exile them from Manila to whatever place shall be deemed best;
and that, if the provincial shall not do so, then your Majesty should
immediately take away the temporalities from all of such order,
and should order the royal officials not to pay them anything, not
even the stipends for the instruction. For that nothing more should
be necessary than for the governor to order it. That decree should
be sent, but with restrictions, so that it may be a check on them;
for your Majesty has sent many decrees to the provincials, charging
them not to preach whatever they please against the governors, but
they do not obey them. Your Majesty will see the importance of this
matter, because those friars stir up and disquiet the country by
these actions and sermons, and arouse hatred toward the governors.

The fathers of St. Dominic left no stone unturned. They drew up a
paper, in which they spoke very discourteously of my person; and
with it they presented a petition to the dean of this cathedral
church--who, inasmuch as the archbishop had been excommunicated by
the judge-conservator, was acting as provisor and vicar-general
in it--asking him to declare and publish me in the lists as
excommunicated. The dean, who is a prudent and aged man, was very
far from doing so. Of a truth, Sire, I cannot fail to represent to
your Majesty, in regard to this point, how great is the resulting
inconvenience that any ordinary at all can declare your Majesty's
governors and viceroys excommunicated. And that would be a great
embarrassment and cause for disturbance for a community; for, if the
governor were declared excommunicated, the discontented would take the
opportunity to release themselves from his obedience, and to excite
a revolt against their legitimate king and lord. There is not lacking
one who says that the bishops and ordinaries cannot do this, since the
viceroys and governors enjoy the royal privileges, and that no other
than the pope himself can excommunicate kings. If this is so, will
your Majesty be pleased to declare it, for such a declaration would
be very advisable; or order what should be done in this particular.

Among these things there occurred another very regrettable
incident. Don Pedro de Monroy, who was now no longer provisor,
left the city; and fearing that, if he returned hither, he would
embroil the matter more, as was his custom, I gave orders at the
gates of the city that, if he attempted to enter it, he was not
to be allowed to do so. But on the twenty-first of last November,
the said Don Pedro de Monroy, clad as a Franciscan friar, in the
company of two other Franciscan friars, attempted to enter by a gate
near the convent of Santo Domingo. A number of religious came out
of the convent to receive him. He who was stationed at the gate as
commander recognized him, seized him, and cried out to his soldiers to
take their weapons and prevent his entrance. But there were so many
Dominican friars who attacked the soldiers, and defended Don Pedro
with their fists, that the soldiers could not use their weapons or
prevent the entrance. Thus, by forcing their way into the guardhouse,
the friars, brought him into the city. I felt the resentment in
this matter that was natural, and I ordered the corporal and the
soldiers to be arrested. Being about to punish them for not having
obeyed their orders, they exculpated themselves very thoroughly in
the investigation made by the auditor-general, but the violence of
the religious gave the soldiers no opportunity to do more. Consider,
your Majesty, what liberties these are to be taken from religious;
and who can endure them? I wrote to their vicar-provincial, but he
answered coolly that his religious had not done any such thing, as
they are obedient, and that he had information to the contrary. The
father vicar-provincial adds that Don Pedro [de] Monrroy entered
the city in response to the summons of the Inquisition. This word
"Inquisition" is the motto and cry of the fathers of the Order of
St. Dominic in these islands, for whatever they wish to do. Your
Majesty will have seen from the aforesaid what ill use they make of
the authority of the Inquisition--so much so, that I assert that
with it they disturb and excite the community, which would not be
safe if your Majesty did not have so many soldiers here. Therefore,
since it is advisable to preserve peace here, will your Majesty be
pleased to order the supreme tribunal of the Inquisition to order
the tribunal of Mexico to appoint, as commissaries, not friars but
seculars, since there are so many seculars who are able to act in
that capacity, and since it is an office that properly belongs to the
ecclesiastical estate. Affairs will then run more smoothly, and there
will be more harmony; and I do not expect peace until that be done,
and until these lawless acts be checked.

The judge-conservator went on with his commission, urging the
archbishop with censures in order to make him hand over the protest
or libel which had been made; but the religious gained possession,
by force, of the will of the archbishop, and although he desired to
surrender the paper, they did not allow him to do so. He gave it to
Fray Diego Collado, of the Order of St. Dominic, who secured such
possession of that paper that afterward the archbishop himself was
unable to obtain it, notwithstanding his efforts.

All was now confusion in the community, and the friars made innumerable
evil and vile reports against the fathers of the Society (who bore
these attacks in silence), whenever they had an opportunity. They
preached innumerable satires against the same fathers of the
Society, and against the judge-conservator, saying that these were
bringing in innumerable innovations--all for the purpose of causing
a disturbance. As the preservation of peace pertains to me, I one
day summoned the superiors of the orders of St. Dominic, St. Francis,
St. Augustine, and of the Recollects, and the father commissary of the
Holy Office, in your Majesty's name, and by a duly-executed decree of
the royal Audiencia. The father commissary refused to come, and sent
no excuse. The superiors were told that they were to keep their friars
still, so that they might not go about disquieting the community. In
regard to those who were most to blame in this--namely, Fray Francisco
de Paula and Fray Sebastian de Oquendo of the Order of St. Dominic,
and Fray Alonso de Carvajal and Fray Alonso de Ochoa, of the Order of
St. Augustine--their superiors were ordered, in your Majesty's name,
to cause them to leave the city for some time. But they would by no
means obey, for at this time the friars do not recognize your Majesty;
and, in order to avoid other troubles, I had to overlook this, and
let things go.

At that time I was attending to the despatch to Maluco of the galleons
which were to go with the reenforcements. The religious of St. Dominic
even allured a pilot whom I had honored and favored, and whom I had
chosen to go in the almiranta, so that he should desert with some
of them by way of India. I learned of it, and was obliged to arrest
him, and to leave orders at the gates not to allow either of the two
religious of the Order of St. Dominic, namely, Fray Francisco Pinello
and Fray Diego Collado, who were the two implicated in this flight,
to leave the city. Therefore, because of this order, they began to
assert that I was incurring innumerable excommunications. They do not
stop to consider that I have this city and these islands in charge,
and that, accordingly, I must conserve them, and look out for them,
and issue the advisable military orders that I esteem necessary; and
that I could not prevent that damage except by not permitting those
religious to leave the walls. In another manner, some other religious
incited a goodly number of sailors, who, having received their pay to
go to Maluco, fled in a boat called "champan," and laid their course
toward India. With them was a secular named Don Francisco Montero,
who had been expelled from the religious estate--a restless man,
who had been deprived some few months before of the chaplaincy of
the seminary of Santa Potenciana, as he was not suitable for that
post and served it ill. There was also a Recollect Franciscan friar,
named Fray Nicolas de Tolentino, who was angered because his order had
not elected him provincial, as he wished; and there was also a friar
of St. Dominic. They are said to be about to go to Espana, with the
intention of complaining of me to the supreme Inquisition. But the
road followed is apt to take them into the hands of the Dutch, or to
shipwreck. But in case any such complaint should be carried to Espana,
I am informing your Majesty of everything. I also do so that your
Majesty may see to what lengths these friars go, and how necessary it
is to check them, so that they may not cause similar desertions--which
appear outrages, and which are so, to the disservice of your Majesty,
as it takes from us the men who should attend to the royal service
in the royal fleet.

While affairs were in this condition, and the archbishop refused
to give me the protest or libel which was asked from him, and the
judge-conservator would not desist from requesting it, as I judged
that it was of service to our Lord and to your Majesty for me to
interpose my authority and settle affairs, I called a meeting of
the four best lawyers in Manila, among whom was the fiscal of this
royal Audiencia. To that meeting I summoned the father provincial and
father rector of the Society, and the judge-conservator himself. The
lawyers read the opinions, over which they had studied for several
days. All agreed that the judge-conservator could remove a suspension
that he had imposed on the archbishop as a means of getting the
said protest or libel from him; as they said that such suspension
was condemnatory. [18] For the same reason they said that he could
moderate or completely abrogate the pecuniary fines. The fathers
of the Society, although they were the ones offended, charitably
took the archbishop's part, and favored the opinion of the lawyers,
and desired that the archbishop come safely out of the affair. The
judge-conservator alone was somewhat harsh, and appeared to agree to
nothing of this. But I asked, entreated, and persuaded him, so that he
had to agree to it and absolve the archbishop from everything. Thus
was the affair completely ended, on January twenty-eight. I went
in my coach and took the archbishop to his cathedral. A huge crowd
of people assembled there, and there was much rejoicing in the
community because of the conclusion of those suits, and because it
is believed that your Majesty will consider it well done and to your
royal service. However, I am ever on the watch for new disturbances,
as the archbishop is naturally inclined to such. Sire, I do not know
that the prelates who are clamoring at Madrid are the ones needed here
in these islands. Not even for this archbishopric is it advisable
that the archbishop be a religious; but he should be some learned
secular of exemplary life--one of the many whom your Majesty has in
your kingdoms. And I say the same also even for the other bishopries,
in so far as that might be possible. For the harmony that should reign
in these islands, it is of the highest importance that the prelates
be seculars instead of friars; for these latter side with the others
and throw everything into confusion, and oppose the governor to the
best of their ability. With secular prelates, things will go better,
and great harmony will reign. I have reported these litigations so
minutely that your Majesty may know the exact truth--if any of the
parties should write or go there, and try to deviate from the truth
in their relation. May our Lord preserve your Majesty's royal person,
as is necessary to Christendom. Manila, the last of June, 1636. Sire,
your vassal kisses your Majesty's feet.


Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


[The present document is accompanied by the following documents:]

[The act enacted against the Society of Jesus by the archbishop
and orders on October 9, 1635, _q.v._ Vol. XXV, pp. 216-219 (and
the notarial attestations, _ante_, pp. 72, 73); the letter from the
governor to Pedro de Monroy, of October 8, 1635, _q.v.,_ Vol. XXV,
pp. 207-208; the reply of the provisor, _q.v., ut supra_, pp. 209-210;
the letter from the archbishop to the governor, October 9, 1635,
_q.v., ut supra_, p. 221; the governor's reply to the archbishop,
_q.v., ut supra_, pp. 221-223 (followed here by notarial attestation
of the present copy, made at Cavite, June 26, 1636).]

Don Felipe, by the grace of God, king of Castilla, Leon, Aragon, the
two Cicilias, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarra, Granada, Toledo, Valencia,
Galicia, Mallorca, Sevilla, Cerdena, Cordoba, Corcega, Murcia, Jaen,
the Algarbes, Algeciras, Gibraltar, the Canarias Islands, the East
and West Indias, the islands and mainland of the Ocean Sea; archduke
of Austria: duke of Borgona, Bramonte, and Milan; count of Axpurg,
Flandes, Tirol, Barcelona, Vizcaya, and Molina, etc.: Inasmuch as
Don Pedro de Monrroy proceeded, when provisor of the archbishopric
of Manila, against Licentiate Don Francisco de Saavedra Valderrama,
auditor of my royal Audiencia and Chancilleria established in the city
of Manila, of my Filipinas Islands, on the ground that he had taken the
notary, De Vega [_i.e._, Diego?] Soto from the church, where he had
taken refuge because of the criminal suit that was being prosecuted
against him for the falsehoods and theft with which he is charged in
regard to the silver lacking in the wreck of the ship "Sant Nicolas
de Tolentino" (he being the notary of that ship), it was ordered
that he be restored to the church under penalty of certain fines and
censures. Notwithstanding that he appealed in due time and form, and
threatened the royal aid against fuerza, and Licentiate Marcos Zapata
de Galvez, my fiscal in the said Audiencia (who took part in the cause
because of what pertains to my royal jurisdiction), did the same,
the person aforesaid [_i.e._, Pedro de Monroy] continued to prosecute
the said suit, with greater penalties and censures. Therefore, the
said my fiscal presented himself in the said my Audiencia in the
said appeal from fuerza. Having examined the acts in the matter, it
was decreed by an act, on the seventh of the present month and year
of the date of this my letter, that the said provisor was declared
to have employed fuerza, and he was ordered to recall and repeal his
acts; and the aforesaid [provisor] must freely allow the said appeals
before the superior judge, who should annul all that had been done and
enacted in prejudice of those appeals. He was to raise and remove the
censures and interdicts which had been laid, and absolve those who had
been excommunicated. Although he ought, in accordance with law, to obey
and observe the tenor of the aforesaid decree, not only did he not do
so, but on the contrary, adding fuerza to fuerza, he excommunicated
Auditor Don Alvaro de Mesa y Lugo, auditor of the said my Audiencia,
with new fines and censures. Therefore, at the petition of the said
my fiscal, my first and second letters were issued and despatched by
the said my Audiencia as royal decrees, ordering that the tenor of the
said act should be observed and kept, under penalty of a fine of two
thousand Castilian ducados and deprivation of the temporalities, and
of being exiled from my kingdoms. Although he was notified, he always
remained rebellious and obstinate against fulfilling it. Therefore,
it was declared by a third letter and royal decree, which was issued
and despatched on the eighth of the said month and year, that he
had incurred the said fine of the two thousand Castilian ducados,
exile from my kingdoms, deprivation from all the temporalities that he
possesses and enjoys, and exclusion from them. As the said Don Pedro
de Monrroy has absented and hidden himself, its execution has not been
entirely carried out in regard to expelling him from the country. It
is advisable to make the necessary efforts, both that the aforesaid
decree may be made public in the said city, and that what has been
enacted may be executed. Therefore, the matter having been examined
by the president and auditors in the said my royal Audiencia, it was
resolved that I ought to order this my letter and royal decree to
be issued. By it I order and command that it be proclaimed publicly
in the city of Manila, in its public places, that all its citizens,
residents, and inhabitants shall consider the said Don Pedro de
Monrroy as exiled from my kingdoms; and, as such, that they treat
him both in regard to any offices or dignities in which he may be
serving, and in all other things regulated by law, as a rebel to my
royal mandates; and they shall not receive or conceal him in their
houses, or in any other place, nor shall they aid or protect him,
so that he may be hidden--under penalty of a fine of two thousand
Castilian ducados for my royal-exchequer, to which I shall consider
as immediately condemned whomsoever shall do the contrary. Further,
they shall be proceeded against by the whole rigor of the law, as
against receivers and concealers of persons exiled from my kingdoms,
and declared as such. I request and charge the superiors of the
orders of this city, and outside the city, and other ecclesiastical
person not to admit him into the city under any consideration, with
warning that I shall consider myself disserved if such be done, and
if more can be done in law, it is ordered to be provided as the most
advisable remedy, inasmuch as it is thus fitting for my service, and
my authority, protection, defense, and the conservation of my royal
jurisdiction. Given at Manila, September twenty-five, one thousand
six hundred and twenty-three.


Don Alonso Faxardo de Tenza
Doctor Don Alvaro de Mesa y Lugo
Licentiate Don Juan de Saavedra Valderrama


I, Pedro Munoz de Herrera, who exercise the office of notary of the
assembly of the royal Audiencia and Chancilleria of these Filipinas
Islands, caused this to be written by order of the king our sovereign,
by the resolution of the president and auditors of that body.


Don Juan Sarmiento
Chancellor of Don Juan Sarmiento [19]


This copy is collated with the original royal decree, which is in
the possession of Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, governor and
captain-general of these Philipinas Islands. By order of his Lordship,
I drew this copy at Manila, October seventeen, one thousand six hundred
and thirty-five. Witnesses, Simon Delgado and the accountant, Juan
Bautista de Zubiaga. In testimony of truth, I sealed and signed it.


Andres Martin de Arroyo,
notary of the royal crown.


We, the undersigned notaries of the king our sovereign, attest that
Andres Martin del Arroyo, by whom this copy appears to be sealed and
signed, is such royal notary as he has called himself therein. To
the writings and acts that have passed, and pass, before him, entire
credit has been and is given, in and out of court. So that this may
appear, we affix our signatures. Given at Manila, June eighteen,
one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Augustin de Valenzuela, notary-public.
Francisco de Rueda, royal notary.
Sebastian Damas, notary of the assembly.


[The act of the commissary of the Inquisition, dated November 26, 1635,
presented to the governor and concerning the libelous protest issued
by the archbishop and religious (_q.v._, Vol. XXV, pp. 243-244); and
the records of the trial and acquittal of Francisco de Rivera _q.v.,
ante_, pp. 73-86, taken in part from the present document) follow.]

_Act, and head of the process for Captain Juan Dominguez, the
pilot._ In the port of Cavite, December twenty-two, one thousand
six hundred and thirty-five, General Don Andres Pacheco de Tholedo,
lieutenant-governor and captain-general, castellan and chief justice
in this said fort for his Majesty, declared that inasmuch as it has
come to his notice that Captain Juan Dominguez, who is captain of
a company of marine infantry and pilot-in-chief of these islands,
has attempted to absent himself from them, and to go in a champan to
the kingdoms of Castilla by way of Yndia, without permission of the
governor, of all which the said judge has been advised by certain
papers without signature that were given to him, and by other
circumstantial evidence that he has had: In order that the said
crime may be punished, in accordance with the military ordinances,
he ordered that an official investigation be made by the department
of royal justice, according to military usage and procedure, and that
the witnesses be examined in accordance with the tenor of this act and
head of the process. Thus did he enact, and he affixed his signature.


Don Andres Pacheco de Tholedo

Before me:
Agustin de Balencuela, notary-public.


_Testimony._ In the port of Cavite, December twenty-two, one thousand
six-hundred and thirty-five, the said judge summoned before him,
for the said investigation, the chief gunner, Daniel Alvarez, an
inhabitant of this said port. The oath was taken from him in due form
of law, before God our Lord and with the sign of the cross, under which
obligation he promised to tell the truth. Being questioned according
to the tenor of the act and the head of the process, of this other
part, this witness declared that he knows Captain Juan Dominguez, and
that what he knows and what occurred is as follows: About twenty days
or so ago, Bartolome Martin, an artilleryman, and both a countryman
and a friend of this witness, said that Captain Juan Dominguez had
communicated with him, and asked him whether he would like to go to
Espana by way of Yndia; and, if so, that he would take him also; for
he, together with ten or twelve others who were sailors, was going
to take a friar of St. Dominic to Yndia. The latter was going to take
papers and despatches from the archbishop and the orders in the city
of Manila; and they were giving the said Juan Dominguez four thousand
pesos for this enterprise. The said Bartolome Martin replied to him:
"Captain Juan Dominguez, I am equipped to go to Terrenate, to serve
in my post as artilleryman under General Don Guillermo Somante. On my
return from the voyage, I think that I shall go to Espana, the same
way by which I came. Therefore, I do not care to go." This is what
this witness knows, and what he has heard. It is the truth, under
obligation of the oath that he has taken, by which he affirmed and
ratified it. He declared that he was competent to act as a witness,
and that he is forty years old. He affixed his signature, and the
said judge signed it.


Daniel Alvarez

[A rubric, apparently that of the said judge, is at the foot.]

Before me:
Agustin de Valencuela, notary-public.


Then the said judge immediately summoned Bartolome Martin, an
artilleryman, to appear before him for the said investigation, on the
said day, month, and year. From him was taken an oath in due form of
law before God and with the sign of the cross, under which obligation
he promised to tell the truth. Being questioned in accordance with
the said act and head of the process, this witness declared that he
knows Captain Juan Dominguez; and that about twenty days or so ago,
he called to this witness and told him to come to see him, as he had
some business to talk over with him. Thereupon this witness went to
his house that night, and found him there with Christobal Romero and
other persons. This witness waited until they had gone, and then asked
the said captain what he wished from him. He replied that he had made
arrangements with the fathers of St. Domingo and some other persons
(whose names he did not declare) to go in a champan from here to
Malaca, and from Malaca to Goa, in order to take some letters from
the archbishop and orders of the city of Manila to Espana, written
against the governor and captain-general of these islands about
the affairs of the judge-conservator. He was to take two friars of
St. Domingo in the said champan, who were giving him more than four
thousand pesos for that enterprise. He asked the witness whether he
did not wish to leave so wretched a country, since the governor was
acting so harshly toward the men of his calling, whose wages he had
cut down. This witness answered that he did not wish to go with him;
and that he was not a deserter, nor in debt, nor was there anything
else that should lead him to absent himself. He said that he was now
about to go to Terrenate, and that opportunity would not be lacking
for him to go to Espana on his return; and then he would not have
to go secretly and at such a risk, which might cost him dear. And he
went to recount the occurrence, just as it had happened, to the chief
gunner Daniel Alvarez (who cites him in his deposition), as they are
friends. This is what occurred and is the truth, on the oath that
he has taken, on which he affirmed and ratified it. He said that he
was competent to act as a witness, and that he is thirty-one years
old. He affixed his signature, and the said judge signed it.


Bartolome Martin

[The rubric of the said judge appears at the foot.]

Before me:
Agustin de Valencuela, notary-public.


Then immediately on the said day, month, and year, the said
judge summoned Jose Martin de Barcelona before him for the said
investigation. An oath was received from him in due form of law, before
God our Lord and with the sign of the cross, under which obligation
he promised to tell the truth. Being questioned in accordance with the
tenor of the said act, he declared that he knows the said captain Juan
Dominguez; and although it is true that this witness stated that the
said captain Juan Dominguez was not to go to Terrenate, he did not
say that because he thought that he was going to Yndia, but because
it was reported that the royal officials were going to arrest him for
a sum of pesos which he owes to the royal treasury. He understands or
knows nothing else than what he has declared, and that is the truth,
on his oath, on which he affirmed and ratified his statements. He
declared that he is competent to act as a witness, and that he is
forty-four years old. He affixed his signature to the same, and the
said judge signed it.


Jose Martin de Barcelona

[A rubric is seen at the bottom, which is that generally used by the
said judge.]

Before me:
Agustin de Valencuela, notary-public.


Thereupon, immediately on the said day, month, and year, the said
judge summoned Cosme Chacon, an artilleryman, before him for the said
investigation. An oath was taken from him in due form of law, before
God our Lord and with the sign of the cross, under which obligation he
promised to tell the truth. Being questioned according to the tenor
of the said act and the head of the process, he declared that what
he knows is, that it was said publicly and openly in that port, four
or five days ago, or thereabout, that certain persons of the port had
told the said judge that Captain Juan Dominguez was trying to absent
himself and go to Espana by way of Yndia, for which they had given the
judge a letter. This witness has spoken about this same matter, and
has no further information than what he has given. He was asked by the
said judge whether, some four or five days ago, when the chief gunner
of the fort at this port arrested him because he would not attend
to the duties of his post, the witness said that the chief gunner's
command over him would soon end. He declared that the words contained
in the above question are true, but that his meaning in saying them
was that his post of artilleryman would soon be exchanged for that
of soldier (which is the employment that this witness professes),
and that he made the aforesaid remark with no other meaning. This is
his answer, and he declared that it is entirely true, on his oath,
by which he affirmed and ratified his statement. He declared that he
is competent to act as a witness; that he is twenty-seven years old;
and that he does not know how to sign the above. The said judge signed
it. [At the foot appears the rubric of the judge.]

Agustin de Valencuela, notary-public.

Collated with the original, which is in the archives of my office, and
I refer to it. At the order of General Don Andres Pacheco de Toledo,
lieutenant-governor and captain-general, castellan, commandant and
justice of this port, I give the present in Cavite, April twenty-five,
one thousand six hundred and thirty-six. Witnesses, Agustin de
Carranca, Christobal de Molina, and Captain Juan Despinosa. In
testimony of the truth, I seal it.

Agustin de Valencuela, notary-public.




_Letter written by Bartolome Dominguez to Juan Romero_

Dear comrade:

I trust that this letter will find your Grace in the enjoyment of as
good health as I wish for myself. Mine is good, and at your Grace's
service. In regard to my return, your Grace must know that, when I
parted from your Grace in Manila, I did not have any such thought;
nor did I know of it until I reached Cavite, when Estacio talked with
me. Seeing myself so out of favor and my brother dead, I resolved to
return, on account of those changes. We went in a small champan--ten
men and one friar--to a distance eight leguas from Maribeles. There
we found a large champan and two religious. We all embarked, and went
to a district belonging to the fathers, to deck the champan over. We
have provisions for two years; powder and balls, muskets, and two small
pieces of bronze artillery [_esmeriles_]. They give each of us three
hundred pesos and our expenses to Espana. Esteves has your Grace's new
doublet; and your Grace can get it [from him]. Francisco Cachata owes
[me] three pesos and Bartolo two--all to be used in saying masses for
my brother. Juan de Palacios owes me four pesos, which he may spend in
his mess; and my silver spoon and mirror. Will your Grace get them? and
they are to be used in saying masses for my brother. Will your Grace
tell him that if he shall bring any cloth, he must do his best for
his soul. The three mantas of Pedro Castaneda must be paid for,
according to what is right. Tell Senora Juana that I beg her pardon
for not having gone to say goodbye to her uncle and aunt, and give
her my regards. And will your Grace tell Captain Juan Dominguez, when
he comes from Terrenate, that I send him my regards. Now I shall say
nothing further except that may God preserve your Grace for many years,
and take you to your home; and, if I reach there first, I shall say
that you are well. Given on this new year's. From your Grace's comrade,

Bartolome Dominguez

The address of this letter reads: "To my comrade, Juan Romero (may
our Lord preserve him!) at the house of Juana Munoz, next to the
Society, Cavite."

Collated with the copy of the report and letter which are in possession
of Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera y Mendoca. At the order of his
Lordship I drew this copy, which is a true and faithful copy. Witnesses
at its copying, correction, and collation were the accountant Juan
Bautista de Cubiaga, Agustin de Reguen, and Juan de Palma, who were
present. In testimony of truth, I sealed and signed it.

Andres Martin de Arroyo, royal notary.

[The notarial attestation of the validity of documents drawn up before
the above notary, dated Manila, May 8, 1636, and signed by Agustin
de Valencuela, Alfonso Baeza del Rio, and Francisco de la Torre,
follows.] [20]

[_In the margin_: "That during the eleven months while he has been in
that government he has done no other thing than to establish the royal
jurisdiction and patronage, and subdue the religious to [understand]
that his Majesty is their natural seignior and the seignior of those
islands; and he relates the mischievous proceedings of the religious
of St. Francis, St. Augustine, and St. Dominic."]

Sire:

One would believe that your Majesty (may God preserve you) has sent
me not to govern your Filipinas Islands, but to conquer them from
the religious of St. Dominic, St. Francis, and St. Augustine; for
in the eleven months since my arrival here, I have had no other
thing to do than to establish the jurisdiction of your Majesty
and your royal patronage, and to subdue the said religious to the
understanding that your Majesty alone is their natural seignior,
as well as the seignior of the said islands. And hitherto they have
succeeded in and obtained whatever they desired, either because they
have governed the governors, or the governor through fear of their
so insolent preaching, or on account of their demands and threats,
has never refused them anything. And if, in the course of the year,
they have resorted to these measures at the time of the despatch of the
galleons to Nueva Espana, the governors have granted their petitions,
just or unjust--either that the religious might write well of their
government, or so that they might not write ill of it. I am convinced
that they will always write ill of me, because I am ever striving to
regulate the service of God and that of your Majesty. As that is a
labor in which both services may be free from self-interest and worldly
ends, I shall not resent that they write to your Majesty whatever they
like; for, since you are so just and so Catholic a sovereign, I cannot
believe or expect that you will condemn me without a hearing. Therefore
I petition your Majesty to be pleased to have your secretaries send
a copy of my letters to your vassals, both regular ecclesiastics and
seculars, of what I shall write concerning them; for they will find
therein no deceit or falsehood (and it is impossible to deceive God
and one's natural sovereign). Also they will find neither hate, love,
nor passion, but only kind desires for correcting the faults of my
neighbors, and those of the subjects of your Majesty whom you have
given to me by your favor, so that I might maintain peace and justice
among them, and keep them in the fear of God and that of your royal
person. I also petition your Majesty to be pleased to have the said
secretaries send me the letters, or copies of the letters, that they
shall write, so that we may, on both sides, verify the truth here,
and, having verified it, advise your Majesty.

[_In the margin_: "That the Order of St. Dominic generally opposes
the government, while that of St. Francis has given great scandal to
those islands, by the provincial chapter that was held."]

The Order of St. Dominic has grown old in opposing the government for
many years. The Order of St. Francis has opposed it from the time of
the provincial chapter held by a commissary, Fray Juan de Gabiria,
an Observantine, in which he deprived the discalced fathers of all
the definitorships, elected Observantine provincial and guardians,
and removed the discalced provincial; and against the will of
your Majesty and your royal decrees tried to convert the discalced
fathers into Observantines, under the protection of Don Juan Cereco
Salamanca. Because he removed a guardian of Manila, Fray Jose Forte,
for causes which the ex-provincial ought to have discovered, this
order caused the greatest scandal in the community that has been seen
here. As it did not happen in my time, I am only obliged to inform
your Majesty of it, but not of the disorders committed. [_Decreed in
the margin_: "In the Council, December 12, 1637. That the secretary
request the commissary-general of the Indias to report what happened
in this matter. Let examination be made to discover whether there
are any papers or letters that concern this matter."]

[_In the margin_: "The provincials of St. Francis, past and present,
are coming to relate what they have done."]

I have decreed that the provincials, past and present, and the
commissary himself, go to report to your Majesty and to their superiors
what they have done; and your Majesty will there give orders as to
which they must be--discalced, as hitherto, or Observantines. [_Decreed
in the margin_: "See above. If these religious come, have this
section brought."]

[_In the margin_: "That the Order of St. Augustine is in need of
reform; he mentions the causes for it."]

The Order of St. Augustine--of the Recollects, in particular (although
they came here, Sire, to reform the others), it is seen and understood,
have as great need of reformation as the first--refused to obey his
Holiness or your Majesty's decrees. In regard to the alternation [21]
that the creoles asked, various remarks are made on this matter, and
the blame is cast on Don Juan Cereco de Salamanca. This order recognize
the injury and injustice that they are doing to the creoles, and they
know that I am not ignorant of any defects and imperfections, however
serious. They have recognized in me that I shall not distort justice
for anyone, and they have consequently composed themselves--quite
early desisting from counseling the archbishop as the others did,
and being reconciled, and returning to unite with the Order of the
Society, withdrawing from the union which they and the other orders had
formed against those fathers. Their present provincial is a discreet,
honorable, and upright man, so that the order is better regulated. The
most efficient remedy that your Majesty can adopt is, not to grant them
any more religious for eight years, or permission to them to travel;
for besides the fact that there are many of them here, and so many
do not die as are reported to your Majesty, last year there came
with your Majesty's permission sixteen or eighteen of the Order of
St. Augustine, and thus was spent by your Majesty as many thousands
of pesos. They brought still more, as many as twenty-eight--either
with the money that was left over (for your Majesty gives them
too large a sum), or with the money sent them by their order from
here. And, as they are contented with nothing, where one religious
formerly served there are now two or three; and where two served,
there are now four or five. I will tell your Majesty the troubles and
disadvantages arising from this condition of affairs: the first is,
to oppose the alcalde-mayor and your Majesty's justice in every way;
the second, to cause more instruction, so that your Majesty may spend
more in stipends, which they have obtained from the government, by
the requests and presents that they have made to my predecessors;
the third, to make greater slaves of the poor Indians by being
the merchants of their rice and cloth, taking by force from them,
at the price that they choose, whatever the Indians possess; and
fourth, when an assessment [_repartimiento_] of rice, linen, wine,
and other things is made for your Majesty's magazines, and for your
royal service, they offer opposition not only to the alcalde-mayor,
but also to the government, bewailing the poverty of the Indians--so
that the latter may have more left of which these religious can skin
and deprive them. These missionaries, Sire, do not undertake only the
teaching of the doctrines and the administration of the sacraments;
but they are attempting to rule everything. They tell the Indians,
publicly and privately, that there is no other king or pope than
themselves; and they make their fiscals give to an Indian, and even
to his wife, fifty lashes for any childish or foolish act. I shall be
satisfied if your Majesty's name has the fourth part of the sovereignty
and lordship that these fathers have among these Indians. Sometimes
they tell the alcaldes-mayor that their provincials in Manila, and
they in the missions, ought to be obeyed. The above and many other
lawless acts which I have discovered here among these orders have
made me disconsolate; and I confess to your Majesty that I would
serve you more willingly in any of your armies as a soldier than
here as governor. If your Majesty do not have the goodness to have
this effectively remedied, this colony will go to ruin, because
of the multitude of allied friars. The ecclesiastical cabildo and
the Society of Jesus recognize your Majesty as sovereign, and obey
you, and at the same time prove by all their actions their love for
your service--for all of which your Majesty can honor them and show
them favor, if you are so minded. [_Decreed in the margin_: "Let the
governor cause to be exactly observed, the alternation which does not
allow that there be more religious in any mission district than those
who shall be necessary for it according to the royal patronage. Let
the others occupy themselves in instruction and in preaching, for
which they were sent. Let no more religious be given them for the
period mentioned by the governor. If they are asked for, let a report
of this letter be made."]

[_In the margin_: "That bishops should be sent to those islands who
are secular priests, but not friars, because of the troubles that
arise from their uniting with the orders and opposing the governor;
and he asks that the presiding archbishop be sent a coadjutor, as he
is now very old and incapacitated."]

Most of the ministers of instruction think only of acquiring and
amassing money, in order thereby to solicit your Majesty in that
court to give them these bishoprics. Surely, your Majesty is not
well served thereby; and you should send a secular bishop, or at
least an archbishop, so that the religious should not unite with
him to oppose your Majesty's governors. And, if it please you, will
you send a coadjutor for Don Fray Hernando Guerrero, archbishop of
these islands, who is now so old that he is past eighty years of age,
and his hands and head shake. Leaving his lack of learning out of
the question, your Majesty can consider what the [ecclesiastical]
government will be by having peace. In order that your Majesty may
establish a thing so to your service, I will give that coadjutor two
thousand pesos annually from my own salary. If he should assume the
archbishopric during my term, I shall arrange so as to leave that
sum to him as an income, besides the four thousand pesos that the
archbishop receives--so that the two thousand may not be paid from
your Majesty's royal treasury, from your royal incomes, or from
those of your vassals. By that means the archbishopric will have
an income of more than six thousand pesos, and its incumbent can
get along excellently on that. Will your Majesty kindly send such
a coadjutor for the succor of these islands and the consolation and
protection of the clergy, from among the so many virtuous and erudite
and moral seculars in that royal court. Should such an archbishop
have a bishop _in partibus_, in order to go to confirm and to visit,
your Majesty can very well dispense with the three other bishops
of Cibu, Nueva Segovia, and Camarines, for they are in fact of but
little use and service in their bishoprics. [_Decreed in the margin_:
"Touching the matter that the archbishopric be given to a secular,
when that post falls vacant, let this section be referred to. In
regard to giving a coadjutor to the archbishop, have his letters
collected, and what other letters treat of his health, age, capacity,
and method of procedure. The secretary, Don Gabriel de Ocana y Alarcon,
shall make a secret investigation of what occurs in this matter. In
regard to the offer of the two thousand pesos which the governor
offers from his salary, no steps will be taken at present; but have
the governor notified to explain the means by which the sum that he
mentions can be obtained without detriment to the royal treasury or
to his Majesty's vassals, so that if it be a measure proper to adopt,
it may be carried out. In regard to abolishing those bishoprics, let
there be brought, for the better settlement of the matter, a report
of the data concerning their erection, their respective distances
[from Manila], and whatever else concerns this matter, and of what
shall be found in the secretary's office."]

[_In the margin_: "That the orders of St. Dominic and St. Francis
have sent more religious than those granted to them."]

The Order of St. Dominic having been granted sixteen religious by your
Majesty, at a cost of a like number of thousands of pesos, brought
twenty-six in all, at a cost of as many thousands of pesos. The Order
of St. Francis brought sixteen, although your Majesty granted them
twelve. Thus, Sire, your Majesty spent forty-eight thousand pesos
in bringing those seventy religious, and established nearly as many
rivals to your governor, in order that they might oppose him in
everything. The diocesan authorities of Camarines have given me a
memorandum, to the effect that in that bishopric alone six stipends
can be saved, and a like number of guardianias, as they are very
near one another, and two can be administered as one. The religious
do not deserve this, but, although there may be thirty Indians in one
district, and another district lies but one-half or three-quarters of
a legua away, they want another mission; and as I say, they are rarely
willing to live alone. Their prelates foster such ideas by saying that
the lax conduct of one is avoided by giving him an associate. Happy
would I count myself, Sire, if I could see myself at your Majesty's
feet, informing you of part of what takes place here, since I could
not do so entirely. [_Decreed in the margin_: "In regard to this
section and the following ones, let the governor be answered not to
consent to the erection of new missions that are not according to the
royal patronage; and let him try, with the consent of the archbishop,
to unite some with others. In those which shall be newly established,
he shall also endeavor to introduce secular clergy, if he find them
capable and sufficient. And whenever anyone shall again discuss the
question whether it is advisable to deprive the religious of the
missions and appoint seculars to them, reference shall be made to
this section."]

[_In the margin_: "That the orders can obtain religious from those
in Mexico, or creoles, without going to so great expense as to convey
them from Espana."]

It also appears that these orders can obtain religious from Mexico,
without causing so great expense to your Majesty's treasury--creoles,
or at least those who have gone thither from Espana, who are more
habituated to a hot climate, and will not enter suddenly so great a
change of climate as that of these islands; and even were there none
of this change, it would be well for them. Your Majesty ought also,
in justice, to favor the ecclesiastical estate, so that, if there are
benefices and missions, these may be given to it. For almost all such
are in the possession of the religious; and the seculars who are now
studying in the colleges, from whose number some very good candidates
graduate, have nothing to which to aspire. It is a shame that there
is nothing in which to occupy them. They do not cause any expense to
your Majesty in a journey hither, nor in their studies, and are more
easily reduced to reason; while the friar is one with his community,
and no one denies that the religious outside his convent would die as
a fish out of water. I entreat your Majesty to be pleased to believe
me that I do not inform you of all these things from hate, passion,
or ill-will; but only from my desire that your Majesty's service may be
uppermost. Your Majesty will never have a true report concerning these
islands, if your disinterested governors do not give it--for which
reason, since this country is so far away, no relief can he furnished
in matters that need it so greatly. For my part, I shall ever endeavor
to comply with the obligations under which your Majesty has placed me,
together with those which I have as a Christian, and those which I owe
to my lineage. I shall do my uttermost, and that will be something; but
if your Majesty will aid me by means of some ordinances and mandates,
there will remain nothing for me to do. May our Lord preserve your
Majesty's Catholic person, as is necessary to Christendom. Manila,
the last of June, 1636. Sire, your Majesty's vassal kisses your feet,

Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera [22]

[_Endorsed_: "Read and decreed within. December 12, 637."]

Sire:

The Order of St. Dominic and the other orders having so disturbed
me and the community with the affairs of the archbishop, Don Fray
Hernando Guerrero, as I have related to your Majesty in other letters,
Fray Diego Collado, who brought twenty-six religious of the said Order
of St. Dominic last year with your Majesty's order and permission,
presented to me certain letters from his general. He says that he
presented them in the royal Council of the Indias, who ordered that
these be returned to him, granting him the said permission to bring
the religious; although it appears that it was under the leadership
of another, the nephew of the said Fray Diego Collado, as the latter
was sick. I consulted as to the matter with the Audiencia, and with
other learned men. In accordance with their opinions (which I have
in writing), although I have no decree from your Majesty ordering me
to help him, I did aid him, at his petition, so that the provincial
of this province should obey the letters of his general. In those
letters the general orders, under penalty of major excommunication,
that the provincial should deliver the government of five houses and
one hospital of the Chinese to the said Fray Diego Collado, without
making any excuse or delay, so that he might form therewith a separate
congregation for the purpose of the propagation of the faith. [23]
Having, as I declare to your Majesty, consulted on and examined the
matter, and as this division cannot harm your Majesty or the royal
patronage, I deemed it advisable to grant him the aid in accordance
with the opinions aforesaid. Those fathers, therefore, divided into
two bodies, and the moods and restlessness in which they were keeping
the said archbishop subsided, and in fact have died away; and they
are allowing me to live and govern in peace. Until now, I have been
unable to have peace during these ten months, by whatever means I
have sought and striven. May God grant that it last, and that those
fathers content themselves with governing within their gates, and do
not endeavor to govern and manage your Majesty's governors--which
they attempted to do the second or third day after I was received
as such in these islands. One Fray Sebastian de Oquendo, a restless
and impudent friar, and extravagant in his speech, came to give me
his opinion, and to counsel me as to what persons were suitable for
alcaldes-mayor and captains of the districts where those religious
have their missions--praising some, and speaking evil of others;
and endeavoring to make me believe that what he told me was the only
thing that was advisable for your Majesty's service. He continued to
do that twice more within one week, until I asked him who had told
him that I needed his counsel and opinion to execute and carry out
your Majesty's service, which was in my charge. Thereupon, he talked
no more to me, but he has spoken evil things of the government in
the pulpit at various times--and so scandalously that it obliged the
Audiencia and its president to request his superior to cause him to
leave the city for a season, together with Fray Francisco de Paula,
another restless preacher, and a disturber of the peace and quiet and
of the minds of your Majesty's vassals. The superior refused to accede
to this request; accordingly, those fathers are always overbold and
impudent in the pulpits. Unless your Majesty have the goodness to
command that this be corrected, those of the province and those of
this new congregation will have recourse to your Majesty, in order
to lodge their complaints--those of the province declaring that your
Majesty's patronage is not being observed, and that the aid given
to Fray Diego de Collado is contrary to the royal patronage. This
is the first time that has been seen in these islands, that the
friars have defended the royal patronage, for they are through and
through opposed to the said royal patronage. If your Majesty would be
pleased to see it quite plainly, the royal patronage rules that the
provincials shall propose two or three persons as priors and guardians,
and that the government, representing your Majesty, shall appoint one
of these. By decrees sent to my predecessor, Don Juan Nino de Tabora,
in the year twenty-nine, your Majesty once more ordered that this be
ordained by your royal Council of the Indias. But, notwithstanding
what pertains to the patronage and what your Majesty orders,
the religious have refused to do this, or to obey you. They offer
certain cool excuses, and, although they see that that decree is
executed in Piru and Nueva Espana, they refuse to obey in anything
which pertains to the patronage, and which your Majesty orders by a
special decree, unless it suits them very well to obey it. And since
your Majesty has now sent an obedient governor, and one who does what
he is ordered, he is the most evil man in all the world; and they
parade him in their pulpits, attempting to ascertain and publish
what belongs to God alone alone--[asking] whether the continence
of the governor and his endeavor not to furnish a bad example, is
the virtue of chastity, or the fault of nature. These things, Sire,
are taught here in the pulpits by the Dominican friars. The guardian
of St. Francis said publicly in the pulpit of the cathedral church
(because the computer of accounts had presented an account against him)
that he would show a balance due against the king of Espana--talking
in this so discourteous manner of his natural lord, as if he were
English, French, or of any other nation; and charging your Majesty
with the fact that Fray Francisco Jimenez had gained Oran for you,
and that another Franciscan friar had quieted and pacified Nueva
Espana. From these things, he drew up results against your Majesty
in the pulpit. He said of the accountant, Juan Bautista de Cubiaga,
a Vizcayan (who is so well known that no one can be ignorant of his
birth, and of the great fidelity and disinterestedness with which
he serves your Majesty), that he was a Gascon devil, besides other
very insolent words--although the said friar is a Mallorcan or a
native of Cerdena [_i.e._, Sardinia], which one could presume to be
a more barbarous place than Espana. This is preached in the pulpits,
and is winked at; for these religious are exciting and stirring up
the community at any opportunity, and in order to avoid scandals,
the mildest course possible is being taken. These religious, Sire,
are very numerous, and must be trying to excite all these islands. They
show humility only when the hostile Indians go to sack their missions;
and then they come to ask for soldiers, and to set forth many things in
favor of the honor of God, and the service of your Majesty. For both,
with all humility I entreat your Majesty to be pleased to order these
excesses to be corrected, or to give me orders for what I am to do
in like cases.

Will your Majesty command that the question be considered whether
it will suit your Majesty to order the approval of what has been
done, or to take such action as may be most expedient for your royal
service--on account of the advantages arising from the separation of
this Order of St. Dominic into two factions, and for that reason,
their becoming subject to your Majesty's orders. I shall obey you
with my breast to the earth, as I ought to do, and as I have done for
twenty-six years past. May our Lord preserve your Majesty's Catholic
person, as is necessary to Christendom. Manila, the last of June,
1636. Sire, your vassal kisses your Majesty's feet.

Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


Sire:

Six months before my arrival here, the fathers of St. Francis had
held a chapter. It was illegal, without question. Fray Francisco de
Gabiria, an Observantine friar, came to them as visitor. He began his
commission and visit by depriving all the definitors of the province
of their offices, and appointed new definitors from the Observantine
friars and others who took the habit in this country and belong to
the Observantine faction. He continued [this course] by removing
the guardians and appointing others who belonged to his following,
until they had more than sufficient votes to hold a chapter. The
commissary-visitor took the opportunity to do all this, because the
legitimate definitors had deprived a friar, one Jose Fonte, of his
guardiania. That religious was guardian of the convent of Manila, and
a prime favorite of Don Juan Cereco, former governor _ad interim_. The
legal definitors deprived him of the guardiania. Upon the coming of
the father commissary, Fray Jose Fonte complained and requested his
guardiania, although the matter had no appeal. The said Don Juan Cereco
also lodged a complaint, because his favorite and adviser had been
deprived of his guardiania. The commissary, who saw that the occasion
was so opportune for his purposes, overrode the province and body of
definitors, and on account of the above, deprived the high officials
[of his order] of their offices. Sire, nothing is hidden from us in
this land. In this case, one might tell your Majesty many things,
but I shall relate only two. First, the father commissary offered to
the father provincial and his definitors one of the greatest insults
that have been known in your Majesty's kingdoms. For Fray Jose Fonte,
as is the general opinion of the community, is a rather free-and-easy
religious; and the reason why the father provincial deprived him
of his guardiania--although he had, as was true, the said Don Juan
Cereco so strongly on his side--was doubtless because his mode of life
and his government of the convent were such that he could under no
consideration be endured. Your Majesty can have no doubt of this, for
it is proved beyond question by the loud murmuring of the community
at the lack of devotion displayed by that religious. Therefore,
your Majesty will reflect whether the removal of a provincial and
the whole body of definitors, in order to reinstate this man, is an
affront worthy of consideration. Second, I assert that his chapter was
illegal, and that beyond question; for the father commissary-general,
Fray Francisco de Ocana, sent a very necessary letter of obedience
throughout the provinces of the Indias, which has, among its other
sections, one of the following tenor:

"_Item_: We ordain that the fathers commissaries-general and the
fathers commissaries-visitors shall render sentences in the causes and
processes that shall be brought to trial [_i.e._, in the tribunals of
the order], one week before the provincial chapters; and on the actual
day of the chapter-meeting these shall be pronounced and made known,
in the manner generally used by the order--so that the matter may
be apparent to those members capable of voting who assemble from the
said province; and so that the electors in the chapter may enjoy the
liberty that is proper. Whatever shall be done in any other manner,
now and henceforth, we annul and revoke it."

The father commissary-visitor sentenced and deprived of their offices
the father provincial and his definitors immediately, in the first
month of his visit, and five months before the week assigned by the
father commissary-general, Fray Francisco de Ocana. Therefore, since
the law is so clear, and in the Romance tongue, there is scant need
of lawyers to judge that the manner in which Father Gabiria performed
his commission is null and void. I was informed of these things,
upon my arrival at the islands, by fathers of all the orders as
well as by other persons of the city. I ordered the ex-provincial
to come privately and talk with me. I asked him why these orders
were issued and such things done, and promised to aid him in your
Majesty's name if he wished to demand his justice. He replied to me
that he saw that all things were in a very lamentable condition,
but that he did not dare plead anything; for very great scandals
would arise, and the superiors of his order would take it ill, and
severely punish those who had written and reported it Therefore, he
had resolved to be patient and to await their reply. The chief end
of all this [scheming] was the capitular election, and because the
father-commissary was trying to obtain the government of the province;
and although it was founded and continued by discalced friars, to make
it Observantine. Your Majesty has ordered that no Observantine friars
may come to this country, but that all who come be discalced. Beyond
question, it is not at all fitting for Observantines to come; for
so long as there shall be Observantine and discalced friars, there
can be no peace; and most serious troubles will result, both to the
order itself and to the natives under its charge. Will your Majesty
be pleased to order the father commissary-general to check these
proceedings, and to prevent these scandals which have occurred so
often among his friars; and that he obey your Majesty's decree not to
send Observantine friars. For, notwithstanding your Majesty's order,
they come here clad in the habit of discalced friars; and on their
arrival at the province, their sole aim is to turn it topsy-turvy.

Thinking that the troubles of this order could be obviated, I requested
the provincial to send that friar, Fray Jose Fonte, to Terrenate to
take charge of your Majesty's hospital there (a post so honorable
that the provincial himself exercised it before being provincial)--in
order to get him away from here, and prevent the discalced religious
from being ill treated and from being afflicted in mind; and so that
the provincial could better discharge the duties of his government
and denounce the invalid acts that had been committed. Although I
told the provincial that it was advisable for your Majesty's service
to have that religious leave here, for which I would be answerable
to him, he refused to do so, excusing him as being a definitor. And
although I told the provincial that, since he could not obey what was
suggested to him in your Majesty's name as fitting to your service,
no other religious nor any supplies of his would go to Terrenate in
your Majesty's galleons, he gave himself no concern about it. Those
friars, as I have written your Majesty in other letters, do not
reckon themselves your vassals, and do not think that they have to
obey you as such. Consequently, it is advisable, as your Majesty can
do so, to have the matter examined, so that a suitable remedy may
be applied. May our Lord preserve your Majesty's Catholic person,
as is necessary to Christendom. Manila, the last of June, 1636. Sire,
your vassal kisses your Majesty's feet.

Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera

[_Endorsed_: "December 22, 637. Have the father commissary-general
investigate the points of this letter, and file what he reports with
the letters treating of this matter and the orders of the Council,
and take all to the fiscal."

"The fiscal declares that the decrees and orders issued in regard to
this matter must, as was ordered by the Council, be filed with this
letter and the report of the father commissary-general. That done,
let it all be delivered to him, so that he may answer. Madrid, July
first, 638."

"No other papers than those which are brought are found in the
secretary's office treating of this matter, or of what the governor
says."

"The fiscal declares that the royal decrees and orders concerning
this matter should be commanded to be observed, and that the father
provincial of this order be commanded to apply the necessary correction
so that these scandals may cease, and that information must be given to
the Council of what shall be done--endeavoring to see to it that there
are no scandals or excesses, which are a great injury to souls. Madrid,
December 9, 1638."

"December 10, 638. Let the decrees that have been issued regarding
this matter be observed. Write to the father commissary-general that
it is expected from his care and attention that he will so manage that
all things may have the desirable harmony and suitable regulation. He
shall advise the Council of what occurs, and of the information that
is expected. Write to the governor that he have all manner of care
in this matter, so that the harmony and quiet of those religious may
be attained."]


_Commerce_

[_In the margin_: "[He asks] that, in addition to the permission given
for the embarcation of cloth and silver, permission be given for two
hundred and fifty thousand pesos more; for if they are prevented
from sending more than the amount conceded, the royal treasury is
defrauded out of a great sum, through the smuggling that takes place."]

Sire:

Your Majesty's orders are not obeyed strictly in the Indias, either for
want of honest officials, or because your vassals would be ruined if
your orders were executed strictly and to the letter. One of the most
essential ordinances is that of the permission that your Majesty has
been pleased to give to your vassals of these Filipinas Islands for
[exporting] two hundred and fifty thousand pesos in cloth, and the
provision that the proceeds therefrom shall not amount to more than
five hundred thousand pesos of silver. It neither has been nor is
observed; for if the officials were strict in not allowing more to
be exported than your Majesty's ordinance states, then the merchants
would do it privately, and as they could find means, and outside
of the town; and there would be no remedy for it. The same takes
place at the return of the [investment in] silver; and after that
the truth could not be ascertained. This trouble can be obviated if
your Majesty would be pleased to grant the vassals of these islands
the favor to permit them to [send exports] of two hundred and fifty
thousand pesos more. For as the people are increasing in number, and
are becoming richer, they cannot be maintained, because of the very
heavy expenses that vanity causes, unless they can export a greater
quantity of merchandise than your Majesty has permitted them to. By
that means they cheat your royal duties, and also by not paying the
freight-charges in your galleons, although those payments are the
backbone of your Majesty's treasury. By those funds the said islands
are sustained, as are also the soldiers and sailors, and the galleons
and other ordinary expenses--a great sum. I petition your Majesty
to be pleased to have this matter examined in your royal Council;
and to order me to execute what is most fitting for your service, as
far as may be possible. But since I am but one man in this region,
I have no one to aid me, and I shall not be able to carry out my
wishes. Another means occurs to me, namely, for your Majesty to
be pleased to grant tacit permission to your governor that, for
all the goods exported over and above the amount permitted, he may
strike a bargain with the said inhabitants, and oblige them to pay
here all the duties and freight-charges that they would pay if such
cloth were registered. This measure has one great drawback--namely,
whether your Majesty can find vassals who will serve you as governors,
whose consciences are so well regulated that they will serve you as
is just. Therefore, Sire, I think it better, in order to obviate
so great a loss as your Majesty suffers in your royal treasury,
for you to be pleased to grant permission for the two hundred and
fifty thousand pesos, whether to ecclesiastics or to laymen; and to
order, under severe penalties of life or of loss of office in your
royal service, that it be executed or observed inviolate. Account
must also be rendered to your Majesty in this matter, in which there
is so much corruption in all the Indias and in these islands--with
flagrant violation of law, since it has obliged me to go in person
to perform the duty of a royal official by lading the vessels myself,
and not permitting any consignment outside the register. The governors
cannot always do that personally, because of the many occupations
and responsibilities imposed by government. In consequence, they
are forced to entrust it to your Majesty's vassals, on whom the
same penalties are laid and executed as are laid by your Majesty
on your said governors. I discharge my conscience, and am awaiting
the resolution that your Majesty may be pleased to take in this
matter. May our Lord preserve your Catholic person in its greatness,
as is necessary to Christendom. Manila, June last, one thousand six
hundred and thirty-six. Sire, your Majesty's vassal kisses your feet.


Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


[_Endorsed_: "June 17, 1638. Let there be no innovation."]


_Chinese_

[_In the margin_: "He says that the pagan Indians pay annually, for the
general license given them, permitting them to live in those islands,
nine pesos less one real; and that they live in a place called the
Parian, from which they went out. And having brought them back to it,
they asked permission to go to live in other places; and it was given
them, by their paying ten pesos."]

Sire:

The heathen Chinese who live in these islands and come to trade with
the vassals of your Majesty, pay annually nine pesos less one real
for the general license which is given them for permission to live
in your Majesty's lands, and by way of recognition. They live in a
place which has been built for them near the Manila walls, called in
their language "the Parian." Many of them have gone to live outside
in the stock-farms and gardens of the inhabitants, and in other parts,
because of their convenience, without permission of the government. At
petition of the city, I ordered an edict to be issued, ordering
that all of these Chinese should return to live in their Parian,
and most of them did so. Afterward, they asked with many requests
and petitions to be allowed to return to live at their posts. That
favor was permitted them, on condition of the payment of ten pesos
two reals in place of the nine pesos less one real for their general
licenses, and, in addition to this, the half-annats for the favor--the
even ten pesos being for your Majesty's treasury, and the two reals
for the printing of the said licenses, and for the judge, notary,
chief constable, and other officials in the matter of the licenses,
who issue them and collect the silver, in which your Majesty has a
profit of nine reals from each one of those licenses. Those people
have no room in their own land; and when they come in their ships to
bring their merchandise to this city, many come who remain. In order
that that number may not increase so much, it is ordered that they
be returned in the same ships, after giving them the good usage and
treatment that is shown them at present. They are so contented that,
with but a message sent them by their alcalde-mayor [requesting]
that they aid his Majesty with [a grant of] four thousand pesos for
the erection of a bulwark which has been begun, to be built in the
port of Cavite, they gave that sum very willingly, without making any
opposition, and offered whatever else remained in their [communal]
fund. For these reasons and for others, especially for the favors
and kind treatment that are accorded them, I am obliged to petition
your Majesty to be pleased to grant me permission, so that, setting
before them skilfully and discreetly the necessities of your Majesty
for maintaining the fortifications of the port and of this city,
all the remainder of the said licenses may be paid at the rate
of ten pesos two reals apiece. This will increase your Majesty's
revenues by eighteen or twenty thousand pesos, and this additional
income will remain in your royal treasury. I will assure to your
Majesty, with the signatures of many theologians and the opinions
of learned jurists, your [peace of] conscience and mine; and also
by managing it with so much mildness that they themselves will ask
it. That has been done by the four or five thousand Chinese who now
pay it. By means of this aid and others which are being arranged,
I preserve the authority of your Majesty, and free your conscience;
and, provided that no one steals anything from your royal revenues,
the support of these islands will be arranged for, without any help
from Nueva Espana beyond the proceeds of the merchandise carried by
the galleons. But by following this plan I have no need of anything
else except that your Majesty be pleased to grant me permission to
do this. May our Lord preserve your Majesty's Catholic person, as is
necessary to Christendom. Manila, the last of June, one thousand six
hundred and thirty-six. Your vassal kisses your Majesty's feet.


Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


[_Endorsed_: "The governor of Filipinas to his Majesty, June 30,
1636. Revenue matters. June 10, 1638."

"Let this matter be looked up, and see whether anything has been
enacted concerning it; and take it to the fiscal, with whatever
notices there are concerning it."

"Nothing has been enacted."

"The fiscal declares that it is written in this letter that there are
four or five thousand Chinese who are now paying this duty, and that
it can be increased to eighteen or twenty thousand pesos of income,
while the additional sum that will be paid by each one will not amount
to more than nine reals. That cannot be, except by admitting into the
Filipinas Islands as many more thousand Chinese, as they say, as will
amount to pesos. That will be running great risk, as is well known,
especially in islands so remote and so sparsely settled. And if before,
when there were so few Chinese, so careful provisions were made to
have them remain shut up within their Parian, so that they could not
make any changes in the condition of those islands, one would think
that not without danger can this be changed, with the people who come
in the ships, which they are commencing to do there. Besides that,
to raise the impost on his own authority, without having informed
the Council thereof until after it was executed, is a matter that
furnishes a very bad example; and since the amount concerned is so
small as thirty-six thousand reals (at nine reals apiece, on the
four thousand pesos [_sic; sc._ Chinese] who he says are there),
it is not desirable to risk for that sum the government--which, it
has been found by experience, is without danger--and to expose it to
the possibility of danger. Therefore he petitions that it be ordered
that no innovation be made. Madrid, June 30, 1638."

"July 28, 1638. Have the governor informed that, considering all
the circumstances that he sets forth in his letter, the measure
for benefiting the imposts for the royal treasury does not appear
improper; but that it will be necessary to consider very carefully
how this increase of duties may be attempted and obtained. For in
order to obtain that increase we cannot risk the commerce, which
must be considered with the coming of the Chinese, as it conduces to
the benefit of those islands; nor also the security of the country,
if their numbers be greatly multiplied. For it seems that this will
be necessary, if the money were to increase to so great a sum as
he mentions. Have the matter entrusted to the governor himself and
to the Audiencia, so that, after weighing the advantages of this
measure with the advantages which might occur in its execution,
and considering all the above, the decision which shall be most to
his Majesty's service and that of his royal Audiencia may be made;
and that they shall report whatever they do to the Council. Have the
Audiencia notified to the same effect."]


Sire:

A communal fund was established in the Parian or alcaiceria of the
Chinese, who are called Sangleys, in the time of Don Alonso Faxardo
de Tenca, and with your approbation given April 8, 1622. Each
Sangley pays into it three tostons annually, in two payments. The
ministers of justice of the said Parian are paid from that fund,
as are those who live there to administer the holy sacraments, in
case that some [of the Sangleys] are converted--namely, two fathers
of St. Dominic. That fund also takes care of the works that your
Majesty needs; and the requisite sum is furnished from it for the
payment of the laborers, so that they may go willingly, and so that
no other assessment need be made. With the consent of the Sangleys,
Don Juan Nino de Tabora assigned from this communal fund a salary for
a minister to administer the holy sacraments to the Chinese living in
the town of Santa Cruz, on the other side of the river, which is in
charge of the fathers of the Society of Jesus; for the said Don Juan
Nino deemed that necessary. But at his death, and when an attempt was
made to collect that stipend belonging to the minister of Santa Cruz,
the fathers of St. Dominic refused to pay it, but on the contrary
went to law about it with him. And as if they were a party in this,
they brought a very strenuous suit against him, before my predecessor,
Don Juan Cereco Salamanca, who gave sentence in favor of the fathers
of the Society. That sentence was appealed to the royal Audiencia,
and although Don Juan Cereso judged, and rightly, that there was in
this matter no appeal to the Audiencia, as it was purely a point of
government, he did not dare to prevent the appeal, but allowed it
to pass. Upon my arrival at this island, I found this suit in the
stage of petition; and, esteeming it to belong to the government,
I suspended the suit, and ordered that the sentence and decree of
Don Juan Nino de Tabora be carried out. The fathers of St. Dominic
were angry at that, but surely without any reason, as it was none
of their business--although they had so possessed themselves of
the communal fund of the Parian, and so controlled it, that in the
fourteen years since it was established, they have used it to get
more than one hundred thousand pesos from it for matters peculiar
to their order. That has been an excess and irregularity that the
governors should not have allowed, as is apparent from the accounts
which I ordered the accountant Juan Bautista de Cubiaga to audit on
this occasion. The Sangleys of Santa Cruz and of the jurisdiction
of Tondo, seeing how small was the benefit that they derived from
the communal fund of the Parian, and that it was converted only
to the welfare of the Sangleys of the Parian and of the fathers of
St. Dominic, petitioned me to be allowed to have a separate communal
fund in Tondo. Considering that they were asking for justice, for Don
Alonso Faxardo, who established the said fund, declared May 4, 1622,
that whenever the said Sangleys thought that they could not endure
the said fund, and whenever they should oppose it and petition that it
be not continued or kept up, it would be proper to have it cease--in
conformity with that, I, seeing that a number of the Sangleys of the
villages of Santa Cruz and Tondo were opposing (and rightfully, as
the fund of the Parian was of no use to them) the payment by them,
as by the others, of three tostons annually for each person, and
that they were asking for a separate fund for Tondo, which should
be entrusted to the alcalde-mayor, I granted it to them. I was also
influenced by the service which the Sangleys of Santa Cruz offered
to perform for your Majesty, as I shall immediately relate--namely,
that the alcalde-mayor of Tondo should be paid from this fund, and
thus the salary paid him from the royal treasury would be saved;
while in the works that offered, your Majesty would be better served
by having two communal funds--one in the Parian, and the other in
Tondo. Therefore will your Majesty be pleased to confirm this action
accordingly, for it is beneficial to the royal treasury. May our
Lord preserve the Catholic person of your Majesty, as is necessary
to Christendom. Manila, the last of June, 1636. Your vassal kisses
your Majesty's feet.

Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera

[_Endorsed:_ "Manila. Government matters. 1636."

"June ten, six hundred and thirty-eight."

"Ascertain whether anything has been written about this matter by
the previous governors, and take it to the fiscal to be examined,
together with what advices there are concerning this."

"It does not appear that the governors have written anything about
this."

"The fiscal declares that since there are interested parties in this
separation of the communal fund (namely, the Chinese of the Parian
and those of Tondo), and since there is a suit pending between the
two orders of St. Dominic and the Society, he cannot decide upon this
matter until the parties have been heard in court, and the dispute
between them settled according to law, especially if the facts are
not evident by other authentic papers in this case which justify it,
besides only this letter of the governor. Consequently, he opposes
the approval that is requested, until he can examine in greater detail
the things mentioned here by a more thorough knowledge of the cause,
after the parties have been cited in court. Madrid, June 30, 1638."

"July 24, 638. The new governor who shall go [to the islands] shall,
together with the Audiencia, investigate the matter."]

[_In the margin:_ "He proposes names for protector of the Chinese;
and in the meantime, Doctor Luis Arias de Mora is appointed, to whom
are assigned two hundred pesos in addition to the eight hundred that
he receives as a salary, so that he may exercise his duties as the
archbishop's counselor jointly with this office."]


Sire:

Your Majesty has ordered that your fiscal shall not be protector of
the Chinese who live near the city, and that six persons be proposed
so that your Majesty may choose according to your pleasure. All the
time while I have been in this government, the said Chinese have been
without a protector. Thus I have had the care and task of administering
justice to them; and, although they have an alcalde-mayor, they
are satisfied only with what rulings the government makes. This
royal Audiencia has only three advocates--or four, counting Doctor
Ledo, who is at present serving as your Majesty's fiscal. I have
appointed Doctor Luis Arias de Mora, who is the senior, and a person
of excellent abilities, to attend to this matter until your Majesty
shall order otherwise. Licentiate Nicolas Antonio de Omana is also a
good person, as is Licentiate Manuel Suarez de Olibera, who is serving
as auditor-general and my assessor. I have assigned two hundred pesos
additional salary to the eight hundred of the protectorship to Don
Luis Arias de Mora; for, in addition to exercising this office, he is
the archbishop's counselor. Therefore he despatches and performs what
pertains to him in ecclesiastical matters, without meddling with the
royal patronage and jurisdiction of your Majesty, as the archbishop has
tried to do hitherto. By that means I think that the archbishop will
be quiet, and we shall be able to live in peace. Doctor Luis Arias is
a person who merits honor from your Majesty by giving him this charge,
in which he will be excellently employed. May our Lord preserve your
Majesty's Catholic person, as is necessary to Christendom. Manila,
the last of June, 1636. Sire, your vassal kisses your Majesty's feet.

Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera

[_Endorsed:_ "January 8, 637. Have him notified to observe the
ordinance of November 22, 636, so that he may avoid new expenses of
the treasury, and that no more salary be given than what is ordered."]


_Encomiendas_

Sire:

Your Majesty has ordered that when persons who have been given
encomiendas, and who have served in the islands, leave them, their
encomiendas fall vacant, in order that they may be given to the most
deserving who remain. Some persons have been able to negotiate and to
obtain from your Majesty the favor and grace of being able to enjoy
them for ten years, even though they live in Nueva Espana. Such are
the adelantado Miguel Lopez de Legazpi, whose services and those
of his father well deserve that honor and reward from your Majesty;
also Don Fernando de Silva, of the Order of Santiago, who, because of
the death of Don Alonso Faxardo, governed these islands with general
approbation, and has served your Majesty for many years in the States
of Flandes with the same approbation. Besides these, there are three
others to whom your Majesty has granted the same favor, namely: Don
Andres Perez Franco, who, although he has served for many years, and
well, in the States of Flandes and in these islands, as he occupied
good positions, took away from them one hundred thousand pesos,
which is sufficient pay and remuneration for a soldier; besides that,
the marquis of Cerralbo has given him a post in Nueva Espana in the
castle and government of Vera Cruz. There are two other encomenderos:
Don Fernando Centeno, who also took one hundred and fifty thousand
pesos from here, and who also has been occupied and busied in the best
posts of Nueva Espana by the same viceroy; and Esteban de Alcacar,
who took two hundred thousand pesos from here, to whom your Majesty
had granted, as a reward, the government of Terrenate, but which he
refused. As regards the services of Don Fernando Centeno, the soldiers
speak of him with but scant respect. He was condemned to lose his head,
for having refused to fight under Don Geronimo de Silva, on an occasion
when they let the Dutch enemy escape, although the Spaniards could have
punished their boldness; and also on other occasions, it is said that
they did not proceed as honorable soldiers. I cannot attest to your
Majesty what I have not seen, but the above is his reputation here. But
granting that, and that one is occupied and the other does not admit
of so honorable a post, it renders those who have served well, and are
here at present, very disconsolate to see the former rewarded and very
rich, and the latter poor and with no reward. And determining to inform
your Majesty of all these reasons, and obeying the general decree by
which no one may enjoy an encomienda if he leave these islands, and
another special decree issued very recently, in which your Majesty
is pleased to order some of the largest encomiendas to be assigned
to the royal treasury, in order to give the religious the wine and
oil which you have been pleased to grant them as a favor, so that
it may not be necessary to take it from your royal treasury as has
been done hitherto--I gave orders to the royal officials to place the
proceeds of the three said encomiendas in the royal treasury, until,
after your Majesty were informed of all the reasons which I present
from here, you might order what is most advisable and is your pleasure.

I petition your Majesty to be pleased to order that these consequences
be not allowed; for with them, all those who should have ordinary
favor with the viceroys of Nueva Espana, will take measures to obtain
rewards there, seeking to enjoy at the same time those grants which
they have here also in encomiendas, and will solicit that favor
from your Majesty through third persons. This is to the injury and
disappointment of those who remain here, as I say above; and others
will not be encouraged to come here, when they see beforehand the great
troubles that they will undergo before they can merit and obtain some
[reward] for living in so uncertain a country.

Some of the encomiendas here are very large, having incomes of from
one to four thousand pesos. If your Majesty be pleased to give me
permission, so that they may be reduced to five hundred pesos, by
dividing these among those who best deserve them, and are poorest, all
will be rewarded and paid; and there will be much to give, and also
to place in your Majesty's royal treasury. The services [rendered]
in these regions, Sire, are not so arduous that this should not be a
good and sufficient reward, although those who are from Flandes know
better how to exaggerate them. I shall await your Majesty's order,
for I have not learned in so many years aught else than to obey. May
our Lord preserve your Majesty's Catholic person, as is necessary to
Christendom. Manila, the last of June, 1636. Your vassal kisses your
Majesty's feet.

Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


_Administrative and financial_

Sire:

Your Majesty has conceded to your viceroys of Nueva Espana authority,
in the case of deaths and vacancies in this government, to send
commissions to those who are to have charge of military matters;
and until the arrival of the regularly-appointed governor you order
them to send another governor from Mexico. That has been done twice
by the marquis de Cerralbo--once with Don Fernando de Silva, of the
Habit of Santiago, because of the death of Don Alonso Faxardo; and
[the other time] with Don Juan Cerezo de Salamanca, because of the
death of Don Juan Nino de Tabora. Your Majesty is greatly disserved in
all of the things that I shall now mention. First, when the Audiencia
was governing the [royal] estate, your Majesty's royal treasury was
pledged to more than eighty or one hundred thousand pesos, which they
obtained by a forced loan from the inhabitants, by placing soldiers
of the guard in their houses, quartering these on them until they lent
this money; and the officials spent the money in paying warrants that
were ordered to be issued to please the soldiers and sailors. It has
been the custom to order those warrants to be despatched so that they
might be paid when there should be any money.

As for those poor men, they have not been paid in one, three, ten,
or fifteen years. They sell their warrants during such times for
the fourth, fifth, or sixth part of their face value; and many have
been paid at one hundred pesos for one thousand. The warrants are
bought by the servants of the auditors, royal officials, governors,
and other ministers, and to them is paid the face value. Thus the
poor soldiers are so unjustly dispossessed of [the rewards for] their
hardships; and on this account is your Majesty's royal treasury so
pledged. In the term of Don Juan Cerezo de Salamanca, more than one
hundred thousand odd pesos had been paid in this kind of warrants. Your
Majesty having issued a decree, in the time of Don Juan Nino de Tabora,
ordering such warrants to be paid at the third of their face value,
he began to do so one year with twelve thousand pesos, that he set
apart for that purpose. The said Don Juan Cerezo did not pursue the
custom, as he declared that the said Don Juan Nino had exceeded
the bounds in the execution of your Majesty's decree. Although
this charge was brought against him in the residencia, it was not
proved that he had actually paid that sum during his term. It is,
however, clear to me, outside of judgment, that his own secretary,
while he was judge and collector of the licenses of the Sangleys, who
should have deposited that money in your Majesty's royal treasury,
deposited a great sum of it in this kind of warrants; and so that
it might not be proved judicially, the owners went to receive the
money from the royal officials; and while they were there, and almost
before their eyes, the said secretary again took it. And perhaps it
happened that a soldier, having collected it, would say that he did
not wish to return it, whereupon the secretary would give ten pesos
for the transaction, and thus obtained his purpose. Although I was so
sure and convinced of this truth, nevertheless, as it was not proved
entirely in the residencia, I did not wish to render sentence on
this point, but instead to send it to your Majesty's royal Council;
for I confess, Sire, that if I had committed that outrage, as I have
investigated it, I would be of the opinion that your Majesty would
not be fulfilling your duty, as a just king, if you did not order
me to be beheaded. After my arrival at these islands, I immediately
set about executing your Majesty's decrees. I ordered, by an act,
that all those persons to whom your Majesty owed money should come
to ask the third of it, the other two-thirds being commuted, so that
they could ask it at no future time. All have done it and up to date
we have paid in warrants of this kind the amount that your Majesty,
if so inclined, can have examined from the enclosed certification, as
well as what we have saved from the two-thirds that have been commuted.

Returning, Sire, to the trouble that arises from having the persons
whom the viceroy sends from Mexico in your Majesty's name to govern _ad
interim_, there is no one who does not take back one or two hundred
thousand pesos, as agents for the said inhabitants of Mexico. That
is very much to the damage and prejudice of this city, for how can
the goods of the inhabitants here go, and how can they make any
profit on them, if the goods of those Mexicans, which are carried
under charge of the commander and almirante and the other officials
(the creatures of the governor), are to be sold first? And since
those governors only come for one or two years, they do not exercise
justice, correct disorder, preserve the authority and jurisdiction
of your Majesty, or undertake any other thing than living in peace;
being the protectors of all, and good merchants, in order to return
very rich; complaining loudly of the hardships that they experienced
in coming to serve your Majesty; boasting of the many risks to their
lives, and the many expenses paid from their own property; and giving
the ignorant crowd to understand that your Majesty is under great
obligations to them. All this, Sire, will cease, if your Majesty
will send six gentlemen of thoroughly good abilities, soldiers of
Flandes, to act as substitutes and who shall have commissions for
the future succession to the government, through the death or absence
[of the governor]. Such men can bring their commissions, sealed, from
your Majesty, and should not come from Mexico. They can be employed
here as follows: the first in the fort of this city; the second in
that of Cavite, and in the government of the said port; the third
in Terrenate; the fourth in the island of Hermosa; the fifth in the
office of master-of-camp; the sixth as commander of the artillery,
in the office of sargento-mayor, and as governor and chief justice
of the Parian, or alcalde-mayor of Tondo. Encomiendas could be given
to all of them, as these fall vacant, if they prove to render the
services and possess the qualities that are requisite; and they could
be changed about in these offices, whenever advisable, so that they
might become experienced in the [various] departments. Whenever one
of these should assume the government because of the death of the
regularly-appointed governor, such should receive the same pay as he;
and, if during his absence, that which he should be receiving. I bind
myself to provide for all of them, so that they may be contented. I
entreat your Majesty to make this resolution, for it is expedient
for your royal service. All who should come should be knights of
the military orders; so that both the vassals who have rendered
homage, and the heathen and other inhabitants, may learn respect and
veneration for the persons whom your Majesty assigns to succeed in
the government. Your Majesty has many vassals who are soldiers, of the
above excellences and qualifications, who would come very willingly if
they were given such positions and hopes. If that happens in my time,
they will be so well established that many who have served your Majesty
well would desire it. The extraordinary expenses incurred by the royal
Audiencia and the greed for the wealth of Mexico will be avoided;
and the greed of both must oblige them to be honest and to govern well.

When the residencia is taken from the governors they give it as if
they had been imitating Moses or Joshua in their government. For as
nearly all the citizens of these islands have come from Nueva Espana to
serve for reasons of justice; and as there are others who do not wish
that the present governor should note them as men who swear against
the past governor, as he would think that they will do the same with
him at his residencia; or so that the governor might not complain of
them as having evil tongues; to tell the truth here is a great sin. No
one is willing that the governor, when his residencia is taken, should
impute any fault to him, or obtain any testimony as to the reason why
he came here as an exile. Many other disadvantages arise, that cannot
be written. In short, Sire, most people swear falsely; and those who
do not, hide themselves, or retire in order not to testify. There are
theologians who counsel them that they may deny the truth under oath,
in order not to do wrong. This condition ought to be closely examined,
and would be remedied by those commissions. Such persons should come
from Madrid, and the persons who have to govern should live here.

I petition your Majesty to be pleased to have this matter examined
in your royal Council, for it is very important for your service. I
discharge my conscience of what is in my care, by advising your Majesty
of it. May our Lord preserve your Catholic person, as is necessary
to Christendom. Manila, the last of June, one thousand six hundred
and thirty-six. Your vassal kisses the feet of your Majesty.

Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


Manila, April 11, 1636. Juan Bautista de Cubiaga, auditor of accounts
and results [_resultas_] of these islands, in whose possession are
the pay-checks of the general accounts of the royal treasury, shall
certify at the foot of this decree the sum of pesos that have been
paid from the royal treasury from the first of July, six hundred
and thirty-five, to the last of June, six hundred and thirty-six,
to various persons for pay-checks that the royal treasury owes them
as pay for serving your Majesty, and for other reasons, by virtue of
my decrees regarding the one-third, the owners voluntarily commuting
to his Majesty the other two-thirds, in consideration of the needs
and debt of the royal estate in these said islands. The certification
shall be set forth in detail with the greatest clearness, together with
the amount of the two-thirds of which a gift is made to his Majesty.


Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera
Francisco de Ortega


In fulfilment of the above decree of Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera
y Mendoza, governor and captain-general of these Filipinas Islands,
and president of the royal Audiencia herein, I, Juan Bautista de
Cubiaga, auditor of accounts and results of the royal treasury in the
islands, certify that among the original pay-checks for credits on
the general accounts of the royal treasury for the year one thousand
six hundred and thirty-five, when the treasury was in charge of the
royal official judges--namely, the accountant, Martin Ruiz de Salazar;
the factor, Ynigo de Villarreal; and the treasurer, Don Baltasar
Ruiz de Escalona--there appear those which will be stated here below,
as having been paid to various persons to whom the royal estate owed
them, as pay and daily wages, for services performed for his Majesty
in various posts of sea, war, etc. [These were paid] up to one-third
of their face value, by virtue of the decrees of the said governor--the
other two-thirds having been given voluntarily, as a favor and proof of
devotion to his Majesty, because of the obligations that were resting
upon his royal treasury in these islands, as appears by the memoranda
that each person presented, asking that they be paid in this manner,
as is set down as in the said pay-checks. Those paid, their numbers
in the files [_legajos_] of each department, together with the names
of each person, the amount of the principal which was owing them,
that of the third which was paid them, and that of the two-thirds
which was commuted, are as follows:

[A marginal note reads as follows: "Certification of the auditor of
accounts that the two-thirds commuted by the owners of the pay-checks,
amount to

                    pesos  tomins  granos

                     4,295    0     6
                     9,923    2     5
                    12,523    5     3
                     4,912    1     1
                     3,095    1     6
                    ------   --    --
                    34,150    1     9"]



Factory Department [24]


Number   Amount             Due to                  Amount      Amount
of pay-  of pay-                                    paid        commuted
check    check

          P  t  g                                     P  t  g     P  t  g

35       56  1 11           Juan Talag, an Indian    14  5 11    31  3  0
36       32  0  0           Juan Talag, an Indian    10  5  4    21  2  8
3[7]     12  5  4           Juan Talag, an Indian     4  1  9     8  3  1
38       56  0  0           Juan Talag, an Indian    18  5  4    31  2  8
39      131  3  5           Juan Talag, an Indian    45  6  5    91  5  0
41      423  2  8           7 Indians               141 11 11   423  2  8 [sic]
45      336  0  0           9 Indians               112  0  0   224  0  0
51      414  4  1[sic]      Pablo de la Oliva
                                (paid one-half)     231  2  0   231  2  0
57      340  2  4           Don Juan Sarapi         113  3  5   226  6 11
62       33  5  2           Cintay, a Sangley        11  1 11    22  4  0
                                                              -----------
                                                              1,330  0  6



Pay of the Infantry of Manila

Number   Amount     Due to                          Amount      Amount
of pay-  of pay-                                    paid        commuted
check    check

          P  t  g                                     P  t  g     P  t  g

 76     149  7  3   Alferez Andres de Aguiar         49  7  9    99  7  6
 77     280  5  9   Simon Sanchez                    93  4  7   187  1  2
 78     117  5  9   Juan de Mendoza                  39  1 11    78  3 10
 79     316  5  3   Domingo de Herrera              105  4  5   211  0 10
 80     224  6  4   Alfonso Rosario                  74  7  5   149  6 11
 81     257  0  5   Antonio Gonzalez                 85  5  5   171  3  0
 82     370  0  0   Antonio Gonzalez                123  2  8   246  5  4
 84     373  5  2   Antonio Gomez                   124  4  4   249  0 10
 88     219  0  9   Alferez Luis de Villarreal       73  0  3   146  0  6
 89     129  2  5   Bartolome Martin                 64  0  9   128  1  8
 90     292  6  4   Juan de Orgaz                    97  4  9   195  1  7
 91      96  0  8   Pedro Ponce                      32  0  2    64  0 6
 92     280  3  0   Juan Gomez Flores                93  3  8   186  7  4
 96      77  3  1   Juan Navarro                     25  6  4    51  4  9
 97      43  3  0   Francisco Rodriguez Caballos     15  6  4    31  4  8
 98      70  0 10   Manuel Vicente                   23  2  7    46  6  3
103     360  0 10   Juan Martin Roldan              320  7  4    39  0  9
108      72  2  4   Juan Galo                        24  0  9    48  1  7
115      48  6 11   Fray Francisco Mexias            16  2  3    32  4  8
116      35  0  0   Jose Perez de Nava               11  5  4    23  2  8
118     263  6  1   Jeronimo Enriquez                87  7  4   175  6  9
120     435  0  8   Captain Juan Ruiz Barrientos    145  0  2   290  0  6
124     167  4 10   Julio Alonso                     55  6 11   111  5 11

        Said pay of the Infantry of Manila  R[esult?]         4,295  0  6

126     505  1  8   Francisco de Leixas             168  3  2   336  6  6
136     294  7  4   Don Juan Dolosit                 98  2  5   196  4 11
138     221  4  2   Captain Pedro de la Mata         73  6  8   147  5  6



Pay of the Infantry of Maluco

Number   Amount     Due to                          Amount      Amount
of pay-  of pay-                                    paid        commuted
check    check

          P  t  g                                     P  t  g     P  t  g

 110    206  5  8   Alferez Juan de Montalvo         68  7  2   137  6  6
 111    593  3  8   Alferez Juan Palomo Holgado     197  6  6   395  5  2
 112    136  4  2   Alferez Juan de Santiago         45  0  4    91  0  2
 114    396  2  0   Alferez Diego Nabon, a Pampango 132  0  8   264  1  4
 115    200  0  0   Captain Juan de Mora             66  5  4   133  2  8
 116    112  0  0   Geronimo de Atienca              37  2  8    74  5  4
 117    510  0  0   Alferez Alonso Rosario Tenorio  170  0  0   340  0  0
 118    184  0  3   Alferez Pedro Melendez Marques   61  2  9   122  5  6
 119  1,535  0  0   Captain Alonso Serrano          511  4  0 1,023  4  0
 120  1,663  0  0   Captain Don Esteban de Comosa
                        y Losada                    554  2  8 1,708  5  4
 121    193  3  3   Captain Don Alonso de Duenas     64  3  9   128  7  6
 122  1,222  4  0   Captain Don Juan Garcia         407  4  0   815  0  0
 123    110  4  4   Alonso Umali                     36  6  9    73  5  7
 124     54  6 11   Alferez Pablo Garcia             18  2  3    36  4  8
 125    354  2  9   Alferez Baltazar de Reyes       118 11  0   236  1 10
 126    209  0  0   Captain Rodrigo de Cossa         69  5  4   139  2  8
 127    100  2  5   Sisto Ruiz                       33  3  5    66  7  0
 129    212  5  9   Alferez Martin Lasangan          70  7  1   141  6  8
 131    158  7  1   Alferez Pablo Lili               52  7  8   105  7  5
 132    217  5  4   Alferez Pablo Malanson           72  4  5   145  0 11
 133    679  0 11   Alferez Alonso Rosario          226  2 11   452  6  0
 134    313  4 10   Alonso Maigal                   104  4  3   209  0  7
 135     51  5  1   Agustin Ansay                    17  1  8    34  3  5
 136    189  2  7   Lucas Cavasag                    63  0 10   126  1  9
 137    329  4  4   Francisco Dumagui               109  6  8   219  5  5
 138    553  2  7   Alferez Cristobal Jaron         184  4  2   368  6  5
 139    348  0  0   Sergeant Nicolas Ciap           116  0  2   232  0  5
 140    303  3  4   Alonso Mangohat                 101  1  1   202  2  3
 141    397  6  7   Alferez Juan Tubil              132  4 10   265  1  9
 142    388  6  2   Miguel Cabalit                  129  5  4   259  0 10
 143    452  7  6   Alferez Diego Pilata            150  7 10   301  7  8
 144    848  5  1   Alferez Agustin Lalung          282  7  0   848  5  1 [sic]
 145    211  3  6   Andres Naguit                    70  3 10   140  7  8
 146    400  0  0   Diego Ruiz Galazzo              133  2  8   266  5  4
 147    622  5  3   Don Gaspar Dugui                207  4  5   415  0 10
 148    203  0  0   Don Nicolas Manuel               67  5  4   135  2  8
 149    694  6  2   Andres Balu, a Pampango         231  4  8   463  1  6
 150    250  3  1   Mateo Bela                       83  3  8   166  7  5
 151  1,575  0 11   Juan Tambing                    525  1  3 1,050  0  0
 152    318  2  6   Ygnacio Maudain                 106  0 10   212  1  8
 153    300  1  9   Juan de Vergara                 100  0  7   200  1  2
 155    100  0  0   Francisco de Linares             33  2  8    66  5  4
 156    100  0 11   Juan Lauglaug                    33  2 11    66  6  0
 157    141  0  7   Agustin Niri                     47  0  2    94  0  5
 158     44  0 10   Pedro Benguit                    14  5 10    29  3  0
 159    390  4  4   Agustin Tauding                 130  1  5   260  2 11
 160     58  1  9   Pedro de Mora Salcedo            19  3  3    38  6  6
 168    393  2  1   Miguel Suboc                    131  0  8   262  1  5
 177  1,004  6  1   Captain Juan Campal             334  7  4   669  6  9
 178  1,494  4  5   Captain Diego Bosog             498  1  5   996  3  0
 189    783  6  0   Francisco Quico                 261  2  0   522  4  0
 180    219  0  6   Don Nicolas Banguit              73  0  2   146  0  4
 181    115  3  6   Don Lucas Lapor                  38  3 10    76  7  8
 182  2,061  6  4   Don Marcos Puyat                687  2  1 1,374  4  3
 184    152  2  3   Captain Lazaro de Torres         50  6  1   101  4  2
 185    254  0 10   Nicolas Rosario                  84  5 10   163  3  0
 186     47  5  5   Don Angel Manalit                15  7  1    31  6  4
 187    547  5  1   Alferez Agustin Banal           182  4  4   365  0  9
 188    384  3 11   Juan Pay, a Pampango            128  1  0   253  2  1
 189    155  2  7   Francisco de Mendoza             51  6  2   103  4  5
 190    648  6 11   Lorenzo Soler                   216  2  3   432  4  8
 191    176  3  9   Bernabe de Aguiar                58  6  7   117  5  2
 192    648  4  9   Matheo de Vila                  216  1  7   432  3  2
 193    319  0  1   Antonio Viscayno                106  2  8   212  5  5
 194    171  0  4   Simon Ronquilo                   57  0  1   114  0  3
 195    399  3  8   Alferez Damian Dalisay          133  1  2   266  2  6
 199    920  4  6   Captain Juan Gonzalez Melon     306  6 10   613  5  8
 200    414  5  3   Domingo Mangonay                138  1  9   276  3  6



_Ordinary Salaries_

Number   Amount     Due to                          Amount      Amount
of pay-  of pay-                                    paid        commuted
check    check

          P  t  g                                     P  t  g     P  t  g

 59     569  6 10   Juan de Olea                    189  7  7   379  7  3
 60   1,019  1  3   Domingo Guimarano               339  5  9   679  3  6
 90      66  7 10   Captain Cristobal Franco         22  2  7    44  5  3
 91     622  7  8   Jorge Fernandez Grella          207  5  2   415  2  6



_Department of Day Wages_

Number   Amount     Due to                          Amount      Amount
of pay-  of pay-                                    paid        commuted
check    check

          P  t  g                                     P  t  g     P  t  g

 33     175  6  0   Cristobal Ramas, calker          58  4  8   117  1  4
 36   2,033  7  2   The natives of La Hermita       677  7  8 1,355  7  6
 44     118  5  6   Julian de Norona                 38  1 10    76  3  6
 45     505  2  2   Julian de Norona                168  3  4   336  6 10



_Extraordinary_

Number   Amount     Due to                          Amount      Amount
of pay-  of pay-                                    paid        commuted
check    check

          P  t  g                                     P  t  g     P  t  g

 16     666  5  4   The Indians of the village
                                       of Taguin    222  1  9   444  3  7
 17     500  4  0   The Society of Jesus            166  6  8   333  5  4



_Sea of Manila and Maluco_

Number   Amount     Due to                          Amount      Amount
of pay-  of pay-                                    paid        commuted
check    check

          P  t  g                                     P  t  g     P  t  g

 51     199  4 11   Mateo Mejias                     66  4  0   133  0 11
 52     476  2  8   Some Indians                    158  6  2   317  4  6
 54     339  4 10   Francisco de Esquivel           113  1  7   226  3  3
 57      67  0  4   Four Indians                     22  2  9    44  5  7
 58     111  0  0   Juan Flores Merino               37  0  0    74  0  0
 63     201  6  2   Sebastian Salvador               67  2  0   134  4  2
 66     536  7 10   Jacinto Col                     178  7 11   357  7 11
 68     617  4  8   Pedro Nunez                     205  6 10   411  5 10
 74     233  7  0   Domingo Macabata                 77  7  8   155  7  4



_Salaries of Alcaldes-mayor_

Number   Amount     Due to                          Amount      Amount
of pay-  of pay-                                    paid        commuted
check    check

          P  t  g                                     P  t  g     P  t  g

 23      97  0  0   Captain Francisco Sebastian
                                           Flores    32  2  8    64  5  4
 24     350  6 11   Domingo de Urieto               116  6  7   233  7  4
 26      87  7  0   Captain Geronimo Nunez           29  4  4    58  4  8
 27      53  0  0   Don Christobal de Valderrama     17  5  4    35  2  8
                                                              ----- -- --
                                                              4,912  7  7



_Pay-checks for the year 1636_

Amount         Due to                       Amount      Amount
of pay-                                     paid        commuted
check

  P  t  g                                     P  t  g     P  t  g

100  0  4     Juan de Valdimeso              33  2  9    66  5  7
303  2  6     Domingo Vilang, an Indian     101  0 10   202  1  8
109  5 11     Juan del Orduy                 36  4  7    73  1  0
126  7  2     Juan del Orduy                 42  2  0    84  0 10
 91  7 10     Sargento-mayor Andres
                             de Yllesoa      30  5  3    61  2  7
 80  5  4     The said Yllesoa               26  7  1    53  6  3
138  0 11     Don Andres Arquerra            46  1  7    92  3  6
127  6  1     Juan Gomez Serrano             42  0  8    85  1  5
791  5  5     Don Pedro Tusiaya             263  7  1   527  6  0
 97  1  6     Don Francisco de Agis          32  3  2    64  6  0
305  0  0     Don Miguel de Aguit           101  6  8   203  5  0
137  0  3     Manuel Simon                   41  4  0    95  0  3
333  3 11     Pedro de Sisaua               111  1  3   222  2  6
610  0  0     Various Indians               203  0  0   407  0  0
128  6  0     Andres de Mesa                 42  7  6    85  6  8
 81  6  7     Don Julio Limbout              27  2  2    54  6  5
131  3  3     Andres Dimbla                  43  6  5    87  4 10
207  7  5     Luis de Alcazar                69  2  5   138  5  0
156  6  9     Alferez Simon Cornejo          52  2  3   104  0  5
 76  3  8     Don Alonso Mocangos           158  6  6   317  5  2
 99  4 10     Alferez Esteban de Aldaco      33  1  7    66  3  3
                                                      ----- -- --
                                                      3,095  1  6


The above is evident, and appears from the pay-checks above referred
to, in each of which is the decree of the governor, by virtue of which
the owners voluntarily commuted two-thirds of the face of each one,
and I refer to it. In order that it may be apparent, and in obedience
to the order of the said governor to that effect, I certify this in
Manila, June five, one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.

Juan Bautista de Cubiaga

We, the undersigned notaries, certify and attest that Juan Bautista
de Cubiaga, whose rubric and name appear to be appended to this
certification, is the auditor of accounts and results of the royal
estate of these Filipinas Islands. As such, entire faith and credit
are to be given to his certification, in and out of court. Manila,
June thirteen, one thousand six hundred and thirty-six


Augustin de Valencuela, notary-public.
Andres Martin Del Arroyo, royal notary.
Juan Serrano, notary-public.



_The governor's decree._ The official judges of the royal estate of
his Majesty shall certify at the foot of this decree the amount in
pesos which they have paid from the royal treasury under their charge
from the year six hundred and thirty-two until June twenty-four of the
past year, six hundred and thirty-five, on the old pay-checks for pay,
salary, or for other purposes, which were owed to various persons;
and which, by virtue of their powers and transfers, were paid in
entirety by virtue of a decree of the government, to extraordinary
persons. [This is to be given] summarily, each year by itself; and
[must show] the sum that is distributed each year. Given at Manila,
February ten, one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera
Francisco de Ortega



_The reply of the royal officials._ The official judges of the royal
estate say that the general books, and the old pay-checks which have
been paid by decree of the governors during the time to which your
Lordship refers in your order, have been delivered to the auditing
department of the exchequer; and that there is no reason for the
compilation of such a report by them. They petition your Lordship
to be pleased to refer the matter to the auditor of accounts, as
he has possession of all the said papers. Manila, February sixteen,
one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.

Ynigo de Vlllareal
Don Baltasar Ruiz de Escalona


Manila, February twenty-three, one thousand six hundred and
thirty-six. Let the auditor [_contador_] Juan Bautista de Cubiaga,
auditor of accounts and results in these islands, give the
certification that is asked for by the decree of February ten of
this year. At the foot of that decree is the rubric of Governor Don
Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera.

Ortega

[_Marginal note:_ "Certification of the auditor of accounts and
amounts--102 thousand 596 pesos, 1 tomin, 8 granos paid in pay-checks
with the authority of the owners."]


In obedience to the above decree of Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera,
governor and captain-general of these Filipinas Islands, and president
of the royal Audiencia herein, I, Juan Bautista de Cubiaga, auditor
of accounts and results of the royal estate of these said islands,
certify that it appears from the original pay-checks which are in my
possession belonging to the general accounts of the royal treasury
of this city of Manila, for the period between years one thousand
six hundred and thirty-two and the end of one thousand six hundred
and thirty-five, that the official judges of this royal estate have
paid from the said royal treasury a number of pay-checks that were
legitimately owing to persons who were serving in the pay of his
Majesty, and for other reasons, to other extraordinary persons, by
virtue of authorities, cessions, and transfers made to them by the
real owners to collect them from the said royal treasury--and who did
collect them--and to satisfy with them certain balances of accounts
and results that persons who received posts in these islands owed to
his Majesty for various reasons. The pay-checks that here appear to
have been paid to such persons by virtue of authorities, cessions,
and transfers made to them by the real owners, are as follows:


Year of 1632

Pay-check number fifty-two, for seven hundred and fifty pesos,
owed to the natives of the village of Candaba, for the value of one
thousand two hundred fanegas of rice, which they gave as a bandala
in the year one thousand six hundred and fifteen. It was collected by
father Fray Francisco de Figueroa, procurator-general of the Order of
St. Augustine, by their authorization, on August thirty, one thousand
six hundred and thirty-two, by decree of the royal Audiencia which
was governing _ad interim_. [25] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 750 pesos



_Pay of the Infantry of Terrenate_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

        200  0  0   Pedro Roso, a soldier                   June 26, 1620
                    Captain Alonso Garcia Romero            February 18

                    Without decree of government.

 4      100  0  0   Alonso Barrientos                       July 17, 1620
                    Adjutant Alonso Perez Manzan            March 15

                    By decree of Juan Nino de Tabora, and by the advice of
                    the royal officials to pay with this sum and others
                    a balance of 1,000 pesos owed by said adjutant to
                    the royal estate. [26]

 5      200  0  0   Antonio de Asnar                        March 10, 1620
                    Adjutant Alonso Perez Manzan            March 15

                    _Idem_.

  7     614  0 10   Juan Pablos de Cisneros                 April 2, 1631
                    Admiral Don Francisco Esguerra          June 4

                    By authority and decree of Juan Nino de Tabora,
                    to satisfy claims due the royal treasury by
                    Esguerra. Reported by the royal officials.

 14   1,640  5  3   Captain Francisco Melendez Marquez      April 30, 1621
                    Juan de Santa Cruz, superintendent of
                    the royal magazines in Manila           August 17

                    By decree of the governor, to satisfy claims of the
                    magazines for a quantity of Castilian wine taken in
                    exchange for work and repair that he made in them
                    for his house.

17-25 1,339  3  6   Nine persons                            At various dates
                    Captain Luis Alonso de Roa              August 25

                    By authority and transfer of the owners, and by decree
                    of the government and report of the royal officials,
                    as a partial payment of a sum of money charged against
                    Captain Luis de Contreras, ex-overseer of Pintados.

 28      50  0  0   Alonso Perez, a soldier                 March 18, 1626
                    Captain Francisco de Rebolledo          September 27

                    By order of the royal Audiencia.

 29     100  0  0   Juan Sevillano a soldier                February 1, 1625
                    Francisco Ruiz, steward of the
                    royal hospital                          September 27

                    By authority from Juan de Santa Cruz, superintendent
                    of the royal magazines, executor of Juan Sevillano,
                    without government decree.

40-43   793  5  9   Captain Don Pedro Taroc
                    Juan Aucan, a Sangley                   December 11

                    Collects 517 pesos, 4 tomins by order of the governor,
                    to pay for 60 licenses for 60 Sangleys.

 7-8    380  4  6   Antonio Caraballo, a soldier            June 5, 1628
                    Adjutant Alonso Perez Manzano           March 15

                    With authority and transfers of the executors, and
                    paid by virtue of an order of Juan Nino de Tabora,
                    by the advice of the royal officials, in order to
                    pay claims of the treasury of 1,000 pesos against him.

                    Domingo Fernandez, artilleryman
                    (both deceased)                         December 14, 1617

 63     345  5  6   The executors of Juan Gonzalez de
                    Carate, deceased artilleryman           December 3, 1625
                    Captain Luis Alonso de Roa              August 25

                    By decree of Juan Nino de Tabora, and report of the
                    royal officials as partial payment of a sum of money
                    charged against Captain Luis de Contreras, overseer
                    of Oton, as heir of the bondsman of the said overseer.

 69     468  5  0   Francisco de la Fuente                  December 31, 1629
                    Captain Gonzalez de Francia             September 3

                    To pay a charge resulting from the visit.

 74      96  2  8   Juan Antonio Tello, a soldier           October 10, 1620
                    Alferez Pedro Ruiz Suarez

                    By order of the royal Audiencia to pay the balance
                    remaining to him in his residencia as corregidor of
                    Calamianes and Ybalon.

122     222  5  5   The executors of Pascual de Aguilar,
                    deceased                                January 22, 1622
                    Francisco Gomez, of the exchequer       December 22

                    By decree of the royal Audiencia, paid 103 pesos,
                    4 tomins, to pay general licenses granted to Sangleys.



_Pay of Seamen_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

 24     300         Francisco Sanchez, sailor               November 20, 1630
                    Captain Luis Alonso de Roa              August 25

                    By order of Juan Nino de Tabora and report of the
                    royal officials,as partial payment of the sum of money
                    charged against Captain Luis de Contreras, overseer
                    of Oton, as heir of the bondsman of the said overseer.



_Year of 1633_

_Pay of the Infantry of Manila_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

  6     325  2  3   The executors of Pedro de la Mata,
                    deceased                                October 1, 1628
                    Father Fray Diego de Toro, O.P.         January 19

                    Paid by decree of royal Audiencia for payment of a
                    number of licenses for Sangleys.

123     343  0  7   Bartolome de Arana, deceased            June 20, 1631
                    General Fernando de Ayala, his executor December 17

                    By decree of Juan Cerezo de Salamanca, as partial
                    payment for charge [_resulta_] of 600 pesos against
                    him for a bond that he gave to the royal treasury.

124     240  3 11   Agustin de la Cruz, soldier             October 5, 1628
                    General Fernando de Ayala               December 17

                    _Idem_.



_War--Maluco_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

 10     300  0  0   Alferez Rodrigo de Orozco               June 25, 1624
                    Dona Cathalina de Santillan             July 19

                    With authority from Orozco, and by decree of the
                    royal Audiencia.

 12     147  4  9   Francisco Rodriguez, a soldier          December 31, 1632
                    Pedro de Cuellar                        August 2

                    With authority from Rodriguez and by decree of the
                    royal Audiencia.

 14   1,741  5  3   Captain Luis Martin, a Pampango         May 10, 1623
                    The castellan, Gonzalo Ronquillo        September 30

                    With authority from Martin, and by decree of Juan
                    Cerezo de Salamanca.

 41   1,134  0  0   Garcia de Melo, a calker                March 6, 1633
                    Don Pedro de Almonte                    December 30

                    Collects 600 pesos with authority from Melo, and by
                    decree of Juan Cerezo de Salamanca.

 46     862  0  3   Marcos Hernandez, a soldier             August 17, 1621
                    Captain Juan Nicolas                    January 3, 1634

                    Collects 410 pesos with authority from Hernandez,
                    in payment of a charge against him [_i.e._, Nicolas]
                    because he had received more pay than was due him;
                    and without any decree.

 47     400  0  0   Captain Nicolas Maniris                 February 1, 1631
                    Captain Juan Nicolas

                    Collects 197 pesos for the same purpose as above.

5, 8    567  5  0   Various Sangleys                        At various dates
                    The Sangleys                            February 17

                    By decree of the Audiencia, for the payment of 66
                    licenses, there being collected 497 pesos, 4 tomins,
                    6 granos.

 22     457  7  0   Fifteen Sangley stonecutters of the
                    island of Hermosa                       May 9, 1629
                    Fray Francisco de Acosta, procurator-
                    general Order of St. Dominic            September 17

                    With authority and transfer from the Sangleys, and
                    by decree of Governor Don Juan Cerezo de Salamanca.



_Year of 1634_

_Extraordinary_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

 13     750  5  4   The natives of the village of
                    Bang-bang in the province of Panay      1601
                    Procurator-general of the Order of
                    St. Augustine                           August 1

                    For the two-thirds of the cost of the church built
                    in 1601 for the said village, which two-thirds are
                    due from the king. The procurator collects 650 pesos,
                    4 tomins. Paid by decree of Governor Juan Cerezo do
                    Salamanca, and with authority from the debtors.

 15     333  2  8   The Indians of the village of
                    San Miguel                              1627
                    Procurator-general of the
                    Society of Jesus                        September 18

                    They ought to have had 533 pesos, 2 tomins, 8 granos
                    (two-thirds of the sum which they were taxed for
                    the stone house built for the minister of the said
                    village, and which his Majesty was to pay). Collected
                    with authority and transfer of the Indians, and by
                    decree of the governor.

 18     300         The Indians of the village of Magaldan
                    Procurator-general of the Order of
                    St. Dominic                             September 14

                    Due for the third of the church built in the said
                    village by permission of Governor Juan de Silva,
                    and which the king was to pay. With authority and
                    transfer of the Indians, and by decree of the governor.



_Department of Day Wages_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

 60     114  1  0   Francisco, slave to Diego Fernandez
                    Torralva                                June 30, 1618
                    Diego Lopez Saavedra, executor of
                    Torralva                                December 9

                    Due for daily wages on royal works. Collected to pay
                    a charge against Pedro de Valdes. Without decree by
                    the government.



_Department of Ordinary Salaries_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

48-49 2,765  4 11   Licentiate Andres de Alcazar, former auditor
                    of the royal Audiencia of Manila        July 2, 1622
                    Alferez Juan de Mirabal Cedeno          June 18

                    With authority and transfer from the heirs of the
                    said auditor, and by decree of Governor Juan Cerezo
                    de Salamanca.



_War--Manila_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

  7   1,410  5  5   Captain Payo, a sailor                  1631
                    Dona Ana Arias Giron                    January 18

                    Collects 410 pesos, with Payo's authority, by virtue
                    of a decree of Governor Juan Cerezo de Salamanca.

 16     119  1  5   Pascual de Aguilar, deceased            January 22,1626
                    The castellan, Gonzalo Ronquillo        February 6

                    By decree of the above governor, to pay certain bonds
                    that he owed to the royal treasury.

 71     729  3  0   Juan Francisco de Medina                At various dates
 73                 Alferez Juan Hurtado
 72                 Juan Bernal Jaimes
                    Juan Dias de Yecla, clerk of the
                    exchequer                               May 30

                    By decree of the above government.

 84     503  5  3   Pablo de Cervantes                      December 12, 1626
                    Captain Pedro de Almonte                June 19

                    _Idem._

103     356  5  0   Alferez Juan Martin de Vargas           October 8, 1630
                    Captain Antonio de Lezama, nephew of
                    the factor of the royal estate          July 6

                    _Idem._

 94     272  4  0   Sergeant Juan Perez de Aramburo         November 5, 1625
                    Alexandro Lopez, procurator-general of
                    the Society of Jesus                    June 30

                    _Idem._

118   1,457  3  0   Pascual Rodriguez                       At various dates
119                 Pablo de la Ossa
120                 Andres Diaz
                    Juan de Santa Cruz, superintendent of
                    the royal magazines at Manila.          August 14

                    To pay for a quantity of mantas taken from said
                    magazines.

158     100  0  0   Jose Vidal                              September 26, 1634
                    Captain Juan Pimentel                   September 26

                    By decree of the governor.

168     203  0  3   Sergeant Diego de Orozco                February 12, 1634
                    Diego de Vargas Cordero                 October 10

                    With authority and transfer from Orozco, and by decree
                    of the governor, to pay a charge resulting against
                    him in the visit.

170-176 1,481 3 1   Various soldiers                        At various dates
                    Guillermo Chalon                        October 12

                    With authority from the soldiers, to be used as a
                    partial payment of the balance in the account for the
                    fitting of the ship "Trinidad," which sailed from
                    Nueva Espana in 1625. By decree of the governor,
                    and report of the royal officials.

203     933  0  9   Captain Juan de Baquedano               November 6, 1633
                    Fray Alonso Hidalgo procurator-general
                    of the Order of St. Dominic, his
                    executor                                December 9

                    Collects 250 pesos, by decree of the governor.



_Pay of the infantry of Terrenate_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g
  2     300  0  0   Adjutant Juan Heredia Ormentegui        March 20, 1628
                    Captain Silvestre de Aybar              January 11

                    Collects 100 pesos, with authority of Heredia, and
                    by decree of the governor.

7-23  8,995  0  0   Various soldiers                        At various dates
                    The castellan, Gonzalo Ronquillo        February 6

                    With authority from the soldiers, and by decree of
                    the governor and visitor, in order to pay charges
                    resulting against himself and uncle, in the visit.

 24     416  4 11   Mattheo Sangal, a Pampango soldier      February 22, 1620
                    General Antonio Carreno de Valdez       February 13

                    Collects 215 pesos, by decree of the governor.

 27     240  0  0   Captain Juan Garcia                     March 12, 1620
                    Captain Francisco Hernandez             March 4

                    Collects 40 pesos on account, by virtue of a decree.

 28     857  0  0   Captain Gonzalo Portillo                February 24, 1634
                    Himself                                 March 11

                    Paid to him so that he might go to Caraga, where
                    he had received an appointment as chief accountant,
                    that money being necessary to him, and because he had
                    to take his wife and family. By decree of the governor.

 30     462  0  3   Marcos Hernandez                        August 17, 1621
                    Sargento-mayor Melchor de Cortaza       March 27

                    With authority and transfer from Hernandez, and by
                    decree of the governor, to pay for the articles given
                    from the royal magazines.

 32     100  0  0   Andres Panganiban                       April 26, 1626
                    Francisco Pangan                        March 30

                    Collects 47 pesos, 9 granos, to pay a charge made
                    against him in the visit.

 36   4,923  0  0   Juan de Ulex Usategui
                    Captain Juan Sarmiento                  April 13

                    Collects 3,748 pesos, by decree of the governor, in
                    order to pay the charge resulting against Sarmiento in
                    the visit. The sum due was given to Usategui as alms by
                    various soldiers of Terrenate from the pay owed them.

 41     435  6  1   Alferez Nicolas Cavil                   March 11, 1631
                    Captain Jose de Naveda                  May 17

                    Collects 248 pesos, 4 tomins, 8 granos, by decree of
                    the governor, to pay a charge [_resulta_] that he owed.

 42     175  2  6   Juan Bacol, an Indian                   May 21, 1634

                    By decree of the governor.

 43     190  3  0   Alferez Matheo Noque                    February 29, 1628
                    Juan Diaz de Yela                       May 30

                    _Idem._

 45     706  5  8   Alferez Luis Patil                      February 15, 1633
                    Vicente de los Reyes                    May 30

                    _Idem._

 56   1,145  5  3   Captain Pedro Cid                       February 19, 1620
 57                 His wife, as the guardian of his
                    children                                June 30

                    Collects 155 pesos, by decree of the governor.

 63     302  6  6   Alferez Juan Cabal                      November 23, 1619
                    Juan Diaz de Yela                       July 1

                    By decree of the governor.

68-71   934  0  0   Four soldiers                           At various dates
                    Juan de Santa Cruz                      August 14

                    By decree.

 72     201  4 11   Matheo Sacal                            February 22, 1620
                    General Antonio Carreno de Valdes       August 18

                    By decree of the governor.

 76     100  0  0   Adjutant Juan Sevillano
                    Alferez Juan de Almansa                 August 26

                    With authority from Sevillano, and by decree of
                    the governor.

 84     835  4  2   Two soldiers                            At various dates
 85                 Miguel de Villareal                     September 11

                    By decree of the governor, to pay a balance that
                    Villarreal owed to his Majesty.

91-94 1,303  4  5   Four soldiers                           At various dates
                    Captain Geronimo de Fuente Cortes       October 5

                    By decree of the governor, to pay a charge [_resulta_]
                    which he owed his Majesty.

102-104 458  4 10   Three soldiers                          At various dates
                    Diego de Vargas Cordero                 October 10

                    By decree of the governor, to pay certain charges
                    that he owed to his Majesty.

105-111 2,715 5 10  Seven soldiers                          At various dates
                    Guillermo Chalon                        November 12

                    By decree of the governor, and report of the royal
                    officials, to pay the balance of the fitting out [of
                    the ship "Trinidad"] of the year 1625, which came to
                    these islands.

112-114 749  7 10   Three soldiers                          At various dates
                    Dona Ana de Cardona

                    By decree of the governor, to pay the sum owed the
                    royal treasury by her husband.

126     150  0  0   Francisco Lopez                         February 8, 1609
                    Procurator-general of the Order of
                    St. Dominic                             November 3

                    By decree of the governor.

127     556  6  6   Geronimo de Lamonte                     January 23, 1632
                    Captain Pedro de Rojas                  November 3

                    _Idem._

129     100  4  5   Alferez Juan Carreno de Quiroz
                    Captain Juan de Olaez                   November 8

                    _Idem._

130     187  1  5   Alferez Nicolas Cahil                   March 14, 1631
                    Alferez Francisco de Torres             November 18

                    Collects 185 pesos, by decree of the governor.

132     200  0  0   Pedro de Salinas                        January 26, 1624
                    Procurator-general of the Society of
                    Jesus                                   November 28

                    Collects 100 pesos, by decree of the governor.



_Pay of the Seamen_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

 35     650  2  9   Two sailors                             At different dates
 36                 Esteban Farfan                          May 31

                    By decree of the governor.

 46     352  5  8   Bartoleme Pacheco                       March 16, 1616
                    Mario Geronimo, his heir                June 12

                    _Idem._

 62     529  6  7   The heirs and executors of Juan Perez
                    de Olea                                 April 22, 1631
                    Lorenzo de Victoria                     July 3

                    _Idem._

 73     680  0  0   Juan Zamorano
 74                 Francisco Reinoso
                    Juan de Santa Cruz                      August 14

                    By decree of the royal Audiencia, and report of the
                    royal officials.

 95     271  1  4   Juan Diaz                               January 2, 1620
                    Fray Geronimo de Belen, of the Order
                    of St. Dominic                          October 6

                    By decree of the governor, with authority to pay a
                    charge due the royal treasury from some poor Sangleys.

 96     894  6  8   Two sailors                             At different dates
 97                 Guillermo Galon

                    To pay the balance of accounts owing from the fitting
                    up of the ship above referred to.

 98     152  5  8   The heirs of Bartholeme Pacheco, calker March 16, 1616
                    Alferez Juan Garcia                     October 25

                    By decree of the governor.

110     691  1  9   Jose Hernandez                          July 3, 1633
                    Licentiate Pedro Tagama                 December 12

                    Collects 350 pesos, by authority and decree of the
                    governor.




_Year of 1635_


_Factory Department_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

 15      60  0  0   Antonio Perez, an Indian ropemaker      August 31, 1617
                    Felipe Dalo                             April 18

                    Collects 42 pesos, 2 tomins, 6 granos, with authority,
                    to pay a charge resulting against him in the visit.



_War--Manila_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

 11     371  5  0   Manuel Pacheco                          January 22, 1635
                    Archbishop Fray Fernando do Guerrero    February 9

                    With authority and transfer.

 12     173  3  4   Francisco Rodriguez                     January 24, 1635
                    _Idem_                                  February 9

                    _Idem._

15      302  4  3   Alferez Alonso Ruiz                     November 2, 1634
                    Captain Garcia de Cuadros               February 17

                    By decree of the governor.

30      180  5  7   Juan Vidal                              November 19, 1629
                    Gonzalo Teran

                    Collects 100 pesos, by decree of the governor.

36      467  6 11   Hernando Diaz de la Pena                November 31, 1628
                    Melchor Perez                           March 31

                    Collects 200 pesos, with authority and transfer,
                    and by decree of the governor.

 37     269  7  4   Juan de Oria                            November 18, 1629
                    Captain Francisco Lopez                 March 26

                    Collects 150 pesos, by authority and decree of the
                    governor.

 47     131  2  1   Alferez Francisco de Albornos           September 25, 1634
                    Blas de Raselez                         May 11

                    With authority and transfer, and by decree of the
                    governor.

 62      63  3  6   Bartholome de Espinosa                  June 14, 1627
                    Captain Luis Alonso de Roa              June 16

                    With authority, to satisfy the charges resulting from
                    the visit.

64-67 1,066  2  5   Four soldiers                           At various dates
                    Alonso de Roa
                    Juan de Olaez
                    Captain Luis                            June 16

                    To satisfy the charges resulting from the visit.

66      329  3  4   Alferez Diego de Vargas                 September 18, 1633
[_sic_]             Alferez Francisco Beltran               June 20

                    To satisfy the charges resulting from the visit. By
                    authority and decree of the governor.

 71     277  4  5   Alferez Domingo Perez                   November 2, 1634
                    Captain Alonso Tello de Guzman          June 22

                    With authority and transfer, and by decree of the
                    governor.

 75     267  6 11   Hernando Diaz de la Pena                November 1, 1628
                    Melchor Perez

                    _Idem._

111-113 846  7  0   Three soldiers                          At various dates
                    Dona Cathalina de Gaona

                    With authority and transfer, and by decree of the
                    governor, to pay the charges resulting against her
                    husband in the visit, to the treasurer, Juan Ruiz
                    de Escalona.



_War--Maluco_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

  1     372  6  5   Andres Perez                            February 25, 1633
                    Dona Francisca Samaniego                January 10

                    Collects 200 pesos, with authority of Perez, and by
                    decree of the governor.

  6     638  6  6   Alferez Rodriguez de Orozco             February 19, 1625
                    Lope de Sosa                            January 22

                    Collects 300 pesos, by authority and decree of the
                    governor.

 10     411  0  3   Luis Latao, an Indian                   May 14, 1623
                    Archbishop Fray Hernando Guerrero       February 9

                    By decree of the governor, to pay a debt and balance
                    owed to his Majesty by the archbishop's nephew, Captain
                    Gabriel Velasquez, of whom the archbishop was executor.

11, 12  145  2  3   Two soldiers                            At different dates
                    _Idem_                                  February 9

                    _Idem._

 13     193  2  0   Alferez Manuel Lorenzo                  September 12, 1633
                    Agustin Angel de Carvajal               February 17

                    By decree of the governor.

15, 16  428  4  0   Two soldiers                            At different dates
                    Dona Ysabel de Guerra                   February 27

                    With authority and transfer, to pay a charge that
                    she owed to the royal treasury.

 21     779  2  0   Alferez Esteban de Espinosa             December 20, 1634
                    Pedro de Almonte                        March 9

                    By decree of the governor.

23      250  0  0   Alferez Geronimo Soman                  March 23, 1628
                    Procurator of the Society of Jesus      March 27

                    Collects 100 pesos, by authority and decree of the
                    governor.

24-27 1,472  0  0   Four soldier                            At various dates
                    Bartholome Gonzalez Guerra              March 30

                    With authority of the owners, and by decree of the
                    governor, to pay the balance of an account which he
                    owed for the fitting up of a ship.

 32     200  0  0   Alferez Alonso Vaez                     February 8, 1633
                    Juan de Santisteban Bracamonte          April 28

                    Collects 62 pesos, 4 tomins, by decree of the governor.

41, 47  137  4  0   _Idem_                                  February 8, 1633
                    Captain Francisco de Atienza            March 26

                    The balance of the 200 pesos above. By decree of
                    the governor.

 42     200  0  0   Alferez Diego Duarte                    March 5, 1633
                    _Idem_                                  March 26

                    By decree of the governor.

 48     283  7  4   Lucas Capata                            April 29, 1634
                    Juan Colmenares                         July 5

                    _Idem._

 50     300         Juan de Heredia                         January 20, 1623
                    Juan Nicolas                            December 23, 1622
                    The executors of Juan de Orguelles      June 15

                    With authority, and by decree of the governor, to
                    pay a charge resulting against Orguelles.

43      10,621 1 5  Various soldiers                        At various dates
pay-                Captain Luis Alonso de Roa              June 16
checks
                    By decree of the visitor, to pay charges that his
                    father owed for bonds, and which resulted against
                    him in the visit.

 96     900  0  0   Seven soldiers                          At various dates
                    Hipolito Centellas                      June 22

                    Collects 200 pesos, by authority and decree of the
                    governor.

 97     800  0  0   Two soldiers                            At various dates
 98                 Hernando Zerrudo                        June 22

                    With authority from the soldiers, and by decree of
                    the governor, to pay the charges [_resultas_] that
                    he owed his Majesty.

99-     1,412 1 11  Various soldiers                        At various dates
103                 The factor, Matheo de Heredia           June 22

                    With authority and transfers, and by decree of the
                    governor, to pay the charges resulting against him
                    in the visit.

103-    1,417 2 0   Three soldiers                          At various dates
105                 Dona Magdalena de Gaona, wife of the    June 22
                    treasurer, Silvestre de Aibar

                    By decree of the governor, to pay the charges resulting
                    against the treasurer in the visit.

162-    2,304 4 7   Various soldiers                        At various dates
176                 Dona Cathalina de Gaona, widow of the
                    treasurer, Juan Ruiz de Escalona

                    By decree of the governor, to pay the charges resulting
                    against the treasurer in the visit.



_Department of Day Wages_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

  4     1,445 6 0   Amgui and Tachaucho, and other Sangleys July 30, 1633
  5                                                         February 9

                    For services on royal works. Collected by decree of
                    the governor to pay general licenses for 1635.



_Extraordinary_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

2       1,129 3 4   The natives of Estero de Lobo, in       1618
                    Cagayan
                    Procurator-general of the Order of      March 3
                    St. Dominic

                    The amount (one-third) to be paid by his Majesty in
                    the building of their church. Collects 207 pesos,
                    with authority, and by decree of the governor, to
                    pay 24 Sangley licenses.

33-43   5,117 7 3   Eleven sailors                          At various dates
                    Admiral Luis Alonso de Roa              June 16

                    With authority and transfer from the sailors, to
                    pay the charges resulting against him in the visit,
                    and which he owed his Majesty.

44      341 1 9     Jose Hernandez, a sailor                July, 1633
                    Licentiate Pedro Cegavia                June 22

                    By authority and decree of the governor.

45-47   1,921 5 9   Three sailors                           At various dates
                    Hernando Cerrido, constable of the
                    royal Audiencia

                    With authority and transfer from the soldiers, and
                    by decree of the governor, to pay charges resulting
                    against him in the visit.



_Department of Ordinary Salaries_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

11      20,000 0 0  The property of deceased persons for    1624
                    loans made to royal treasury
                    Alferez Juan de Mirabal Cedeno          June 22

                    Borrowed from the property of Licentiate Andres de
                    Alcaraz, former auditor of the royal Audiencia. Repaid
                    on account, 14,476 pesos, by decree of the governor,
                    and with authority and transfer from the heirs of
                    the said auditor.



_Salaries of Alcaldes-mayor_

Number   Amount     Due to                                  Expiration
of pay-  of pay-                                                of service
check    check      Paid to                                 Date of payment

          P  t  g

18      111  3  8   Alferez Francisco de los Rios Coronel,  December 6, 1629
                    ex-corregidor of Catanduanes
                    Juan de Colmenar                        June 5

                    With authority, and by decree of the governor.


Accordingly, all the aforesaid is obvious, and appears from the
said pay-checks, whose originals remain in my possession, to which I
refer. In order that it might be on record, I certify it at the order
of the said governor and captain-general, Don Sebastian Hurtado de
Corcuera y Mendoza. Manila, April 15, one thousand six hundred and
thirty-six. Amount 102,596 pesos, 1 tomin, 8 granos.

Juan Bautista de Cubiaga

We, the undersigned notaries, certify that Juan Bautista de Cubiaga,
whose mark and name appear at the end of this certification of eleven
pages, is auditor of accounts and results of the royal estate of the
Filipinas Islands, as he styles himself. To the certifications and
papers of these and other records that he has despatched, touching
the said his office, entire faith and credit has been, and is, given,
in and out of court. In order that such may be obvious, we signed
this in Manila, April thirty, one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Alfonso Baeza del Rio, royal notary.
Francisco de la Torre, notary of the royal crown.
Andres Martin del Arroyo, notary of the royal crown.



_Reduction of expenses_

Sire:

In my endeavor to be a good steward of your Majesty's estate, having
noticed and considered the many expenses and the lack of profit that
you encounter in these islands, solely in order to maintain in them
the Catholic religion, I have thought it advisable to reduce some of
the expenses--as your Majesty will please to have examined by means
of the orders for the said reduction, and which your Majesty will
please approve or censure, according as you judge it most for the
good of your service. My only desire is that God will not ask account
from me for doing it badly, and for unjustly causing expense to your
Majesty. Although I desire to render your Majesty so just an account,
I could not fear it so much as the first, if I gave it as many others
of us who serve you do.

I thought it advisable to save the pay of six hundred pesos per year,
which a captain receives for serving [as such] in the company that he
raised in Mexico; and although my officers are careful to station and
retire the guards, and serve as those of the master-of-camp, I see
to it that they do it well, and that they are not derelict in their
duty. I have given the same orders to the governor and sargento-mayor
of the forts of Terrenate, who also have command of two companies;
the governor and sargento-mayor of the island of Hermosa, of two other
companies; the warden of Camboaga [_i.e._, Zamboanga], of another;
and the alcaldes-mayor of Oton, Cibu, Nueva Segovia, and Caraga, who
have a company together, and command their men in the forts in the
above-named islands. Also in this army, from now on, a captain will
have command of another company, and will receive the pay of the chief
guard of the Parian, which will be paid from the communal fund of the
Chinese, and his pay will be saved to the treasury of your Majesty. The
captains who will serve without pay from your Majesty's royal treasury
will thus amount to eleven; and hence a great sum of money will be
saved by the end of the year, as well as the [expense for] the post
of sargento-mayor of this army, which is held by my nephew, Don Pedro
Hurtado de Corcuera--who serves without pay, together with a company
of thirty horsemen, whom I thought to be very expedient for your
Majesty's service, for the following reasons. First, just as I caused
and ordered the raising of four companies among the citizens of this
city, in the infantry, in order that they might exercise themselves
in the squadrons, and be ready for any emergencies that may arise,
I also had two companies of fifty horse apiece raised--one made up of
the nobility of the city, who can keep horses, and the other of the
overseers of the royal stockyards--all armed with spears. In order that
the above horsemen might have someone to instruct and exercise them,
this company of thirty horsemen was enlisted. The actual officers in
it are captain, alferez, and lieutenant. It would be very advisable
to raise the number to fifty, if that would be agreeable to your
Majesty; for besides being necessary for the guard of the coast, and
to keep these nations--the Chinese, Japanese, and Indians--in check,
they patrol the city nightly, and shut and open the city gates,
on horseback. For that reason the poor infantrymen are excused from
patrol duty, and from locking the gates, and thus from going about
almost every night knee-deep in water, from which many diseases
and deaths ensued; that has been avoided by this means. Experience
has demonstrated, also, how useful and profitable these cavalrymen
may be when stationed as a troop among the artillery on a campaign,
for skirmishing--for which they are greatly esteemed in the Flandes
army; and, at the very least, the sight of them strikes terror in
those present, and the noise made by them in those absent. Will your
Majesty be pleased to approve and confirm this company of cavalrymen,
and grant permission that it consist of fifty soldiers. Notwithstanding
the savings and the reductions, of which I inform your Majesty, not
only is there no expense incurred in this company but there is even
a saving of money for the following reasons. In recent times there
have been eight companies of infantry for the guard of the city; but
immediately upon my arrival, I reduced them to six. When I sent the
reenforcements to Terrenate--for two hundred Spaniards went there in
three companies, and one hundred Pampangos (who are as good and as
faithful here as are the Burgundians in Flandes)--and the guard of
the city remained in four companies, seeing that it was impossible
to cover the posts and to stand guard with so few men, I ordered
two hundred Pampangos to be enrolled into two companies, so that now
there are the six hundred necessary guardsmen. The Pampangos are in
place of the two hundred Spaniards who went [to Terrenate]. Seeing
that the said Spaniards are lacking, there is nothing but to appeal
to the Pampangos; they are being instructed, and are managing their
arms in a manner that makes me very well satisfied with them. Both
the captains and other officers, and the soldiers, receive half the
pay of the Spaniards. Thus the two companies of Pampangos cause your
Majesty an expense of ten thousand pesos, and that of the cavalry
seven thousand, making a total of seventeen thousand pesos. The
two infantry companies which were here before caused an expense of
twenty-two thousand pesos or thereabouts; so, if the former expense
was this amount, and that of the Pampangos and the cavalry now is
seventeen thousand, there is an annual saving of five thousand pesos
to your Majesty. There are thirty more soldiers than before. Will
your Majesty please have this approved and look favorably upon it;
and believe that I am spending your Majesty's revenue with great
care, and that I can have no scruple of conscience in what I am
doing. Your Majesty will learn the truth of this by experience, in a
short time. May our Lord preserve the Catholic person of your Majesty,
as is necessary to Christendom. Manila, the last of June, 1636. Sire,
your vassal kisses your Majesty's feet.

Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera



_Revision of pay and rations made September 4, 1635_

Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, knight of the Order of Alcantara,
member of his Majesty's Council, member of the Council of War in the
States of Flandes, governor and captain-general of these Filipinas
Islands, and president of the royal Audiencia, resident in the city
of Manila:

From the discovery of these islands until now there has been no
instruction or fixed order given by his Majesty in regard to the
pay and rations which have been and ought to be given to many of the
persons who have served and who shall serve in his service in various
posts of the sea and in other employments, both in this city of Manila
and along the coast and in the port of Cavite, in the shipyards for
the construction of ships which are built for the royal service in the
provinces of these islands, in the presidios of the islands, and in the
voyages to and from Nueva Espana, Terrenate, the island of Hermosa,
Macan, India, and other places; but the governors my predecessors,
and the councils of the treasury, made some regulations, by virtue
of decrees from his Majesty (as the matter was referred to them,
so that they could decide on what was best). Some of the wages paid
were thus very greatly increased, thereby causing, from that time
until the present, a heavy burden and debt on the royal estate. So
heavy has been this burden that the royal estate has come to so low
an ebb by reason of some salaries that are especially excessive, that
it is obliged to demand loans quite ordinarily from the inhabitants
of this said city; and, because of the heavy loans that have been
made for many years, it has been impossible to free itself from its
many debts. Now therefore, on account of all these considerations,
and because the matter has been examined and considered attentively,
as well as the little profit of the royal patrimony in these islands
(or rather its many expenses) because of the constant reenforcements
of men, money, ammunition, food, and other things that must be sent
to the presidios of the islands (which, being many and so distant and
separated from one another), meet a much greater cost and expense than
his Majesty is told--in especial the great cost of the preparation
and equipment of the two ships sent annually to Nueva Espana for the
usual reenforcement of men and the other things that maintain this
land; and almost the chief reason for which those ships sail and
are sent seems not to be for reenforcements, but only to carry and
to bring back the goods of the inhabitants and merchants of Manila,
in which they traffic to the extent that is well known, and to so
much greater a sum than his Majesty has permitted, at so great an
expense to the royal estate, and little or no profit from the duties
and freights that they owe), it is advisable to revise and adjust some
of the posts and wages and rations, to abolish some and add others,
and to create some new ones which are obligatory and necessary for
the service of his Majesty. Therefore, and because it is advisable,
according to the present condition of matters, and in order to relieve
the said royal treasury and to help it as far as may be possible
(as his Majesty commands by various decrees), and in order to attend
better to what is obligatory and necessary, and to see that the royal
treasury be not pledged so deeply as it has been hitherto and is now,
he ordered by a decision communicated and conferred over with persons
zealous for his Majesty's service--and he did so order--the official
judges of the royal estate of these islands, and all the other persons
who administer the royal revenues, both in the royal treasuries of the
garrisons at Terrenate and the island of Hermosa, under the titles of
accountants, factors, and royal officials, and in the other provinces
(whence they come to this royal treasury of Manila to report what has
entered into their possession)--each one in so far as it concerns him,
or can concern him--to give the necessary orders in his Majesty's
name, so that from the first of the month of October next of this
present year, and thenceforth, all shall understand what is to be
paid and given to the persons who shall serve his Majesty in the
posts mentioned in this order, and which will be mentioned in every
case. That sum is that which they are to receive as their proper pay;
and it must be observed and kept in the following form.

The assayer and weigher of the royal treasury of this city shall
serve for two hundred and fifty pesos per annum, without any ration.

The executor of the royal estate shall receive one hundred and fifty
pesos per annum, without any ration.

The keeper of the provisions in the royal magazines of this city shall
receive a salary of three hundred pesos per annum, without any ration.

The keeper of the provisions in the royal magazines of the port
of Cavite shall receive a salary of three hundred pesos per annum,
without any ration.

The keeper of the royal magazines, provisions, arms, and ammunition
for the forts of Terrenate shall receive a salary of three hundred
pesos per annum, without any ration.

The keeper of the provisions, arms, and ammunition for the presidio
of the island of Hermosa shall receive three hundred pesos per annum,
without any ration.

The keeper of the provisions, arms, and ammunition for the port
of Yloylo shall receive a salary of three hundred pesos per annum,
without any ration.

The clerk of the royal magazines of this city shall receive one
hundred and fifty pesos per annum, without any ration.

The shore-master of the port of Cavite and of all the naval dock-yards
there shall receive a salary of six hundred pesos per annum, without
any ration.

The overseer at the royal works of all the day-laborers and assistants
at the said port of Cavite shall receive a salary of six hundred
pesos per annum, without any ration.

The artillery founder of this city shall receive a salary of five
hundred pesos per annum, without any ration or anything else.

The shipbuilder and the master-workman of the works at the port
of Cavite shall receive a salary of six hundred pesos per annum,
without any ration.

The manager of the powder that is made for his Majesty on the other
side of the river shall receive a salary of four hundred pesos per
annum, without anything else.

The manager of the rigging which is made in the province of Balayan
for his Majesty shall receive a salary of two hundred and fifty pesos
per annum, without any ration.

The castellan of the fort of Santiago in this city of Manila shall
receive a salary of six hundred pesos per annum, and shall hold
the place by virtue of regular appointment. He who exercises that
office _ad interim_ shall receive one-half that sum as his Majesty
has ordered.

The lieutenant of the said fort of Santiago in this city, who has
hitherto been appointed at a salary of four hundred and twenty pesos,
is now removed and discharged; for there is no need of him in the
said fort, since there is an alferez and a sergeant.

There shall be two infantry adjutants in the forts of Terrenate. One
shall receive a salary of three hundred and sixty pesos per annum,
while the other shall receive ninety-six pesos per annum--the pay of
a simple soldier. They shall receive nothing else.

All the Pampango soldiers who serve in the forts of Terrenate shall
receive annual pay at the rate of forty-eight pesos of eight reals
apiece. They shall be in two companies, which shall be under the
command of the master-of-camp and his sargento-mayor, each of whom
shall receive a salary of two hundred and fifty pesos per annum.

The two alferezes of the said Pampango nation shall receive an annual
pay of one hundred and fifty pesos apiece.

Each of the sergeants of the said [Pampango] nation shall receive an
annual pay of one hundred and twenty pesos.

There shall not be an artillery captain in the forts of Terrenate,
for that place is abolished.

The surgeon of the royal hospital for the said forts of Terrenate shall
receive a salary of six hundred pesos per annum, without any ration.

The field captain of the said forts shall receive an annual pay of
one hundred and fifty pesos, without anything else.

The military notary of the said forts, who has hitherto received a
salary of two hundred pesos per annum, shall not receive that sum
from the said day and thenceforth; and the accountant of the said
forts shall under no consideration pay it to him.

The four substitutes [_entretenimientos_], who were reduced to their
[opportunities for] advantage in the said forts of Terrenate, shall
be given nothing by way of additional pay or allowances; and they
shall not be paid in advance from the said day and thenceforth by
the accountant of those forts.

The infantry adjutants of the presidios in the provinces of Cibu, Oton,
Cagayan, Caraga, and Cambuanga, shall serve as simple soldiers for the
annual pay of ninety-six pesos--the same as the simple soldier--without
anything else.

The field _borrechel_ (which means the field captain and borrechel
in one) shall serve for an annual pay of one hundred and fifty pesos,
without anything else.

The military notary, who has been hitherto stationed in this city,
with an annual salary of two hundred pesos, shall not receive that sum,
and the royal officials shall not pay it to him.

The head drummer shall be paid at the rate of one hundred and twenty
pesos per annum--the pay of a musketeer.

The chief gunners--in this city of Manila, he of the fort of Santiago
in this city, and those of the port of Cavite, the island of Hermosa,
and Terrenate--shall receive annual salaries at the rate of two
hundred and fifty pesos.

The apothecary of the royal hospital in this said city of Manila shall
receive an annual salary of two hundred pesos, without any ration.

The galley captains of this city of Manila, the port of Cavite,
the island of Hermosa, and Terrenate, shall be abolished; for the
duties of galley captain shall be performed by the master of the
galley. The latter shall receive the royal revenue, and shall give
account of it. He shall give bonds to the satisfaction of the royal
official judges. He shall receive an annual pay of two hundred and
fifty pesos, and, when afloat, the ration which shall pertain to him
in addition to the pay; but, when not afloat, he shall not receive
anything in addition to the pay.

The boatswains of the said galleys shall receive an annual pay of two
hundred pesos without ration, when in port, and when they are afloat
their ordinary ration, as aforesaid.

The boatswains' mates of the said galleys shall receive when ashore an
annual pay of one hundred and fifty pesos, and thirty gantas of rice
[per month], which must be given them on account of their pay; and,
when afloat, the said one hundred and fifty pesos and the ordinary
ration, as aforesaid.

The guards of the said galleys of this city, Terrenate, and the island
of Hermosa shall be abolished, as they are unnecessary.

The corporals of the said galleys are removed and abolished, for they
are unnecessary.

The captain of the said galleys shall receive an annual pay of two
hundred pesos, without any ration; when afloat, he shall be given his
ordinary ration as an officer of said galley, in addition to his pay.

The pilots who sail on any voyage from these islands shall receive
an annual pay of five hundred pesos, besides their ordinary ration,
which shall be given them from port to port, wherever they may be
anchored; but while not afloat they shall receive only two hundred
pesos as an allowance, and nothing else.

The mates of his Majesty's ships shall receive an annual pay of two
hundred and fifty pesos, besides the ordinary ration, when afloat,
and during any voyage; but when not afloat, even though they be
employed on the ships which are to sail on any voyage whatever, they
shall receive one hundred and fifty pesos per year, and their ration
of thirty gantas of cleaned rice per month, as do the other sailors,
and it shall be charged to the account of their pay.

The second mates of the said ships shall receive an annual pay of
two hundred pesos when afloat, and their ordinary ration; but in the
interval when they are not afloat, even though employed in the ships
that are to sail, they shall receive one hundred and fifty pesos
per year, and the ordinary ration of the sailor, of thirty gantas of
cleaned rice per month, at the account of their pay, as aforesaid.

All the sailors who are employed and shall be employed on the Cavite
coast, and anywhere else, shall receive pay at the rate of one hundred
and fifty pesos per year, and thirty gantas of cleaned rice apiece
per month. The rice shall be charged to the account of their pay,
as aforesaid. When afloat they shall receive the said one hundred
and fifty pesos, and in addition the ration that has been given
them hitherto.

The Spanish common seamen who are employed anywhere shall receive
pay of one hundred pesos per year, and the thirty gantas of rice
per month on account of their pay, as aforesaid. When afloat they
shall receive their ordinary ration, as do the rest of the sailors,
in addition to their pay.

The Indian common seamen who are employed anywhere shall receive
forty-eight pesos per year, and fifteen gantas of cleaned rice per
month on the account of their pay, as aforesaid; and when afloat,
the said pay, and in addition the ordinary ration which has hitherto
been given them.

The Spanish carpenters, both those who work in the port of Cavite,
and those who work at shipbuilding in other places, shall receive an
annual pay of two hundred and fifty pesos, and no more, without any
ration while on shore; but when afloat, the said pay, and in addition
the ordinary ration, as hitherto.

The chief calker who shall be employed in any place shall receive
an annual pay of three hundred pesos, without any ration; but when
afloat, the said pay, and in addition his ordinary ration, as hitherto.

The Spanish calkers shall receive two hundred and fifty pesos per
year, without ration while in port; but when afloat, the said pay
and in addition their ordinary ration, as hitherto.

The Spanish coopers shall receive each two hundred and fifty pesos per
annum, without anything else; but if afloat, their ordinary ration,
as hitherto.

The Indian coopers shall receive an annual pay of sixty pesos per
year, and fifteen gantas of cleaned rice per month; and afloat,
their ration in addition to the said pay.

The diver in the port of Cabite shall receive two hundred pesos per
year, and a ration of thirty gantas of cleaned rice per month, which
shall be charged to the account of his pay; and afloat, the ordinary
ration, as hitherto.

The Spanish boss of the rope-factory at the port of Cabite shall
receive an annual pay of one hundred and fifty pesos, and thirty
gantas of cleaned rice per month, which shall be paid on the account
of his wages.

The two Indian artisans in the rope-factory shall receive fifty-four
pesos per year apiece, and fifteen gantas of cleaned rice per month,
on the account of their pay.

The Spanish boss of the smithy at the port of Cabite shall receive
an annual pay of four hundred pesos, without any ration.

The Indian smiths at the said port of Cabite and in the foundry and
arsenal of this camp shall receive--the boss, one hundred pesos per
year, and fifty gantas of cleaned rice per month; and the others,
the pay that they are receiving. The latter shall all receive fifteen
gantas of cleaned rice per month, which shall be charged to the
account of their pay.

The Sangley champan men, and sailors in the champans that belong to
his Majesty in any place, shall receive the pay in money that has
hitherto been given them, and in addition fifteen gantas of cleaned
rice per month, instead of the twenty gantas that have been given them,
besides their pay.

The Sangley carpenters and sawyers who are actually working in the
port of Cabite and other places shall receive the pay in money that
has hitherto been given them; and in addition, fifteen gantas of
cleaned rice per month instead of the twenty.

The sawyers of _brazas_ [27] shall receive four reals for each _braza_
one braza long and one vara wide, but nothing else. However, if they
prefer rice on their account, it shall be given them at its market
price to his Majesty.

The Sangley smiths who work on the Cabite shore and in other places
shall receive the pay in money that has been given them hitherto;
and, in addition, fifteen gantas of cleaned rice instead of twenty.

The Sangley calkers who ordinarily work at the royal works in Cabite
and other places shall receive five pesos per month, and, in addition,
fifteen gantas of cleaned rice.

The Indians who are employed to row in the sentinel boat at Mariveles,
shall receive one peso in money and fifteen gantas of cleaned rice
per month.

The Lascars who are employed in any capacity in Cabite, either on sea
or on land, shall receive--the two bosses one hundred and fifty pesos
per year, and in addition fifteen gantas of cleaned rice per month;
while the others shall receive the pay that they receive at present,
and they shall be given in addition fifteen gantas of cleaned rice
per month, apiece.

The other two sub-bosses of the Lascars shall receive one hundred
and twenty pesos per year, and fifteen gantas of cleaned rice per
month. All the others shall receive the pay that they received before,
and fifteen gantas of cleaned rice per month, besides their pay.

There shall be twenty musketeers in each one of the companies of this
city and in the companies of the other presidios outside the city,
but no more. They shall be paid at the rate of two pesos per month,
one for additional pay for the musket; but no more, inasmuch as each
one has been reduced four reals.

The acting sergeants of the company of this said city of Manila, and
the others in the presidios outside it, shall receive an increase of
two pesos per month, in addition to the ten pesos that they received
before, because of the severe labor that they have to perform.

Likewise, the corporals of all the companies in this said city,
and outside it, shall receive an increase of one peso per month,
as additional pay, besides what they were receiving before.

There shall be no shield-bearers to any company of this said city,
or in the other presidios; and consequently, they shall not be paid
at his Majesty's account. But the captains shall have them at their
own cost, and the captains shall not go without them, nor station
the guards without the said page.

The commander of the ships which are despatched annually to Nueva
Espana shall receive a salary of three thousand pesos per annum,
besides the usual ration while sailing from port to port--even though
he anchor at any other port in the islands, if he reach it in distress,
even though it be not the legitimate port whence he sailed.

The admiral of the said ships shall receive an annual salary of two
thousand pesos, and the usual ration while sailing from port to port,
in the same manner as the commander.

The notaries of the said ships which sail to Nueva Espana, or on any
other voyage, shall receive one hundred and fifty pesos per year,
with the usual ration, as hitherto, while sailing from port to port.

The stewards of the said ships, and those making any other voyages from
these islands, shall receive one hundred and fifty pesos per year,
besides the usual ration, while sailing in the same manner as above;
but when they reach land their pay or ration shall not run on.

The guards of the water on the said ships, and those making other
voyages, shall receive one hundred and fifty pesos per year, and
their ration while sailing in the above manner.

The office of the controllership of the royal exchequer must be held
by such a person as that office requires. For in that office, not only
is he under obligation to examine and review the transactions in all
the other offices--the paymaster's, the factor's and the chief office
[of the exchequer]--but it is instituted from their beginning, and
must keep an equal number of books, which must agree with them and be
made as they. He exercises the duties of the paymaster, of the factor,
and of the chief official of the said exchequer, in order that the
despatches made in the said offices may be collated and compared
with the duplicates which he shall have made at that same time in
his office of the controllership. Finding that they conform, those
pay-checks and payments will be despatched more properly. He shall be
given two clerks to help him, at a salary of ninety-six pesos per year,
without anything else. He who shall exercise the said duties of the
controllership shall receive two hundred and fifty pesos per year,
without anything else.

In the pay-office of the infantry, in the accountancy of the treasury,
there shall be a chief official, who shall receive three hundred
pesos per year, but nothing else. This is the same sum that he has
received and is receiving in the said office.

In the said pay-office and accountancy, there shall be a subordinate
official with an annual salary of two hundred and fifty pesos,
without anything else, which is the sum that he has been receiving.

There shall be two clerks in the said office, so that they may
become experienced in the management and handling of papers; they
shall succeed to the others who shall be employed in the other higher
places; and they shall work there and aid them, because of the press
of matters there, as I have been informed. Each of those clerks shall
receive one hundred and fifty pesos per year, without ration.

In addition to the chief clerk and the sub-clerk at present employed
in the office of the factor of the exchequer, at the pay that they
receive, there shall be another clerk; so that he may help them, and so
that he may become experienced in the office for the future. He shall
receive a salary of one hundred and fifty pesos, without anything else.

In the chief office of the exchequer, there shall be, in addition
to the chief clerk and the other sub-clerk, who shall receive the
salaries that they have been receiving, another clerk to help them,
and to render himself useful in the office. He shall receive one
hundred and fifty pesos, but nothing else. The said clerks in any of
the said offices shall be Spaniards.

No powder shall be wasted in salutes for the commandants of the
presidios when they enter or when they go out of them, with a fleet
or without it, or any other things, in any of the redoubts and forts
of this city or in the others outside it--except on the day of the
Resurrection and on Corpus Christi. It shall be done with moderation
on those days. If they wish to fire salutes on the days of the patron
saints of the city of Manila and other places in these islands, it
shall be at their own cost; and they shall pay his Majesty for the
powder and other things that are used.

Furthermore, after the said day the standard-bearers of the alferezes
of all the companies of this city, and of those outside the city,
shall receive only the half of what they now receive. They were
receiving ninety-six pesos of eight reals, the half of which is
forty-eight pesos; and they shall receive that sum, and nothing else.

Furthermore, the standard-bearers of the companies of the Pampango
nation shall only receive, from the said day and thenceforth, the
half of the sum paid to a soldier of that nation, and no more, and
the pages of the said nation shall be dismissed.

All the above shall be observed and obeyed and executed, without any
violation of it by any other meaning and interpretation that might be
given to it in any circumstance, under penalty of being punished as
disobedient to the royal commands, so long as there is no change made
in them by his Majesty, by myself, or by any other person in his royal
name. The said royal officials, in order that they may so understand
it, shall enter this order in the royal books, and shall despatch the
necessary orders to the places where that is advisable. The royal
officials are to note that the salaries and other payments made in
this city, in any manner, must be authorized and paid by decree of
the government, as is ordered to them; and not in any other manner,
by issuing pay-checks and payments in form. The auditor of accounts
shall also take note of this order, so that, in accordance with
it, the payments that shall have been made shall be placed in the
accounts of the royal estate that he shall audit which shall have been
administered not only by the said royal official judges, but by those
of Terrenate and the island of Hermosa, and by the alcaldes-mayor,
overseers, ship-masters, and all others who in any manner have to do
with his Majesty's revenues, and in no other manner. Given in Manila,
September four, one thousand six hundred and thirty-five.


Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera

By order of the governor:
Francisco de Ortega



Also, from the said day and thenceforth, the common seamen who shall
come in the ships from Castilla, who shall not be necessary and
indispensable in the port of Cavite, shall be dismissed. The same
shall be done in the ships that sail to Terrenate and the island of
Hermosa, when they shall have returned to Manila. The pay of the said
common seamen shall not run any longer than the day on which they pass
muster after they shall have anchored. If the said galleons shall be
needed for the voyage, they shall determine what common seamen shall
be necessary, a fortnight before the ships sail.

Furthermore, the clerk of the magazines at the said port of Cavite
shall not receive, from the said day and thenceforth, a greater
sum than one hundred and fifty pesos of eight reals per year, and
nothing else.


Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


From the said day, the first of October, and thenceforth, all the
artillerymen of this city, the port of Cavite, and all the others
in all places outside this said city, shall receive one hundred and
seventy pesos of eight reals per annum, and no more; and the sum of
two hundred pesos that they received before shall cease.

All the corporals of all the companies outside of this city shall
receive and enjoy the same pay and additional pay as those of this
presidio of Manila, and no more.

The corporals from the nobility, [28] who have been in the forts of
Terrenate hitherto, and who have received more pay than the other
corporals of the companies, shall be dropped and removed, as they
are unnecessary.

Furthermore, all the companies which shall be serving in the said forts
shall each receive thirty ordinary escudos of ten reals, the same as
is received by the companies of this presidio; and they shall cease
to receive the thirty ducados of eleven reals which they had before.

The corporals of the companies of the Pampangos throughout these
islands shall receive and enjoy no additional pay for their office.

The pay of captain, alferez, and sergeant of the Pampango nation shall
be understood to be, for all those who serve in these islands, the
amount that is assigned in the articles of this revision, and no more.


Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


Collated with the original act and revision of pay and rations made by
the governor and captain-general, Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera
y Mendoca, who sent it to the official judges of the royal estate of
these islands so that it might be put in force. I obtained it from
them, in order to set it down in his Majesty's books in this auditing
department of the royal exchequer, and to make these copies. Then I
returned it to them and they have it now. Given in Manila, June four,
one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Juan Bautista de Cubiaga


Juan Bautista de Cubiaga, auditor of accounts and results of the
royal estate of these Philipinas Islands, shall certify at the end
of this decree the salaries and wages, and the rations, that have
been paid from the royal treasury and magazines to the persons who
have served in any naval or military post, or in any other capacity,
both in this city of Manila and outside of it, and in its presidios,
in former times and until June twenty-five, one thousand six hundred
and thirty-five, when I assumed the government of the islands. He
shall also make a copy, signed with his name, from the revision which
I made general, in the month of September of the said year, of the
paid positions in which certain wages and rations that they enjoyed
were lessened and reduced, because they were so large. He shall do
it all distinctly and clearly, so that the saving that has been made
for his Majesty's royal estate may be seen, in order that it might
be evident in his royal Council. Given in Manila, May twenty-four,
one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera



In fulfilment of the order given by the above decree of Don Sebastian
Hurtado de Corcuera, governor and captain-general of these Philipinas
Islands, and president of the royal Audiencia herein, I, Juan Baptista
de Cubiaga, auditor of accounts and results of the royal estate of
these islands, certify that it appears from various books, warrants,
and other papers in this royal exchequer that are in my charge, that
the various posts necessary to his Majesty's service, both in this
city of Manila, and outside of it, and in the presidios, received
the salaries which will be stated below, and which were assigned by
councils of the treasury, called by the president and auditors and
the fiscal and royal officials, in former years and up to June, one
thousand six hundred and thirty-five. In accordance with the general
revision which the said governor made on September four, one thousand
six hundred and thirty-five, there has been saved for his Majesty,
from the pay and rations enumerated therein--which are the amounts now
paid, and those which they formerly received and which were given to
those who were employed in the said posts--what appears in each item
of the following.



_Saved for his Majesty annually_


                                Money     Cleaned rice  Rice in
                                                        the husk
                                          (gantas)      (fanegas)

The assayer and weigher of the royal treasury received
four hundred pesos and one hundred fanegas of rice in
the husk per year. His pay was reduced by one hundred
and fifty pesos and the hundred fanegas of rice
                                150 p.      0           100

The executor of the royal estate received one hundred
and fifty pesos per year, and thirty gantas of cleaned
rice per month. His pay was reduced by only the ration
                                0           365[_sic_]  0

The keeper of the provisions and ammunition in
the royal magazines of Manila received six hundred
pesos and one hundred fanegas of rice in the husk
per year. He shall receive three hundred pesos only,
his pay being reduced by three hundred pesos and the
said ration                     300 p.      0           100

Another keeper, he of the royal magazines of Cavite,
received three hundred pesos per year, and sixty gantas
of cleaned rice per month. His pay was reduced only
by the ration                   0           720         0

One person has held the above two places, with a
substitute at his own cost, from the year one thousand
six hundred and twenty-eight until the present time,
at the salary of eight hundred pesos and the said
ration. It was badly administered because of the vast
number of papers that that keeper made, and one cannot
hope to see the end of his accounts.

The keeper of the magazines and the paymaster of
Terrenate received five hundred pesos per year and
one ganta of rice daily. His pay was reduced by two
hundred pesos and the ganta of rice
                                200 p.      365         0

The keeper of provisions and ammunition in the
magazines of the island of Hermosa received a salary
of five hundred pesos per year and thirty gantas
of rice per month as a ration. His pay was reduced
by two hundred pesos and the ration, and he shall
receive three hundred pesos     200 p.      365         0

The keeper of provisions and ammunition in the port
of Yloylo has quite generally been the purveyor and
alcalde-mayor of Pintados, who received seven hundred
pesos per year for both places, having everything
under his own charge. The amount saved in all three
is one hundred and eighty pesos from the three per
cent of the six thousand tributes which his Majesty
owns in the said purveyorship of Panay and Oton
                                180 p.      0           0

The clerk of the royal magazines of Manila received
one hundred and fifty pesos and forty-eight fanegas
of rice in the husk per year. The revision deprived
him of only the rice            0           0           48

The shore-master of Cavite received six hundred pesos
per year, and one hundred and twenty gantas of cleaned
rice per month. The revision deprived him of only
the rice                        0           1,440       0

The overseer of the royal works on the Cavite shore
received eight hundred pesos per year. The said
revision deprived him of two hundred pesos
                                200 p.      0           0

The artillery founder of this city received seven
hundred pesos and thirty-six fanegas of rice in
the husk per year. At present he receives only five
hundred pesos, for the revision deprived him of two
hundred pesos and the rice      200 p.      0           36

The shipbuilder and master-workman of the royal works
at the port of Cavite received six hundred pesos per
year, and one hundred and twenty gantas of cleaned
rice per month. He now receives six hundred pesos,
but the ration has been taken from him
                                0           1,440       0

The manager of the powder-house received a salary of
five hundred pesos [per year]. One hundred pesos were
taken from him                  100 p.      0           0

The manager of the rigging which is made in Balayan
received a salary of two hundred pesos and forty-eight
fanegas of rice in the husk--all worth two hundred
and seventy-two pesos. He now receives two hundred
and fifty pesos, thus saving twenty-two pesos
                                22 p.       0           0

The castellan of the fort of Santiago in Manila
received a salary of eight hundred pesos per year. Now,
if regularly appointed, he shall receive six hundred
pesos; and, if appointed _ad interim_, the half of
that sum. He who now holds that post, being appointed
_ad interim_, shall receive four hundred pesos; but
when one is regularly appointed, he shall be reduced
by two hundred pesos            200 p.      0           0

The lieutenant of the said fort of Santiago was ordered
to be entirely cashiered, as he had a company of
infantry in the fort with an alferez and sergeant. This
post was again created, because it was advisable that
the fort should not be without it; and it was given
to Alferez Antonio Ysquierdo with two hundred and
forty pesos per year. If a captain should hold it,
he shall receive three hundred pesos. He who held
this post before received four hundred and twenty
pesos. One hundred and twenty pesos are saved
                                120 p.      0           0

Furthermore, two hundred and forty pesos are saved
which were taken from the alferez when the post of
lieutenant was again created    240 p.      0           0

There are two adjutants of the sargento-mayor in
the forts of Terrenate, who receive four hundred and
twelve pesos four tomins apiece, per year. Now one
of them shall receive three hundred and sixty pesos
per year, and the other ninety-six pesos, a total of
four hundred and fifty-six pesos. The revision saves
three hundred and sixty-nine pesos
                                369 p.      0           0

There are two infantry companies of the Pampango
nation in the said forts of Terrenate, which formerly
had two hundred soldiers, counting the captains
and other officers, or one hundred and ninety-four
simple soldiers. They received formerly seventy-two
pesos apiece per year. Now and henceforth they
shall receive forty-eight pesos per year apiece,
the revision depriving them of twenty-four pesos
apiece. That makes a total saving of four thousand
six hundred and fifty-six pesos for the one hundred
and ninety-four soldiers        4,656 p.    0           0

The two captains of those two companies received two
hundred and eighty-eight pesos per year--a total
of five hundred and seventy-six pesos. They shall
now receive two hundred and fifty pesos apiece, or
a total of five hundred pesos, making a saving of
seventy-six pesos               76 p.       0           0

The two alferezes of the two companies of the
Pampango nation received one hundred and ninety-two
pesos per year apiece, a total of three hundred and
eighty-four. Now they receive one hundred and fifty
pesos apiece, a saving of eighty-four pesos
                                84 p.       0           0

The two sergeants of the said nation received
one hundred and forty-four pesos apiece. Now they
receive one hundred and twenty apiece, a saving of
forty-eight pesos               48 p.       0           0

There was an artillery captain in the said forts of
Terrenate, who received four hundred and eighty pesos
per year. This post has been entirely suppressed
                                480 p.      0           0

The surgeon of the hospital of Terrenate received six
hundred pesos per year and two rations which amounted
to forty-eight maravedis daily. He was deprived of
only the ration, which is worth sixty-four pesos
three tomins three granos       64 p. 3t. 3g.   0       0

The field captain of the said forts of Terrenate
received three hundred and thirty pesos per year. Now
he receives one hundred and fifty pesos, thus saving
one hundred and eighty          180 p.      0           0

The military notary of the said forts received two
hundred pesos per year. That pay is abolished entirely
                                200 p.      0           0

There were four substitutes [_entretenimientos_]
in the forts of Terrenate. They were reduced to
opportunities for profit, of various amounts, in order
to distribute that money among half-pay alferezes. Each
substituteship was worth four hundred and fifty pesos,
or a total of one thousand eight hundred pesos. This
was abolished entirely          1,800 p.    0           0

In this camp of Manila, in its presidios, and in
those of Cibu, Oton, Cagayan, Caraga, and Camboanga,
there are five adjutants of the sargentos-mayor. Each
received one hundred and eighty pesos. Now they receive
ninety-six pesos apiece, thus saving eighty-four
pesos on each one, or a total for the five of four
hundred and twenty pesos        420 p.      0           0

There was a field captain in this city of Manila,
who received one hundred and eighty pesos per year,
and a field borrachel who received ninety-six pesos
per year. One person shall serve in these two posts
for one hundred and fifty pesos, thus saving one
hundred and twenty-six pesos    126 p.      0           0

The post of the military notary, which was paid two
hundred pesos per year, has been entirely abolished
and taken from the person who exercised it in this
city of Manila                  200 p.      0           0

The chief drummer of this camp of Manila received
one hundred and twenty pesos per year. He receives
the same now, and has been reduced in nothing
                                0           0           0

The chief gunners of the artillery--in this city of
Manila, he of the fort of Santiago in this city,
and those of Cavite, the island of Hermosa, and
Terrenate--each received three hundred pesos per
year. Now each one receives two hundred and fifty
pesos, thus saving two hundred and fifty pesos on
all five                        250 p.      0           0

The apothecary of the royal hospital of Manila received
two hundred pesos per year, and his ration. That
was reduced only by four reals per day, and a total
worth one hundred and eighty-two and one-half pesos
was thus taken from him         182 p. 4t.  0           0

There are generally six galleys in the city of
Manila, the port of Cavite, the island of Hermosa,
and Terrenate--each galley with its captain, those of
Manila, Cavite, and the island of Hermosa, receiving
three hundred and fifty pesos, and their necessary
ration; and the other two of Terrenate, five hundred
and sixty-seven and one-half pesos per year, with the
said ration. It amounted in all to two thousand six
hundred and fifty-five pesos per year. Those posts
have been entirely abolished, because the masters of
the said galleys are to serve in them
                                2,655 p.    0           0

Each of the said six galleys had its own master,
with a salary of two hundred and fifty pesos per
year and fifty pesos for a ration, a total of three
hundred pesos. Now they receive the two hundred and
fifty pesos, but no ration if anchored; while if
they are afloat the ration that they received per
year is diminished by half for all of them, as it
is not certainly known when they are to navigate, or
when they will leave or enter from port to port. Thus
there is a saving here of one hundred and fifty pesos,
which is the half of three hundred
                                150 p.      0           0

The said six galleys had six boatswains, who received
two hundred pesos apiece per year, besides fifty
pesos for two rations. Now they receive two hundred
pesos--without the ration when anchored; while, if
afloat, the ordinary ration. Three hundred pesos are
saved, and by the difference for the time when they
are afloat, the half of that sum is saved, namely,
one hundred and fifty pesos     150 p.      0           0

The said six galleys have six boatswains' mates,
who received pay of one hundred and eighty pesos,
and thirty-seven pesos four tomins for two rations, in
all two hundred and seventeen and one-half pesos. Now
they receive one hundred and fifty pesos, and the
ration when afloat. Thus there is a saving of four
hundred and five pesos, and the ration for all the
time while they are at anchor, namely, forty-five pesos
                                450 p.      0           0

Six guards on the said galleys received an annual
pay of one hundred and eighty pesos apiece, besides
two rations, a total of two hundred and thirty pesos
apiece. Those posts were entirely abolished, as they
are not necessary. They are worth one thousand three
hundred and eighty pesos        1,380 p.    0           0

The corporals of the said galleys received an annual
pay of one hundred and twenty pesos apiece formerly,
and two necessary rations additional. Those posts
were entirely abolished, as they are unnecessary. The
total amount is one thousand and twenty pesos
                                1,020 p.    0           0

The chaplain of the said galleys received the same
pay, and there is nothing in money saved on it,
except twenty-five pesos, which is the half of the
fifty, the value of the ration of an officer when
afloat. Because it is not known how long this one
will be afloat, that ration is cut in two
                                25 p.       0           0

There are usually ten or twelve pilots and
assistants in the voyages to Nueva Espana, the
island of Hermosa, and Terrenate. When afloat they
all formerly received pay at the rate of six hundred
pesos per year; and, while ashore, two hundred pesos
for allowance. Sometimes those voyages last a year,
or fourteen or fifteen months, and at the very least
nine months; and one is commuted by the other. [29]
The said pilots shall now receive five hundred pesos
while afloat, besides their ration as before, and
ashore the same allowance. One hundred pesos is saved
from each one and in all ten pilots one thousand pesos
                                1,000 p.    0           0

A like number of mates sail on the said voyages in
the said ships. They received three hundred pesos
apiece, and their ordinary ration. Now they receive
two hundred and fifty pesos apiece while afloat, and
there is a saving of fifty pesos on each one. This
item follows the same rule as the above item, and
the total saving is five hundred pesos
                                500 p.      0           0

There are a like number of second mates in the said
voyages and on the same ships. They formerly received
two hundred pesos, and their ordinary ration while
afloat and ashore. Now they receive the same when
afloat only; and, when in the port, one hundred and
fifty pesos and no more, for the ration is charged to
their pay. Fifty pesos are saved on each one. They
receive, besides the ration for all the time while
they are anchored; for although the ship is not always
sailing, still they live on it, in case that any storms
arise, for there are neither more nor less storms
than when they are sailing. Consequently, nothing is
saved in what concerns the ration, and there is only
a saving of money, which amounts to five hundred pesos
                                500 p.      0           0

There are about five hundred seamen--more rather than
less--who sail in the same voyages and on the ships
for Castula, the island of Hermosa, Terrenate, and
other places--where journeys are made in champans,
which carry merchandise by way of the provinces to
the royal magazines of Manila, and Cavite, and along
all the river and its port, and in the port and river
of Yloylo, and to the presidios; as well as in the
vessels that carry the money for reenforcement of those
places and those that go to the provinces in order
to bring back the bandalas [30] of products. They
formerly received one hundred and fifty pesos per
year apiece, and one ganta of cleaned rice daily as
a ration. Now they receive the same one hundred and
fifty pesos per year; and the ration is charged to
the account of their pay, except when afloat. Those
seamen who are generally sailing in all parts number
about two hundred. They have the same storms above
mentioned, and their voyages last at times one year,
or more or less. Thus it is considered that nothing
is saved on those two hundred. On the remaining three
hundred, the said ration of one ganta daily is saved
entirely. That saving amounts to one hundred and nine
thousand five hundred gantas    0           109,500     0

The Spanish common seamen who serve in the said parts
formerly received one hundred pesos, and the same
ration [as the sailors]. Now they receive the same
when afloat, but when ashore the ration is charged
to the account of their pay. The saving is so small
that no mention is made of it
                                0           0           0

In the same voyages and ships, and in the presidios,
port of Cavite, port of Yloylo, the royal magazines
of Manila, and Cavite, his Majesty's champans,
and in various other parts, there are usually two
hundred Indian common seamen. They formerly received
forty-eight pesos per year, and fifteen gantas of
cleaned rice per month. Now they receive the same pay
and ration while afloat, but while at anchor only
the pay, and the ration is charged to the account
of the pay. It is considered that one hundred common
seamen are always on voyages; and since these last,
as has been said above, a year more or less, it is
not thought that there should be any other course
with them. With the other hundred, however, there
is a saving of all the rations, which amount to one
thousand five hundred gantas    0           1,500       0

Along the said shores and in the said ships, there
are generally six Spanish carpenters, who formerly
received three hundred pesos and their ordinary
ration. Now they receive two hundred and fifty pesos
apiece besides their ration while afloat, and while
anchored. Fifty pesos are all that is saved from each
one, making a total of three hundred pesos
                                300 p.      0           0

The chief calker who is generally at the port of
Cavite formerly received three hundred pesos, and
his ordinary ration of two gantas of cleaned rice
daily. Now he receives the same pay, but the revision
deprives him of the ration, which amounts to seven
hundred and thirty gantas       0           730         0

There are seven Spanish calkers in the said ports
and along the shore. They formerly received three
hundred pesos per year, and one ganta of cleaned rice
daily. Now they receive two hundred and fifty pesos,
and the same ration when afloat; but if not afloat
they do not receive that ration. By the difference in
this, as above stated, the saving in this particular
is one-half of the ration, which amounts to one
thousand two hundred and seventy-seven gantas,
besides the three hundred and fifty pesos in reals,
reckoning fifty pesos from each of the seven
                                350 p.      1,277       0

There are seven Spanish coopers in the said places,
who receive the said pay and ration, and who have
been reduced to the same figures as the calkers. The
same amount is saved as in the case of the calkers
in the preceding item           350 p.      1,277       0

There are generally four Indian coopers in the said
ports, who received sixty pesos per year apiece, and
one-half ganta of cleaned rice daily. Now they receive
the same pay and ration, while afloat; but when not
afloat, they do not receive the ration. Nothing is
saved in money; and in case that they go on voyages,
there is saved in this one-half of the four rations,
which amount to three hundred and sixty-five gantas
of cleaned rice                 0           365         0

The diver at the port of Cavite received three
hundred pesos per year, and two gantas of cleaned rice
daily. Now by the revision he receives two hundred
pesos, and one-half the ration. One hundred pesos
are saved and three hundred and sixty-five gantas
                                100 p.      365         0

The Spanish rope-master of Cavite formerly received
the same pay and rations as now; and nothing has been
saved in this regard by the revision
                                0           0           0

Two Indian artisans in the rope-factory of Cavite
formerly received fifty-four pesos per year, and one
ganta of rice per day. Now by the revision they receive
the same pay, and the half of the ration. Between
the two, three hundred and sixty-five gantas are saved
                                0           365         0

The Spanish master-smith at Cavite formerly received
four hundred pesos per year, and thirty gantas of
cleaned rice per month. Now he receives the same pay
without the ration, which was taken from him by the
revision. The saving amounts to three hundred and
sixty-five gantas               0           365         0

The Indian smiths who serve in the smithies of Cavite,
the artillery foundry, and the arsenal of this city
of Manila generally number one hundred, more rather
than less. The boss received one hundred and twenty
pesos per year, and sixty gantas of cleaned rice per
month. The rest received various sums, and thirty
gantas of rice per month. Now the boss receives one
hundred pesos, and the others the same pay as before,
but the ration that is given them must be on the
account of their pay, and is fifteen gantas to each
one--boss and all. Twenty pesos are saved on the boss,
besides seven hundred and thirty gantas of rice,
and thirty-six thousand five hundred gantas from the
one hundred Indians.            20 p.       730         0

                                0           36,500      0

The Sangley sailors and champan hands on his Majesty's
champans that carry the food and products that are
transported and bought in the islands, taking these to
the ports where they are needed (and there are about
one hundred and sixty Sangleys with their bosses),
all received various wages. They receive the same now,
except that the twenty gantas of cleaned rice which
was given to each one as a monthly ration has been
reduced by five, and each one is now given fifteen
gantas. That reduction amounts to sixty gantas apiece
per year, and the total for all one hundred and sixty
Sangleys is nine thousand six hundred gantas
                                0           9,600       0

The Sangley carpenters and sawyers who were actually
working in Cavite and other places received sixty-eight
and one-half pesos apiece [per year], and twenty
gantas of cleaned rice per month. Now they receive
the same pay, and fifteen gantas. Five gantas per
month have been taken from each one by the revision,
or sixty per year. There being fifty Sangleys among
those workmen, three thousand gantas are saved annually
                                0           3,000       0

The Sangley sawyers of brazas received the same
pay formerly as now, and nothing has been saved on
this item                       0           0           0

Thirty Sangley smiths who worked on the Cavite shore,
and in other places, received various wages, and
twenty gantas of cleaned rice apiece per month. Now
they receive the same pay, and fifteen gantas. By
the revision five gantas per month have been taken
from each one, or sixty per year. From all the thirty
Sangleys one thousand eight hundred gantas are saved
                                0           1,800       0

Fourteen Sangley calkers who were ordinarily employed
on the royal works of Cavite and in other places
received five pesos five tomins and twenty gantas
of cleaned rice per month. Now they receive the same
pay and fifteen gantas. Each one has been deprived of
five gantas per month, or sixty gantas per year. The
reduction from all fourteen amounts to eight hundred
and forty gantas. Besides that, each one's pay has
been decreased by five reals per month, which for all
fourteen amounts to one hundred and five pesos per year
                                105 p.      840         0

The twenty Indians who served as rowers in the
sentinel-boat of Mariveles were formerly paid one peso
per month and one hundred fanegas of cleaned rice,
or four thousand eight hundred gantas per year for
all. Now they receive the same money, and fifteen
gantas of cleaned rice apiece, or for all twenty,
three thousand six hundred gantas per year. One
thousand two hundred gantas are saved
                                0           1,200       0

The two bosses of the hundred and thirty Lascars,
natives of India, who serve as sailors, common seamen,
and in other capacities, received formerly two hundred
and forty pesos per year, and thirty gantas of cleaned
rice per month. Now they receive one hundred and
fifty pesos per year, and fifteen gantas of rice per
month. One hundred and eighty pesos and three hundred
and sixty-five gantas of cleaned rice are saved on
the two bosses                  180 p.      365         0

Two other bosses of the Lascars received one hundred
and twenty pesos per year and thirty gantas of cleaned
rice. Now they receive the same pay and fifteen
gantas. On the two, three hundred and sixty-five
gantas are saved                0           365         0

The other one hundred and twenty-six Lascars received
various wages, and thirty gantas of cleaned rice
per month. Now they receive the same pay, but, by the
revision, the ration of each one was reduced by fifteen
gantas per month, or one hundred and eighty gantas
per year; and that of all, by twenty-two thousand
six hundred and eighty gantas of cleaned rice, which
is saved                        0           22,680      0

_Increase_. There are twenty-four companies, or two
more or less, in all the camp of Manila and in its
presidios and those of Terrenate. They are generally
divided into different bodies in order that they may
be sent to different parts as occasion demands. Each
company has its own sergeant, and they have all
received an increase of twenty-four pesos per year
over their former pay, because of their arduous
duties. That increase amounts to five hundred and
seventy-six pesos of common gold
                                576 p.      0           0

_Increase_. There ought to be ninety-six corporals in
all the said companies, each company of one hundred
men having four, but since there are no companies
that contain that number, the number is adjusted at
ninety corporals. Each one has received an increase
of twelve pesos per year, in addition to the sum
that he formerly received, because of their arduous
duties. That increase amounts to one thousand and
eighty pesos                    1,080 p.    0           0

There were a like number of shield-bearers in the
twenty-four companies, who received ninety-six pesos
per year apiece. They were entirely abolished by the
revision, and the captains shall keep them at their
own cost. That saves two thousand three hundred and
four pesos                      2,304 p.    0           0

The commander of the ships which are despatched
annually to Nueva Espana received three thousand
Castilian ducados per year. Now he receives by
the revision three thousand pesos, thus saving one
thousand one hundred and twenty-five pesos. In regard
to rations, he receives the same now as then
                                1,125 p.    0           0

The admiral of the said ships received two thousand
Castilian ducados per year. Now he receives two
thousand pesos, thus saving seven hundred and fifty
pesos. In regard to rations, he receives the same
now as then                     750 p.      0           0

One hundred pesos per year have been reduced by the
revision from the two hundred pesos that each of the
two notaries of the said ships formerly received
                                100 p.      0           0

A like sum has been taken from the pay of the two
stewards, in the same manner    100 p.      0           0

A like sum has been reduced from the pay of the
water-guards, in the same way
                                100 p.      0           0

The two notaries and the two stewards of the ships
that make the voyage to Terrenate and one notary
and one steward of the ship that sails to the island
of Hermosa, have been reduced for like sums in the
same way                        300 p.      0           0

_Increase_. In the office of the controllership,
two clerks were added with pay of ninety-six pesos
per year, a total of one hundred and ninety-two pesos
                                192 p.      0           0

The places of chief clerk and second clerk of the
pay-office, of which the revision makes mention,
have neither been increased nor diminished.

_Increase_. In the said pay-office, two more clerks
were added, with one hundred and fifty pesos apiece
per year                        300 p.      0           0

_Increase_. In the said office of the factor, another
clerk was added to the force, with a salary of one
hundred and fifty pesos per year
                                150 p.      0           0

_Increase_. The chief office was given another clerk
at the same and aforesaid pay   150 p.      0           0

The powder that has been wasted in Manila and in the
outside presidios in firing salutes to the persons who
govern the provinces, and on festal days, as appears
by the different accounts of the administration of the
royal estate, is considerable; and inasmuch as this
cannot be regulated with certainty, it is diminished
by eight hundred pesos per year, for according to
the revision, powder must not be so used in the future
                                800 p.      0           0

The standard-bearers of all the companies of these
islands and the Molucas (who, as we have said above,
are twenty-four in number) received ninety-six pesos
apiece per year. According to the revision, they have
been cut down by the half. The half that is saved
amounts to one thousand one hundred and fifty-two pesos
                                1,152 p.    0           0

Of five standard-bearers of five infantry companies
of the Pampango nation (who are in Terrenate, the
island of Hermosa, Cagayan, and Camboanga) those of
Terrenate received seventy-two pesos apiece per year;
and the others, forty-eight apiece. Now they receive
the half of those sums, and one hundred and forty-four
pesos are saved                 144 p.      0           0

Of the five shieldbearers of the said five companies,
two received seventy-two pesos apiece, and the
others forty-eight. They have all been abolished,
and the amount saved in this is two hundred and
eighty-eight pesos              288 p.      0           0

_Increase_. The clerk of the royal magazines of
Cavite received one hundred and forty pesos per year,
and a ration of forty-eight fanegas of rice in the
husk. Now he receives one hundred and fifty pesos,
but the ration has been taken away
                                10 p.       0           0

There are about one hundred artillerymen--more
rather than less--in this city of Manila, the fort
of Santiago, the port of Cavite, the fort of Oton,
Cagayan, the island of Hermosa, Cibu, Caraga,
Camboanga, and the Malucas Islands. Each of them
formerly received two hundred pesos per year. The
revision now gives them one hundred and seventy pesos,
and each one has been decreased by thirty pesos. The
saving in this item amounts to three thousand pesos
                                3,000 p.    0           0

In the reduction of the additional pay of the corporals
from the nobility in the forts of Terrenate--who
received thirty pesos of additional pay per year,
besides the ordinary pay--and who are six in number and
belong to the six companies in the said forts, the sum
saved amounts to one hundred and eighty pesos per year
                                180 p.      0           0

The said six companies in the said forts received
thirty Castilian ducados to distribute among those
who received additional pay. Now and henceforth, in
accordance with the revision, they receive thirty
escudos of ten-real pieces. Three pesos six reals
are saved on each company; and in all six, twenty-two
and one-half pesos per month; and per year
                                273 p.      0           0

Each of eight corporals of the Pampango nation,
for the two Pampango companies who serve in the said
forts of Terrenate, receives one peso per month as
additional pay. That amounts to ninety-six pesos per
year for the eight              96 p.       0           0

There are infantry of the Pampango nation in the
island of Hermosa, Camboanga, Cagayan, Oton, Cibu, and
Caraga. Among them are three captains, who received
two hundred and eighty-eight pesos per year apiece;
and three alferezes, who received one hundred and
ninety-two pesos per year apiece. The total sum
of those salaries is one thousand four hundred and
forty pesos. Now the captains receive two hundred and
fifty pesos, and the alferezes one hundred and fifty;
or a total for all six of one thousand two hundred
pesos. Two hundred and forty pesos are saved annually
                                240 p.      0           0



_General summary of the amounts saved for his Majesty in these islands
in certain salaries_


            Pesos    Tomins   Granos    Cleaned rice
                                        (gantas)
              450      0        0
            1,080      0        0         1,085
              951      0        0         3,650
            5,788      3        3       109,500
            2,978      4        0         3,507
            3,405      0        0         2,737
              951      0        0         3,650

            3,925      0        0        49,830
              500      0        0         4,205
              650      0        0        23,045
              450      0        0       -------
               20      0        0       197,519
              235      0        0
            2,304      0        0       Rice in the
                                        husk (fanegas)
            2,475      0        0
            2,384      0        0           200
            3,789      4        0            84
           ------     --       --            48
           31,435      3        3           ---
                                            332

                 Increases of pay (pesos)
                    1,656
                      792
                       10
                    -----
                    2,458


                                        pesos tomins granos


Consequently, according to the revision of salaries
and rations made by the governor--which, exactly copied
from the original, accompanies this certification--it
appears that the amount annually saved for his Majesty
is thirty-one thousand four hundred and thirty-five
pesos three tomins and three granos,
                                        31,435  3   3

in reals; one hundred and ninety-seven thousand five
hundred and nineteen gantas of cleaned rice, which
is appraised at one-half real per ganta (about the
usual price in the market), and hence is equivalent
to twelve thousand three hundred and forty-four pesos
seven tomins and six granos;            12,344  7   6

and three hundred and thirty-two fanegas of rice
in the husk, of forty-eight gantas to the fanega,
valued at twelve reals per fanega, and thus worth
four hundred and ninety-eight pesos.       498  0   0

That gives a total of forty-four thousand two hundred
and seventy-eight pesos two tomins and nine granos.
                                        44,278  2   9

Subtracting from that sum two thousand four hundred
and fifty-eight pesos                    2,458  0   0

for some places that the governor created anew, as the
said revision declares, the remainder is forty-one
thousand eight hundred and twenty pesos two tomins
and nine granos.                        41,820  2   9

That is the amount that is saved for his Majesty
annually, in deducting it from the former pay and
rations attached to the positions cited by the said
revision. Of those posts, and of all others that his
Majesty has sustained and sustains in these Filipinas
Islands, there is a full account in this auditing
department of the royal exchequer which is in my
charge. And now, so that it might be apparent to his
Majesty in his royal Council of the Yndias, and in any
other place, I attest the same, referring to various
books, accounts, and other papers of the said office,
where it appears, in fulfilment of the command given
by the said decree of the governor and captain-general,
Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera. Manila, June twelve,
one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Juan Baptista de Cubiaga



[_Tribute from Negro slaves_]

Sire:


With the approval of your royal Audiencia, it has been decreed that
the negro slaves of the Indians shall pay tribute to your Majesty,
in the same manner as it is paid by their masters and by the Indian
slaves whom these hold, who are of their own countrymen and people. No
one has opposed it, except that the religious of St. Dominic,
St. Francis, and St. Augustine say that this is a new imposition,
and that it cannot be collected. They do so, because there is nothing
else in which they can oppose the government. These Indians, Sire,
formerly cultivated their lands, and they served the Spaniards for
what the latter chose to pay them, on the ships and in other kinds
of service; but now, as they have become slothful and do not render
these services, they purchase these negro slaves and use them for
making money--with which gains they pay their tributes and support
themselves. It stands to reason that since the Indian slaves of these
people pay the tribute as their masters do, the negro slaves should
do the same. Your Majesty will be pleased to command that this matter
be considered, and to give me such orders as shall be most expedient
for the service of your Majesty--whose Catholic person may our Lord
preserve in your greatness, as Christendom has need. Manila, June 30,
in the year 1636. Sire, your vassal kisses your Majesty's feet.


Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


[_Endorsed_: "Governor of Philipinas; to his Majesty, June 30, 1636;
no. 14; government."]

[_Endorsed_: "December 16, 1637. Tell him that his zeal and solicitude
for the profit of his Majesty's treasury are appreciated; but that
this measure seems to be an innovation, and not quite in accordance
with law. Accordingly the religious are not without reason for
opposing it. Tell him that if any difficulties arise from this,
and it shall not be established and current with the consent of all,
he shall avoid levying this impost, and shall render account to the
Council of what he shall have done."]





LETTER FROM FATHER CRISTOBAL DE LARA TO FATHER FELIPE DE CARDENAS


_Pax Christi vobiscum_

I consider it unnecessary to tell you of the pleasure, joy, and
satisfaction which the letter of Brother Felipe gave me; for certainly
this would be great, considering the desire which I already had to
know about the brother as well as the other pupils and companions,
and likewise because of the love and good-will which I have always
borne towards Brother Felipe--who I am satisfied will repay it, and
will not forget me in his holy prayers. By means of them I hope for
much fervor of spirit and courage in pursuing the way of our Lord,
that I may not be faint-hearted in the continual hardship and toil in
which I trust in our Lord soon to find myself, with the conversion of
these heathen--so wide-spread and far extended, and in so great need of
laborers and workers. This increases our labor, so that our sufferings
are very great--a prolonged martyrdom in which the sons of the Society
pass their lives, exposed to innumerable fatigues, which are incredible
even when seen. I believe, indeed, that you in Europe have no idea
of this apostolic life; for of late years the missionary fathers have
gone about through these mountains alone, poor and half-naked, having
nothing to eat or drink, without shelter or entertainment, on account
of the ferocity of the enemy in Mindanao. These latter came forth this
year with intent to kill all the fathers that should fall into their
hands, on account of a vow which they made to their false god Mahoma
that, if he would give them health, they would pursue the fathers who
are teaching a religion different from their own. Sano, their infamous
king, complied with this vow, and brought out his army of cruel savages
to attack the villages of the Society. They wrought havoc worse than
can be told, sparing no one. When they learned that the fathers had
fled to the mountains, they sent out dogs to capture them and get
them in their power--in the meantime burning houses and churches and
outraging the images. They overtook the good father Juan del Carpio,
[31] whom they cut into pieces and killed with inhuman and unheard-of
cruelty. Before this they had captured our good old man and father,
Domingo Vilanzio, [32] a holy man who died from the ill-treatment
which they inflicted upon him. In short, without detailing at length
the glorious ministries of the Society in Filipinas, suffice it to
say that fathers who have been through it all affirm that Paraguai
[33] was but matter for jest compared with this; for the Society has
no field more glorious, nor more to the honor of our Lord. This is
well seen through the marvelous events which his Majesty has brought
about through us, without which it would be impossible for so small
a number of fathers to accomplish so much and not suffer a thousand
deaths in so many hardships as they have endured. In short, my brother,
it is there that we shall look to go, and die a thousand times in
the quest, working day and night. But comfort shall not fail us, to
refresh us in these labors, for this is only a little rice and water,
and what they are seeking most to accomplish in Espana--namely, that
the cross of our Lord should be raised up here through these labors,
and all with the greatest pleasure in the world for poor me. What I
should have lost if I had remained there, etc.

Our Lord will repay the brother for his kindness in giving us news
of the province, and of the fellow-novices and the fathers whom we
know. Certainly there is no pleasure, for us who are here, to compare
with our joy in knowing about our fathers and brothers, who are ever
present in our hearts.

Brother Diego Ponze has acted in a very despicable manner. I never
have confidence in persons like him.

I have good news of Brother Celerio, his companion, which pleases me
much. I had written to Brother Diego de Mendizabal before I received
the clause in the letter from the brother. To all the fellow-novices
who are there, a thousand million greetings, to each one separately
and to all in common; and let them commend me to our Lord. I was
much pleased at the good news of all which was given me by Brother
Juan de Alcala. I am writing to several persons, and it will make
me glad [to know] that all continue in the growth that I desire,
both in virtue and in learning, etc.

Not to take more space, I leave unsaid many things--especially
concerning Japan, where the persecution is progressing cruelly and
fiercely. May our Lord check this, and protect my brother Felipe as
I desire, etc. Filipinas; Manila, July 3, 1636.

From the humble servant of my brother,


Cristoval de Lara


I beg my brother to let Brother Christoval de Escamilla and Brother
Manuel de Frias consider this as their own; and to them I send most
cordial greetings.





LETTER FROM CORCUERA TO FELIPE IV


Sire:

1. I am at this port of Cavite, lading the two galleons belonging to
your Majesty that carry the merchandise which you have been pleased
to grant and permit to the citizens for their navigation and trade
to Nueva Espana. These two ships will carry this year a greater
registered cargo than formerly the ten galleons for five years
carried. The usual amount registered was from three hundred or four
hundred to five hundred chests of silks, stuffs, and cloths [_bienzos_]
(which here they call _mantheria_); but now I have laden the capitana,
and the registration exceeds a thousand chests, while the almiranta,
which has a larger hold, will probably carry one thousand two hundred
chests. The royal duties which belong to your Majesty will amount to
three per cent; the freight charges and further duties at the port of
Acapulco will come to six hundred thousand or seven hundred thousand
pesos. Accordingly, if your Majesty's viceroy will send me even the
proceeds of the said royal dues alone, I shall be able, in the four
years' [service] that I have offered your Majesty, to relieve this
your royal treasury of more than three hundred thousand pesos of
debts, and to maintain these islands with what can be obtained from
them--a thing which your Majesty has so desired, and which you have
so often charged so many governors to do. If God grants me life,
that I may employ it wholly in the service of your Majesty, and in
efforts to increase your royal estate, I will not content myself
with that, but more and more will send you all the cloves from the
Malucas Islands which can be procured in trade at your forts in
Therrenatte. Thence I will send the spice to the port of Acapulco,
to be sent to Espana to your Majesty--or to be sold there, and the
proceeds sent to Espana. I have also decided to purchase all the wax
that comes from the encomiendas of your Majesty's vassals, and place
it with [the products of] your royal encomiendas, to be sent on your
Majesty's account to Nueva Espana, so that the proceeds of the wax may
be sent to your Majesty with that from the cloves. [_Marginal note_:
"Inform him of the receipt of his letter, and say that we hope that
he will always do what he can to increase the royal estate; and that
he shall endeavor to secure, by all proper and convenient methods,
the relief of the royal treasury."]

2. I was occupied in this service on the morning of St. Peter's day,
being engaged in celebrating a fiesta to the blessed sacrament,
and giving thanks to God for the favor that He has shown to your
Majesty in bringing to this port, at the same time and hour, your
two galleons which I sent with the relief to Therrenatte--of which
affair I will give account to your Majesty in another letter. There
were two other ships, small ones, which the viceroy, the Marques de
Cadereyta, sent to these islands with the usual succor, because last
year he had not sent galleons which could carry it. In other letters
I have told your Majesty of his reasons of convenience. By these
ships I received the decrees which your Majesty has been pleased
to command me to issue. In the first, you command me to charge the
archbishop, the bishops, the provincials of the religious orders,
and all classes of ecclesiastics and virtuous people to commend to God
your Majesty's monarchy, and that they should banish the vices which
among your vassals are so displeasing to our Lord; and the same order
is laid upon the governors, alcaldes, and higher magistrates of these
provinces. This mandate of your Majesty shall be obeyed, Sire, with
all promptness, and with the carefulness which so important a matter
demands--that not only for the time, but continually, this care may be
maintained. And as the beginning has been made by the benefit received
on St. Peter's day from the fiesta of the blessed sacrament, I shall
endeavor to secure the regular observance of this fiesta every year,
forever, so that what your Majesty desires may on that occasion be
implored from God. This decree is dated at Madrid, June 28, in the
year 1635. [_Marginal note_: "Write that this is approved."]

3. With this decree comes another, in which your Majesty commands
that I make secret inquiries, and carry out the directions in the
said decree regarding the Frenchmen who have come to these islands
and are living in them, and regarding their property. This I shall
promptly execute, according to the tenor of the decree, and with such
discretion and proper measures as shall be possible. [_Marginal note_:
"Seen; tell him to carry out the commands of the decree."]

[4.] In another decree, dated at Madrid, March 4 of the same year,
your Majesty is pleased to command that when I send the galleons
to Nueva Espana, they shall be in command of a trustworthy person,
and that other persons of similar ability shall go with the ships,
so that in case of [the commander's] death these persons shall bring
them back [to these islands]. This very arrangement I had made before
I saw your Majesty's decree, for which honor and favor I kiss your
Majesty's feet a thousand times. In another letter I have entreated
your Majesty that you will be pleased to command your viceroy of Nueva
Espana to allow the commander and admiral who conduct thither the
galleons from these islands to exercise authority and jurisdiction
in the port of Acapulco (so long as they are not on the land) to
punish their seamen and soldiers, and that the warden of the port
shall not interfere with them by endeavoring to have such delinquents
punished on shore; for they have always had some men under them who
have ability, and have served well, and are very competent--who yet,
from the time when the said galleons cast anchor, neither respect nor
obey as they should, during the entire time while they remain in port,
the said commander and admiral, since they think that those officers
cannot punish them until they set sail for the return voyage. This
is a great hindrance to the service of your Majesty; and since you
have been generously pleased to grant to your governors authority
to send future successors for the said offices, may your Majesty be
also pleased to grant me this favor which I now entreat, in behalf
of their authority and due respect and proper government. [_Marginal
notes_: "Bring hither the orders already given on this subject, and a
statement of what is customary in other ports, especially in that of
Bera Cruz." "They are here." "Let the governor's request be granted,
with the conditions that he mentions; and write to the viceroy that
this seems to be the general practice, to judge from precedents found
here, and that he is to issue the necessary orders for the execution
of the above--unless he finds difficulties in the way which oblige him
to do otherwise. Then, when the men on the ships commit any excesses
on shore, let a case be made against them, and then referred to the
commander and admiral."]

5. In another decree from Madrid, dated May 4 of the same year,
your Majesty commands, that in order to prevent the frauds which
hitherto have been committed on the ships which sail with merchandise
to Nueva Espana, I shall, since this port is so near, sometimes
go to examine and direct the lading, or entrust this duty to some
careful person. Before the said decree arrived, I came (as I have
informed your Majesty in another letter) to the said port to serve
as a royal official; and I have already laden the capitana--which
is an undertaking of so much importance that the governor who does
not attend to it in person, but entrusts it to some one else whom he
supposes to be trustworthy, does not comply with the dictates of his
conscience or with the obligations of his office. Notwithstanding
that your Majesty has royal officials to whom this task pertains,
I have thanked God that I had begun to render this service to your
Majesty before I could know your wishes, and whether you had commanded
such action. Now that I know what you desire, I will carry it out
more expeditiously; for here in the Yndias I need only to show the
orders of your Majesty, in order to defend myself from the jealousy
and complaints of your vassals, and with these they respect and obey
me better. I follow my natural inclination in obeying, as a Christian
and a loyal vassal, the orders and commands which your Majesty shall
be pleased to give me. [_Marginal note_: "Seen."]

6. In another decree, dated May 4 of the same year, your Majesty
commands that, on account of the losses which have resulted therefrom,
I shall not allow the trade and commerce of the Portuguese with
these islands, so that the Chinese trade may not be broken off. I
shall obey this very punctually, according to its tenor. Judging
that this very thing which your Majesty commands was best, I had,
before receiving the decree, sent advices to the city of Macan that
they must not send any merchandise to these islands; and that only one
ship could come from Macan, which should bring some anchors, muskets,
and arquebuses, of which these islands are in great need. Although
when I came here I found three of their ships in the port, this year
only one has come; and hereafter this commerce will be dispensed with,
inasmuch as it will not be expedient to send [to Macan] for anything
save what the Chinese cannot bring--such as anchors and firearms,
which often get broken. But in everything which shall not be expedient
for your Majesty's service I shall prevent the Portuguese from coming
to this port, or to any other, to trade with the Castilians. With the
welcome and kind treatment which has been shown to the said Chinese
thirty-three of their little ships have come this year, and have
brought so great a quantity of merchandise that your Majesty's vassals
have not for many years past seen stuffs so cheap. This has been caused
by receiving them hospitably, treating them well, and despatching their
affairs graciously and promptly; and by not allowing the officers of
justice or those of the treasury to molest them, or to take from them
a thread of silk. With this shipment of goods; these your vassals have
no need whatever of the trade with the Portuguese; and the customs
duties of six per cent which the Chinese pay have amounted this year
to more than fifty thousand pesos. [_Marginal note_: "Seen. Tell him
to execute the decree, since he knows how expedient it is."]

7. In another decree, dated Madrid, December 4, 1634, your Majesty
commands your viceroys and governors that, on account of the
inconveniences resulting from the vacant see, and as the ecclesiastical
cabildos manage some affairs contrary to law and to the service of
God and your Majesty, in order to check them such measures shall
be taken as shall be most expedient for your royal service in these
islands. Thus far, Sire, the vacant [archiepiscopal] see has not been
governed by the ecclesiastical cabildo, but by the bishop of Cibu,
or by the bishop who has been longest in office; accordingly such
irregular proceedings have not occurred here. Moreover, the religious
orders and their members avoid these evils, obeying your Majesty and
your governors, as also do the ecclesiastics of the cabildo of this
holy church who are your very obedient chaplains. They cannot fail to
be such, for they live on what your Majesty furnishes them from your
royal treasury; and they perform what has thus far been required from
them which pertains to your royal service--especially in commending
your Majesty to God in their prayers at the beginning and the end
of mass, as well as our lady the queen, and our prince and the royal
children. They have done this very willingly, although it is something
which had not been done before, even among the religious orders--which
surprises me, and seems a very unusual thing. In all respects and in
every way, I will observe and follow what your Majesty is pleased to
command. [_Marginal note_: "This is well."]

8. In another decree, dated at San Martin, December 21, 1634, your
Majesty commands that I shall not go beyond the decrees in regard to
the resignations of saleable offices, in which it is commanded that
the third part of the price of such office be placed in the royal
treasury. What your Majesty commands shall be fulfilled and carried
out. [_Marginal note_: "Let this decree be brought. Tell him that
his course is approved, and he shall act accordingly."]

9. In another decree, dated Madrid, January 30, 635, your Majesty
commands that I continue in the efforts made by my predecessor, Don
Juan Nino de Tabora, and the plans that he had formed to expel the
Dutch enemy from the island of Hermosa, and to unite the forces of
Yndia with those of these islands. This latter undertaking, Sire,
is very difficult; and the former is no slight thing. For if the
enemy were at that time commencing their fortifications, these are by
this time completed and very well defended; and unless your Majesty
send here a thousand Spanish soldiers, I have not the force in these
islands to drive out the Dutch from Hermosa. The Portuguese of Macan
desire that this be done, because the enemy inflicts damage on them
in the voyage to Xapon. But the fact that the enemy maintain a post
there does not at all embarrass or hinder the crown of Castilla; for
the Chinese do not fail to come in twenty-four hours to the forts of
your Majesty that are on this side the sea, bringing the necessary
merchandise and supplies. That island, Sire, is of very little use
to your Majesty, and it serves only to consume a large part of the
revenues; for the Indians of the said island are [too] ferocious to be
reduced to our holy Catholic faith, and it only serves to keep occupied
there two hundred and twenty Spaniards, and a company of Indians from
Nueva Segovia, and several vessels. But as it is so injurious to the
reputation of honorable soldiers to abandon the posts which others will
seize, I am--notwithstanding that, as a soldier, I have considered
the little or no importance of that post--maintaining and aiding it
with thirty thousand pesos a year, until your Majesty shall command
what may please you. As for joining our forces with those of Yndia,
Don Juan de Silva, in the time when he was governor, maintained the
forces of these islands in a very flourishing condition; for he was
able to build and assemble ten powerful galleons and two pataches,
with which he undertook to join the viceroy of Yndia to destroy the
Dutch and drive them from these seas. Although he set out, he did not
find any preparation on the part of the said viceroy; and by waiting
for it he lost an excellent opportunity when the enemy had left their
station. It is said that he died from grief at having spent so much
and achieved so little result; and that this was the cause for the
islands having fallen into so great poverty, and for your Majesty's
royal treasury being so embarrassed. For the governors to equip armed
fleets is a very difficult enterprise; for from that time until the
present people have been bewailing the heavy costs, and regretting
the ruin of the Indians who perished in the shipyards. If this colony
is preserved in its present condition, not displaying our weakness to
the enemies, but rather giving them and all the neighboring peoples to
understand, even with a few ships, that your Majesty is lord of these
seas--except of the strait of Sincapura, where the Dutch keep all their
forces--no little will be accomplished--even if your Majesty do not,
as I said above, send one thousand Spanish soldiers. I do not mention
the money, for neither can your Majesty send it; and I am planning here
how to economize and to maintain myself with the royal duties, a few
encomiendas, and the licenses of the Sangleys for the eight hundred
thousand pesos which are spent in these islands. [_Marginal note_:
"Bring the decree which gave rise to this paragraph, and the plan of
Hermosa Island, and whatever has been written about this matter."]

10. In another decree, dated Madrid, January 30, 35, your Majesty
commands that these ships shall sail from here so that they will
reach Acapulco December first. Your Majesty gave me the same orders
last year by another decree that they should leave this port,
without fail, by June first. Having called a council of all the
pilots, both chiefs and subordinates, they affirm and assert that
the said ships cannot leave until the twelfth or fifteenth of July,
because the vendabals--the winds with which they must sail--do not
begin until that time, nor are they strong until the early days of
August; and the ships waste the said fifteen days in sailing the
eighty leguas which they have to make among the islands to reach
the Embocadero of San Bernardino. For at times when they have sailed
earlier they have been detained, before they could leave the channel,
one or two months, in which time they have consumed a large part of
the supplies for the voyage; and as a result, many of the men have
died, from the hardships of the voyage or from want of food. For all
these and many other reasons, I entreat that your Majesty will be
pleased to believe that I shall not waste time in these despatches,
as best suits the service of your Majesty and the benefit of your
vassals. I have spared the viceroys of Mexico from sending flour, oil,
fodder, and a thousand other things for the equipment of the soldiers,
of which there is no lack there--as how I am informing the viceroy,
the Marques de Cadereyta, in the memoranda which I am sending him. By
this your Majesty has been saved a great part of your revenue, as well
as by the galleons not being repaired in Acapulco; for the viceroy
did nothing more to them after the necessary repairs from the calkers
and carpenters who went on the ships. In a little more than a month,
they could be again sent to sea; and they did not spend, at most, more
than five months in going from here, three in returning, and one in
the port. [_Marginal note_: "Tell him that those ships are to depart
at the time which shall seem most seasonable, since the orders do not
intend that they shall set out with evident loss and risk at the time
which has been fixed. While matters remain as they are, therefore,
he shall make such arrangements as are most expedient."]

11. In another decree, dated Madrid, November 29, 634, your Majesty
commands that a report be made of the vacancies which there are in the
dignities, canonries, raciones, and medias-raciones. Don Juan Cereso
de Salamanca, during the time while he governed after the death of
Don Juan Nino de Tabora, promoted the following persons. The post, of
schoolmaster was given to the canon Don Francisco de Valdes. Because
Don Alonso de Campos, appointed by your Majesty, remained in Espana,
his canonry was given to Don Gregorio Descalona, a racionero; and
his racion was given to Pedro Diaz de Ribera. By the death of Don
Garcia de Leon, who was archdeacon by your Majesty's appointment,
his office was given to the cantor Brizeno; and his cantorship was
given to Don Francisco de Valdes, the schoolmaster. The schoolmaster's
office was conferred upon the canon Don Gregorio Descalona; and his
canonry was given to Pedro Diaz de Ribera, racionero, his racion to
Diego Ramirez de Alcantara, a medio-racionero, and his medio-racion to
Pedro Flavio. By the death of the said archdeacon, Don Juan Brizeno,
the archdeaconry was given to Don Francisco de Valdes, cantor; his
cantorship, to Thomas de Guimarano, treasurer; and his treasurership,
to Don Juan de Olasso. By the death of the said Guimarano, the
cantorship was given to Don Gregorio de Escalona, schoolmaster;
his post as schoolmaster to Don Fabian de Santillan, canon; and his
canonry, to Don Pedro de Quesada. On account of the resignation of
the archdeaconry by Don Francisco de Valdes (in which post I found
him serving), I presented to the said dignity of archdeacon Master
Don Andres Arias Xiron; he is a cleric of thoroughly satisfactory
character, and good parts, and is now filling that post. Of all this
I have given account to your Majesty in another letter; you will
command according to your pleasure, in regard to all the aforesaid
persons. It will give me pleasure to inform your Majesty very soon
of the vacancies which you are to fill without presentation of names
by this government; but I shall always exercise the care which I
ought in the execution and fulfilment of this decree, according to
my obligation. [_Marginal note_: "In the memorial."]

12. In another decree, dated Madrid, February 16, 635, your Majesty
gives command on account of the information sent you by Don Juan
Cereso Salamanca that the trade with Xapon had been spoiled by the
indiscretion of certain religious. I promise your Majesty that the
religious orders have done you a great service in this respect,
especially that of St. Dominic. Although they have so many times
been told of what your Majesty has seen fit to command by various
decrees, they have been unwilling to obey. About a month ago, their
provincial sent a champan belonging to the said order, with three
of their religious; one of these was among the most prominent of
their members, and he has greatly disturbed the peace of this colony
since he arrived in it. They went with a Japanese priest. It was
not enough with these religious to show them your Majesty's decrees,
nor to threaten them that an account of their proceedings should be
given to you, and that the favors which they usually demand gratis
from the government would be withheld from them. [I told them this]
in order to induce them to cease following their own pleasure in this
matter, [which they do] without heeding that your Majesty is spending
so great an amount of your income in bringing them to these islands
for the reduction of the Indians to our holy Catholic faith. But
for this they do less than is right, although they have in these
islands, without going far away to seek them, so many on whom they
can exercise the charity of their office. I assure your Majesty, with
all truthfulness, that I do nothing in your service in which I earn
more merit than in tolerating and enduring some of these religious
orders. I will endeavor, as discreetly and diligently as possible, that
this and other decrees of your Majesty relative to this matter shall be
observed. [_Marginal note_: "Tell him to deal with the religious orders
with great moderation, in making them observe what is commanded."]

13. In regard to the deficiency of Spanish soldiers, it is because
so many have died, on account of the unhealthy climate and the great
heat, not because so many permissions for going away have been given as
your Majesty has been informed. For in these galleons no Spaniard is
going, unless he is married and going to live with his wife, as your
Majesty has ordered in other royal decrees; or else, if they are not
married, they have given bonds, satisfactory to the royal officials,
for two thousand or four thousand pesos that they will return to
this country; and even the seamen and artisans on the galleons have
given bonds for the same, in greater or less sums. [_Marginal note_:
"Tell him to observe the decrees and orders that have been issued in
regard to this and to endeavor to prevent frauds in their execution."]

14. In another decree, dated Madrid, February 16, 635, your Majesty
commands that I take measures to check the raids which the Joloan,
Camucon, and Bornean Indians make, so that they shall not injure the
settlements in these islands, plundering them and carrying the people
into captivity--of which the Audiencia has given an account to your
Majesty. For many years, Sire, nothing has been done to stop this,
save to waste your Majesty's incomes; for, after the mischief had
been already done, vessels sailed from here with troops who were
untrained, poorly equipped, and with no relish for fighting. Then,
after all the expense had been made, the Indians who are subject to us
were left plundered and captive; and the enemy remained victorious,
and still more daring and insolent. The only measure which I,
but recently arrived, could take for the remedy of this evil was to
order all the alcaldes-mayor to raise companies of Indians, exempting
the captains, alferezes, and sergeants from tributes and personal
services, and equipping them with firearms, pikes, and lances. As
a result, this year only one village has been plundered--and that
because the alcalde-mayor could not arrive in time; and the only
damage they did was to capture a religious of St. Francis and some
few Indians. The fort which has been erected near La Caldera, that
of Camboanga, which is in the very territory of those Indians, holds
them somewhat in check. I wish to become freed somewhat from so many
necessary demands upon my attention as this government requires, and
see to the completion of a galley which I have begun, in order to try
whether I can at one blow make an end of these enemies, and thus carry
out what your Majesty is pleased to command. But these [Moros] are a
people who, if they encounter any resistance, no matter how small,
betake themselves in flight through the mountains, with which they
are so well acquainted; while the Spaniards cannot follow them on
account of the great heat, and the many difficulties of the journey;
and our peaceful Indians, when they have not the Spaniards near them,
are timid and accomplish nothing. Consequently, the whole enterprise
has some share of hindrances and difficulties; but I will try, so far
as it lies in my power, to accomplish it, and so that your Majesty
may not have occasion to command this another time. [Marginal note:
"This is well."]

15. In another decree, dated Madrid, February 21, 635, your Majesty
commands that the shipyards be supplied with timbers, planks,
and all that is necessary for the repairing and equipment of the
galleons, because your Majesty has understood that there is a lack
of these materials and of the provisions necessary for the royal
storehouses. Your Majesty was correctly informed of this; but for
the past year efforts have been made to remedy these deficiencies,
by building flat-bottomed boats for transporting the said timbers,
and having as many as possible of the latter cut. With this, the
galleons which go to Castilla have been put in very good order,
and there is sufficient lumber left for the necessary and usual
repairs which continually have to be made in this port. As for the
provisions for the storehouses, not only have the necessary supplies
been lacking, but there are no storehouses in which to place them. I
shall therefore begin two buildings: one a storehouse at this port,
inside the castle of San Phelipe; and another as lodgings for the
infantry company which forms the garrison. Hitherto the soldiers
of that company have lived outside the said castle, as they had no
quarters--some of them in wretched cabins built by their own hands. In
the same manner, Sire, or very little better, the rest of the troops
were lodged in Manila. As I have written to your Majesty in other
letters, I am building them a chapel, where the dead may be buried
and the sacraments administered to them; also a barracks, where they
can live comfortably. I am endeavoring that [the expense of] this
may be met by donations and gratuitous services, and not from the
royal treasury of your Majesty. I have ordered that a large house,
in which the governors were lodged when they came to this port, be
set aside for a royal hospital. I have had it repaired, and two wings
added; and thus medical treatment can be given in it to the seamen,
the convicts on your Majesty's galleys, the carpenters and calkers, and
some sixty-six slaves of the crown. It was said that your Majesty has
also carpenters ashore, besides petty court officers, and the Lascars
and Moros who serve in mooring the vessels and for all the extra labor
that is needed ashore; and hitherto they have had no hospital, and it
was necessary to take them to Manila for treatment. [_Marginal note_:
"Ascertain what provision has been made for this in other regions. As
for the buildings for parish church, hospital, and barracks for
soldiers, this is explained by another letter from the governor. As
for the shipbuilding, what he says is approved."]

16. In a decree dated Madrid, February 16, 635, your Majesty commands
that I exercise care to see that the religious shall not go to Japon
for the present, because the king of that country has so tightly
closed the door to the Catholics. [_Marginal note_: "Seen."]

17. He has commanded this, with very rigorous penalties of death and
confiscation of property, that no vassal of his shall for ten years
leave his kingdom, in any kind of vessel, so that religious may not
go in their ships; he thus checks the trade with the Chinese also,
so that they may not carry religious. Only the Dutch maintain commerce
with Japon, from which has resulted great loss to these your Majesty's
islands--for they bring from Xapon much silver; copper and tin, for
casting artillery; wheat; and many other products and conveniences
which are very necessary for the said islands. Then the barter of the
silks, fine Castilian cloths, and Spanish leather made from deerskin,
which were carried there from these islands--all this is so cut off
that it seems as if no way could be found to restore the trade unless
God in His mercy shall open one in the course of time. [_Marginal
note_: "Seen."]

18. Don Pedro de Quiroga y Maya, whom your Majesty has been pleased
to send to Mexico to take the residencia of the Marques de Cerralbo;
sends me a certified copy of a section in the instructions which your
Majesty gave him, in which your Majesty has commanded me, by one of
your royal decrees that, in order to stop the illegal transportation to
Nueva Espana of more merchandise than is permitted to the citizens,
the ships shall be built thus: the almiranta, of four hundred to
five hundred toneladas' burden; and the capitana, of five hundred
to six hundred toneladas. These decrees, Sire, have not come to my
hands thus far, further than a copy which the said royal visitor
sends me, issued in the term of Don Juan Nino de Tabora. This shall
be very punctually obeyed in the future construction of the ships;
but it is necessary to make the present voyage with the galleons
that are already built. I must remind your Majesty that the islands
are at the end of their resources, as far as the Indians in them are
concerned; for it is they who bring the timber from the forests for
the said shipbuilding. I have thought of an expedient for this, in
order not to complete the destruction of the Indians; it is, to ask
the viceroys of your Majesty in Nueva Espana and Piru to send vessels
here. Every two years, let the viceroy of Piru send to Nueva Espana a
ship with the permission which your Majesty has given, one of those
which the viceroy the Conde de Chinchon caused to be built in the
time when I served your Majesty there; they were of three hundred
to four hundred toneladas' burden, and carried twelve, fourteen,
or sixteen pieces of artillery. The cost of these will be paid here,
on the account of this royal treasury. With this, and with rebuilding
the galleons that are here, and repairing them every year, may be
remedied the loss in the shipyards, and the destruction and ruin of
the Indians. It is no light burden to maintain the laborers who cut
the timber for the repairs every year. Will your Majesty be pleased to
command the said viceroys to do what I have proposed; and thus in the
course of time the ships will come to be of the burden and lading that
your Majesty requires. Meanwhile, until the matter is arranged, the
galleons will go from here to Nueva Espana every two years, each with
two registers--one for the previous sailing, and one for the present
year--as they go now. In the year when they go, they will bring back
the half of the silver for the proceeds [from the merchandise sent];
and in the following year, when they do not have to go, the rest of the
money will be brought in the ship which will be sent from Piru. I hope
that your Majesty will approve this, and give such commands as are
most expedient for your royal service, in order that these vassals
who are so poor may be encouraged, and the merchandise that they
export may bring in good returns when nothing goes unregistered,
and that the Indians may be saved from ruin. [_Marginal note_:
"Let there be no innovation in this matter which he proposes, and
follow the orders which have been issued in regard to the building
of ships; and tell him that, as he has been commanded, he shall make
no innovations without first consulting the government in regard to
the matter, so that orders may be given him to be put into execution."]

May our Lord guard the Catholic person of your Majesty, as Christendom
has need. At Cavite, July 11, 636. Sire, your vassal kisses your
Majesty's feet.


Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera





THE HOSPITALS AND HOSPITAL CONTRIBUTIONS


_Letter to the king from Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera_


Sire:


1. Your Majesty was pleased to entrust to my predecessor, Don Juan
Nino de Tabora, as he was the person who had the matter in hand,
the regulation of the comfort of the hospitals, the care of treating
the sick, both soldiers and citizens, and the administration of the
revenues of the said hospitals, so that the expenditures would be
well employed and your Majesty's treasury have some relief.

[_In the margin_: "That the purpose in having established the
convalescent ward is approved."]

2. The first thing which I heard on my arrival in this government
was this [matter of the hospitals], in which I have found that your
Majesty spends more money than you ought to spend; and, in the endeavor
to apply a suitable remedy, I ordered the royal officials to note on
their pay-rolls that the soldiers must give two reals from each month's
pay, and the sailors four--as is done in the States of Flandes with the
royal hospital of your Majesty's army, where the soldiers give one real
from each month's pay, and the officers, higher and lower, according
to their pay. This amounts to more than seven thousand pesos per year,
as your Majesty will have seen by the certifications which I enclose.

3. The religious of the Order of St. Francis--to whose brothers the
government and several of your Majesty's decrees have entrusted for
some years back the duty of nurses in these hospitals, and to their
religious priests that of chaplains therein--have both [brothers and
priests] contrived to make an ill use of the orders of your Majesty
and of the government; for besides the comforts that are brought from
Castilla at so heavy an expense to the treasury of your Majesty, such
as wines, raisins, almonds, and quince preserves, and other things
which are not found here, and are indispensable for the hospitals--and
although these things and the medicines were delivered to the steward
and apothecary, the said officials did what the religious ordered
them; and, to keep the devotees of religion contented, dispersed
and spent many of those things outside of the hospitals. I made the
steward whom I found in the hospital of the Spaniards settle his
accounts, which were in very bad condition; but it will cost him his
property. I appointed a new steward to whom all the aforesaid articles
which came from Nueva Espana were delivered, on his responsibility
and account. This man asked for the keys to the pantries, in order
to keep them, but the religious refused; consequently, I was obliged
to issue strict order that the keys be given up. The provincial of
that order gave way to anger, saying that the taking the keys of the
pantries to keep them was to his discredit. With the devotion which
I have always had toward that order, and my love for its religious, I
requested the said provincial to charge himself with, or have given to
some religious, the said articles, with the obligation to give account
of his expense at the end of the year to the person whom I should
order to do that. He replied that I could not do that, according to
his rule; nor could he subject himself to give account of anything;
the steward, however, continues to exercise his duty and care.

[_In the margin_: "Having dismissed the discalced religious from the
hospital, although it is thought that in this he will have desired
the greater service of his Majesty and the convenient regulation of
the matter, he might, before executing it, and before having made this
innovation, have given some notice of it, as he has been notified to
do in other points. Let him do that from now henceforth. In regard to
the condition of the edifice and the other matters, let him advise
immediately; and of the manner in which the hospital is governed,
and what has been the practical result of the change, without making
any alteration in the state in which this despatch shall find it,
and without going any farther."]

4. Various decrees of their Majesties, your holy father and your
prudent grandfather, order that a convalescent ward be made in the
royal hospital of the Spaniards. Since my predecessors did not carry
out this plan, I began it with two thousand pesos, of which a governor
of the Sangleys of the Parian made your Majesty a gracious gift. It was
advisable to have this ward pass through certain small cells which the
brothers and religious chaplain had in the said hospital. I courteously
requested the provincial to withdraw them to his convent while the said
ward was being built; but he refused to do so. I again requested him
to remove the most holy sacrament--which was deposited in a ward under
the principal one of the infirmary and exposed to indecency, because
the filth and water from the sick, fell from above--to a place above,
where mass was said to the said sick. He also refused to do that; on
the other hand, he went to the archbishop, who began a suit before the
ordinary. Although the royal Audiencia (the said archbishop refusing
to give the regimental chaplain-in-chief permission to administer
the holy sacraments to the soldiers and others, and refusing to
give it, and [the chaplain] having appealed to royal aid from the
fuerza), declared that he should do what I had asked, the archbishop,
nevertheless, refused to give the said permission--until that, after
he had been exiled from these kingdoms for having refused to obey
the decrees of your Majesty (as I shall recount in another letter),
the bishop of Camarines, who came by act of the royal Audiencia to
govern during his absence, granted to the said chaplain-in-chief
the said permission to administer the sacraments. For these and many
other reasons, of which I shall give your Majesty an account, I made
the said religious leave the royal hospital of the Spaniards, and the
regimental chaplain-in-chief ministers to the sick for the present,
until a chapel is finished (which I ordered to be built in which to
bury the soldiers), and quarters [for them], at the expense of their
pay, which they have graciously given, without any expense to the
treasury of your Majesty. And when the said chaplain-in-chief shall
go to exercise his duty in the said chapel, another chaplain shall be
appointed for the said royal hospital. Sire, the reasons which have
existed for changing the religious of this hospital are those which
your Majesty will please have examined in the papers which I herewith
enclose. At the same time, I petition your Majesty, with all humility,
to be pleased to grant permission to the brothers of [St.] John of
God to come to serve in these hospitals in place of the same discalced
religious, and at their own petition--because of the disorderly acts
that the brothers must have committed in visiting private houses in the
city in the quality of surgeons, and in methods from which, they tell
me, proceeded the relaxation of the order, as well as other things that
deserve correction. For many reasons concerning the service of God and
of your Majesty, it has been, and is, advisable that these hospitals
be administered by the brothers of [St.] John of God, and that the
Order of St. Francis attend to their ministries and the observance
of their rule. In case that your Majesty finds it unadvisable that
the said brothers of [St.] John of God come to these islands, will
you be pleased to have the holy sacraments administered by seculars,
the revenue put in charge of laymen, and several of the very aged
alferezes, who have served long enough and now cannot bear arms, act
as nurses--as they are doing at present with great willingness and
promptness, in order not to lose the accommodations of the hospital by
negligence and poor service. Only the said hospitals of this city and
of the port of Cavite I have withdrawn from the power of the religious
of St. Francis of this city, for the reasons aforesaid, and because
of the opposition which the religious have made to your Majesty's
governor, in their desire to make themselves lords and masters of your
royal hospitals; since neither by reason of their rule, nor by their
own will, nor by anything else can they be proprietors. There was no
hospital at the port of Cavite; but on account of the donations which
some persons have given to your Majesty, I have ordered a house to
be prepared where the governors lived when they went to that port,
and an excellent hospital has been made there. In it five hundred
sailors, three or four hundred convicts belonging to the galleys,
slaves of your Majesty, the common seamen of the galleons, and the
calkers and carpenters of the said port--in all two thousand odd
persons--receive medical treatment. Since this hospital has been
created anew (for a barracks which was used for a hospital has fallen),
the religious do not claim it in ownership, as they do the hospital of
this city. The alms given by the sailors for the said hospital amount
to three thousand pesos per year. With what the calkers, carpenters,
and other workmen who receive pay will give, and a small cattle-farm
that it owns, with some more that can be obtained from some encomienda
when it falls vacant, the said hospital will be sustained without any
expense to your Majesty's treasury. And in order that that of Manila
may do the same, an excellent cattle-farm costing eight thousand pesos
has been bought at the advice of the treasury council with the money
contributed for it. With those ranches that it had, and the three
pesos per year from each soldier, and an encomienda of one thousand
three hundred tributes which has been granted to the convalescent ward
in the name of your Majesty, in virtue of your royal decree despatched
to Governor Gomez Perez Das marinas (and I petition your Majesty to be
pleased to confirm to it the encomienda of the village of Macabebe,
in the province of Pampanga)--with all the above and other things
which I shall endeavor to secure for it, I shall relieve your Majesty's
royal treasury from expense. The expense which I have made in only the
said hospital in ten months, without its being possible to avoid it,
amounts in money to seven thousand pesos for the aforesaid, and more
than that amount in kind. Since your Majesty has so many encomiendas
here, it is right that we relieve the treasury of this expense; and we
shall put to rights many things which I confess to your Majesty have
never been regulated until now. With it the hospitals of the natives,
that of Los Banos, that of Camarines, and others, I have left to the
religious until your Majesty orders what is your pleasure. But it is
not advisable that they should administer them, but the brothers of
[St.] John of God, or secular priests and lay stewards. This is the
truth, as I assure your Majesty as your vassal and minister, whereby
I discharge my conscience of all that shall be placed on it; and,
if opportunity offer, I shall give a detailed account and one to the
royal Council of the Yndias. May our Lord preserve the Catholic person
of your Majesty, as is necessary to Christendom. Manila, the last of
June, 1636.

Sire, your Majesty's vassal kisses your feet,


Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera


_Comments of the Council_

In regard to the deductions [from their pay] that are levied on the
soldiers and sailors, since it is with their good-will, as is supposed,
his having introduced this plan is approved.

Since that aid amounts to seven thousand pesos annually, and since not
only the soldiers are treated in the hospital, but other citizens;
if this is so, it seems that it will be necessary that the cost of
the hospital be not entirely charged to the soldiers, but that the
others contribute their share, whereby the deductions [from the pay]
of the soldiers will be less and less felt.

That in regard to passing to the Yndias it has not been considered
as very advisable that the brothers of [St.] John of God go; but that
in its general aspect the matter is being considered, and he will be
advised of what shall be resolved.

That in regard to placing alferezes on half-pay as nurses, it is not
advisable; nor do such men proceed with the charity that is necessary,
and that such ministry requires.

That in regard to the hospital which has been established in Cavite,
by taking the house of the governor, it is not approved, and that
is another innovation of which he must give account; for, although
the work is good in itself, it has the inconvenience that when the
governors go to that port, they have no house in which to lodge, and
that they will have a motive for building one. Consequently, he shall
not go ahead with that undertaking. To apply some encomienda for that
hospital of Cavite appears advisable, and he is permitted to assign it
an encomienda of about five hundred ducados of income. Let him advise
of what he does in this, and whether the quantity is sufficient, in
respect to the expense, and considering the aids which he mentions
in his letter, which will be made voluntarily by the contributors.

In regard to the cattle-farm which has been bought for the hospital of
Manila with the money from the gifts, see whether the royal officials
or any other persons write of this; and, if they do not write, have
him told that if it is money donated as a gift to his Majesty, that
expenditure is not approved; for he was not authorized to make it,
and has rather exceeded his authority, and it will be necessary to
restore the money to his Majesty. But if it is a gift made as an alms
by citizens, that will be well; and it is expected that he will have
it administered as is advisable.

Let information be asked separately on all the points of this letter
from the archbishop, Audiencia, royal officials, and the superior of
the Order of St. Francis.

Write to the governor not to make any innovation.


_Governor's act regarding convalescent ward_

Don Sebastian Urtado de Corcuera, knight of the Habit of Alcantara,
governor and captain-general of these Philipinas Islands and president
of the royal Audiencia herein, etc. Inasmuch as by a clause of a letter
from his Majesty dated San Martin de la Vega, April twenty-nine, one
thousand five hundred and seventy-seven, directed to the governor of
these islands, it is ordered that, as it is so fitting and necessary,
as he has been informed, a convalescent ward be established where
the poor soldiers who served in these islands may be cared for and
entertained when convalescing after having left their treatment in
the hospital; and that he shall maintain and supply it by assigning
one thousand Indians as an aid to the support of the hospital, or as
shall seem best to him. That, as is well known, has not been done;
and no effort has been made to fulfil the royal will in so many
years, although this enterprise is so useful to the community. On
the contrary, it has been the cause of many wrongs, as experience
demonstrates; for, by not having had the said convalescent ward,
so many soldiers, sailors, and other poor wretches have died by
reason of lacking care and comfort when they recover from their
illness. And great disorders have been and are caused with such
sick when they leave the said hospital with little health and
strength--some returning to their own houses, and some to those of
others, where because of the little or no comfort, and the poor and
injurious food, with wine, tobacco, buyo, and other similar things,
and the continual temptations to associate with women of evil life,
they relapse, so that their sickness has no cure. These having been
examined by me and certified to me, in order to check these evils,
and to comply with what his Majesty ordered so many years ago but
which has not been done, and as it is so pious a work in itself,
and for the service of our Lord and the good of the community:
I have resolved to establish a convalescent ward near the royal
hospital for the Spaniards of this city of Manila. And [it shall be]
incorporated with the same [hospital] because there is no other place
where it can be established--so that in it may be treated, entertained,
and entirely cured, the sick of the hospital. These, without leaving
the hospital, may pass from the sick wards to the convalescent ward,
where they will be treated and entertained as well as possible from
the proceeds of one thousand two hundred tributes of encomienda,
which I have assigned and given to the said ward in his Majesty's
name in the province of Pampanga, in the encomienda of Macabebe,
which became vacant because of the end and death of Don Nicolas de
Rivera, who possessed it for the last generation. The building of the
said room and ward has been begun for more than two months; and the
foundations are laid in some parts by order of Captain Santiago de
Gastelu, citizen and regidor of this city. I entrust its work to him,
as he is a competent person. He has represented to me that, in order
that he may continue the work to the completion that is required, and
with the divisions and pantries that are necessary for its service,
it is advisable that he tear down a small old house, with some cells,
that are built close to the said work in the said hospital. There
live the discalced fathers of St. Francis, who have attended and
attend to the hospital. The men cannot continue further with the work
because the said old work is in the way, and because it is necessary
to make the foundations alike all over. As the said religious are
there, he could not begin to tear it down; while there was no place
where the said religious could be accommodated in the said hospital
because of its small capacity; nor was there room for the physician,
surgeon, barber, steward, and apothecary, who are the persons who
must live within. And likewise the house where the apothecary-shop
is located, and where the apothecary and steward live, he must tear
down in order to proceed with the said work. Likewise he must do
the same and tear down the church of the hospital in order to make
there a low living-room and an infirmary, where the soldiers of the
Pampanga nation who fall sick in this camp of Manila may be treated
and cared for, as they have no other place for it. A church is not
necessary in the said hospital, because another one for the infantry
is being built, as quickly as possible, next to the royal palace in
the Plaza de Armas, where all those who die in the said hospital will
be carried for burial. To say mass, confess, and console the sick
in the hospital, they will be attended by the regimental chaplain,
to whom it properly belongs. His Majesty has assigned a special pay
for that here. Consequently, the said religious can be dispensed
with and are not necessary, since they neither confess those who
go there, nor attend to anything else that is important. Therefore,
the father-provincial of the Order of St. Francis shall withdraw the
religious (both priests and lay-brothers) who are in the said hospital;
and shall take them to his convent, since it is within the walls of the
city, and is capacious enough for them and for many others. There they
will live with all comfort, care, and shelter, as is fitting, as it is
advisable for the service of God and the welfare of the community that
the work and quarters be continued where the said convalescents and
soldiers of the Pampanga nation may be treated. By this act he ordered
the said Captain Santiago de Gastelu that the work be immediately
proceeded with, tearing down the said room and church and all else
that seemed necessary for the said purpose, as quickly as possible,
since he has been given money for the said work and building. In order
that the aforesaid might be done, the said captain Santiago de Gastelu
shall be notified. By this act, accordingly, he issued this command,
and signed it. The government secretary, or another public or royal
notary, will notify the aforesaid, and the said father provincial,
so that what is ordered by this act may be fulfilled. Manila, March
five, one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Sevastian Hurtado de Corcuera
Francisco de Ortega


_Notification_. In the city of Manila, on the eighth day of the month
of March, one thousand six hundred and thirty-six, I, the notary,
read and notified the order and act of this paper, as is contained
therein, to Captain Santiago de Gastelu, regidor of this city, in
his own person. He said that he heard it; and I attest the same.


Alonso Mendez de Almada,
royal notary of mines and registers.


_Notification_. In the town of San Pa[b]lo, on the tenth of March, one
thousand six hundred and thirty-six, I, the notary, read and notified
the said act and order of this paper, as is contained therein, to
father Fray Jeronimo del Espiritu Santo, provincial of the order of
the discalced religious of St. Francis of these islands. He said that
he heard it, and that he would talk with the said governor concerning
the matter. I attest the same, witnesses being Alferez Diego Salgado
Colmenero and Matheo Mexia.


Alonso Men[d]ez de Almada,
royal notary of mines and registers.


Collated with the originals, which are in possession of Don Sebastian
Hurtado de Corcuera, governor and captain-general of these islands
and president of the royal Audiencia herein, and to which I refer. In
order that this might be evident, I gave the present, authorizing it
in public form at his petition, and gave it the authentication which
takes the place of law. As witnesses at its examination, copying,
correcting, and collation were Simon Delgado, Jhoan Correa, and
Francisco Gomez, here present.

In testimony of law, I have affixed my seal:


Augustin de Valenzuela, notary-public.


In the public service; fees dispensed with; I attest it.

We, the undersigned notaries, certify that Agustin de Valenzuela,
before whom passed this authorization, and who signed and sealed
this copy, is notary-public of the port of Cavite; and as such,
entire faith and credit have been and are given, in and out of court,
to the acts, copies, and other despatches which have passed and pass
before him. In order that this might be evident, we gave the present,
July five, one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Alonso Baeza del Rio, notary-public.
Alonso Mendez de Almada,
notary-public and clerk of registers.


_Money deducted from pay of soldiers and sailors as alms for the
hospital_

We, the official judges of the royal treasury of these Filipinas
Islands for the king our sovereign, certify that, by virtue of an order
of the governor and captain-general, Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera,
there has been and is deducted from [the pay of] the soldiers of this
camp, in the settling of their accounts that has been made and is
being made from the first of July of the past year of one thousand six
hundred and thirty-five and thereafter, for the balancing of accounts
of the service of his Majesty in various parts and presidios of these
said islands, from each soldier, that which will be stated hereafter,
of what they had to contribute as an aid in the expense and support of
the sick in the royal hospital of this city of Manila. And, according
to what it has been possible to ascertain with greater certainty, the
said contributions from all the soldiers of this said camp, and in the
forts and presidios of these islands, will amount to the following sum.


In the city of Manila and its camp


In this said city of Manila and its camp, there are at present four
companies of Spanish infantry, of which two belong to (and have that
title) the said governor and captain-general, and the master-of-camp,
Don Lorenco de Olaso.


From [the pay of] the captains of the other two
companies, the deduction is made at the rate of one
peso per month apiece--which amounts annually to
twenty-four pesos                                       24 pesos

From the four sergeants of the said companies, at
the rate of two reals per month apiece--which amounts
annually to twelve pesos                                12 pesos

The company of the said governor has ninety-two
effective soldiers, and four posts below the
commissioned officers--which, at the rate of two
reals per month apiece, amounts annually to two
hundred and eighty-eight pesos                         288 pesos

The company of the said master-of-camp, Don Lorenco
de Olaso, has one hundred and seven soldiers, and
four posts below the commissioned officers--which,
at the rate of two reals per month apiece, amounts
annually to three hundred and thirty-three pesos       333 pesos

The company of Captain Don Juan Francisco Hurtado
de Corcuera has ninety-eight soldiers and four posts
below the commissioned officers--which, at the rate
of two reals per month apiece, amounts annually to
three hundred and six pesos                            306 pesos

The company of Captain Don Juan de Frias has also
ninety-one effective soldiers and four posts below
the commissioned officers--which, at the rate of
two reals per month apiece, amounts annually to two
hundred and eighty-five pesos                          285 pesos

The company of mounted arquebusiers of the captain
and sargento-mayor, Don Pedro Hurtado de Corcuera,
has thirty soldiers, one lieutenant, one alferez,
and one trumpeter--which, at the rate of one peso
per month from the said captain, four reals from the
lieutenant, four from the alferez, and two from the
trumpeter and from each soldier, amounts annually to
one hundred and seventeen pesos                        117 pesos

From two adjutants of the sargento-mayor of this camp,
at the rate of two reals per month--which amounts
annually to eighteen pesos                              18 pesos

From the head drummer of this camp, at the rate of two
reals per month--which amounts annually to three pesos   3 pesos

From the twelve soldiers of the guard of the
said governor, at the rate of two reals per month
apiece--which amounts annually to thirty-six pesos      36 pesos

Castle of Santiago in this said city

In the said castle of Santiago there is an effective
garrison of one drummer, one lieutenant, and twenty-two
soldiers--which, at the rate of two reals per month
apiece, amounts annually to seventy-two pesos           72 pesos

Fort San Felipe at the port of Cavite

In the said fort San Felipe, there is one company of
Spanish infantry, with one captain, one alferez,
one sergeant, four minor posts, and seventy
soldiers--which, at the rate of one peso per month
from the said captain, four reals from the alferez,
two from the sergeant, minor posts, and said soldiers,
amounts annually to two hundred and forty-three pesos   243 pesos

Presidio of Zibu

In the city of Zibu is a garrison of one company,
with one captain, one alferez, one sergeant, four
minor posts; and according to what we have been able to
ascertain with greatest certainty, about fifty soldiers
in the said company--which, at the rate of one peso
from the said captain, four reals from the alferez, and
two from the sergeant, minor posts, and said soldiers,
amounts annually to one hundred and eighty-three pesos  183 pesos

Presidio of Zamboanga

In the presidio of San Jose of Zamboanga, there are
three companies, with three captains, three alferezes,
one sergeant, four minor posts, and two hundred and
ten soldiers in all three companies--seventy in each
one, according to the surest information that we
have been able to obtain. At the said rate of one
peso per month from each captain, four reals from
each alferez, and two reals from the sergeant, each
minor post, and each soldier, it amounts annually to
seven hundred and twenty-nine pesos                    729 pesos

Presidio of Oton

In the fort of Nuestra Senora de la Rossario, the
presidio of Oton, is a garrison of one company of
Spanish infantry, with one captain, one alferez,
one sergeant, four minor posts, and fifty soldiers,
or thereabout. At the rate of one peso from the said
captain, four reals from the alferez, and two from the
sergeant, the minor posts, and the said soldiers, it
amounts annually to one hundred and eighty-three pesos  183 pesos

Presidio of Cagayan

In the fort San Francisco at the city of Segovia,
the presidio of Cagayan, is a garrison of one Spanish
infantry company with one captain, one alferez, one
sergeant, four minor posts, and about eighty soldiers
or so--which, at the said rate from each one, namely,
one peso per month from the said captain, four reals
from the alferez, two from the sergeant, and each
of the minor posts and the said soldiers, amounts in
one year to two hundred and seventy-three pesos        273 pesos

Presidio of Caraga

In the fort of San Joseph of Tanga, the presidio
of Caraga, is a garrison of one company of Spanish
infantry, with one captain, one alferez, one sergeant,
four minor posts, and forty-five soldiers--which, at
the rate of one peso per month from the said captain,
four reals from the alferez, and two from the sergeant,
minor posts, and said soldiers, amounts annually to
one hundred and sixty-eight pesos                      168 pesos

Presidio and fort of the island of Hermosa

In the presidio San Salvador of the island of Hermosa,
there are three companies of Spanish infantry, with two
captains (for the third is commanded by the castellan
and governor of the said presidio), three alferezes,
three sergeants, two minor posts, and one hundred
and eighty soldiers among all the companies, in the
proportion of sixty men to each company, which is the
most authentic information that we have been able to
discover and ascertain. At the rate of one peso per
month from each captain, four reals from each alferez,
two from each sergeant, minor post, and soldier, it
amounts annually to six hundred and twenty-seven pesos 627 pesos

In the said presidio there are two adjutants of the
sargento-mayor, one with the pay of a musketeer,
and the other with two hundred and forty pesos per
[_illegible in MS._: year?], which at the rate of
two reals per month from the one who serves as a
soldier, and six from the other, amounts annually to
twelve pesos                                            12 pesos

Forts of Terrenate

In the forts of Terrenate there are six companies
of Spanish infantry, with two which are to come in
the reenforcements which are next expected. For them
there are five captains (for the sixth company is
commanded by the governor of the said forts), six
alferezes, six sergeants, twenty-four minor posts,
and four hundred and eighty soldiers in all, in the
proportion of eighty soldiers to each company, which
is the ordinary number. At the rate of one peso per
month from each captain, four reals from each alferez,
and two reals from each sergeant, minor post, and
soldier, this amounts annually to one thousand six
hundred and twenty-six pesos                         1,626 pesos

In the said forts are two adjutants of the
sargento-mayor--one with the pay of a soldier, and the
other with twenty-five ducados per month--which, at
the rate of two reals per month from him who serves
in the post of soldier, and six from the other,
amounts annually to twelve pesos                        12 pesos


Consequently, all together the said contributions amount annually to
five thousand five hundred and seventy-four pesos, which is the sum
found among the said infantry in the balances and settlements of the
accounts; it is levied on them when their pay is given to them, and
when warrants are issued for what his Majesty owes them for the time
while they have served in these islands in the military posts. This
is the most authentic account which it has been possible to get,
for many soldiers are generally sick in this city and other places;
and consequently, there is usually more or less expense, of little
consideration. And so that this may be evident, at the order of the
governor and captain-general, Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera,
we attest the same in Manila, June twenty, one thousand six hundred
and thirty-six.


(In triplicate.)

Hinigo de Villareal
Balthazar Ruiz de Escalona


We, the undersigned notaries, attest that Inigo de Villa Real and
Don Balthazar Ruiz de Escalona, by whom this certification is signed,
are factor and treasurer, the official judges of the royal treasury
of these Philipinas Islands; and entire faith and credit has been and
is given to them, in and out of court, to the certifications, acts,
and other despatches which they as such royal official judges have
given and give. Manila, June twenty-three, one thousand six hundred
and thirty-six.


Francisco de la Torre, notary-public.
Alonso Baeza Del Rio, notary-public.
Augustin de Valenzuela, notary-public.


I, Martin Ruiz de Salazar, accountant of the royal treasury in these
Philipinas Islands for the king our sovereign, and senior royal
official judge in these islands, certify that it is evident and
appears by his Majesty's books of the royal accountancy that are in
my charge, that there is charged to the accounts of the pay of the
captains, officers, soldiers, sailors, pilots, and common seamen who
serve his Majesty in the company of the seamen which is stationed
in this port of Cavite and in other parts of these islands, three
thousand one hundred and twenty-nine pesos of common gold, in the
list where the account of it is kept for the time that they serve;
and what is granted and paid by them for the contributions of the
hospital for one year reckoned from the first of July, one thousand
six hundred and thirty-five, until now (the date for deducting the
amount from them, when their accounts are concluded and balanced) is
at the rate of eight reals from the captain, four from the alferez,
two from the sergeant, a like sum from each non-commissioned officer,
and four reals from each marine soldier, a like sum from the pilot,
and the same from the common seamen. This has been done in virtue of
an order of Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, knight of the military
Order of Alcantara, governor and captain-general of these islands, and
president of the royal Audiencia herein, under date of August sixteen
of the said year one thousand six hundred and thirty-five. And in
order that this may be evident wherever required. I give the present.

Cavite, June thirty, one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Martin Ruiz de Salazar


We, the undersigned notaries, attest that Martin Ruiz de Salazar,
by whom the certification of this other part appears to be signed,
is accountant and official judge of the royal treasury of these
islands. Entire faith and credit has been given, in court and out,
to the certifications and other despatches signed in his name. In
order that that may be evident, we give the present in Cavite, July
twelve, one thousand six hundred and thirty-six.


Alonso Mendez de Almada,
royal notary and clerk of registers.
Augustin de Valenzuela, notary-public.
Alonso Baeza del Rio, notary-public.







BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA


The following documents are obtained from MSS. in the Archivo general
de Indias, Sevilla:

1. _The nuns of St. Clare._--"Simancas--Secular; Audiencia de
Filipinas; cartas y expedientes de personas eclesiasticos de Filipinas;
anos 1609 a 1644; est. 68, caj. 1, leg. 43."

2. _Letters to Felipe IV from Corcuera._--"Simancas--Secular; Audiencia
de Filipinas; cartas y espedientes del gobernador de Filipinas vistos
en el Consejo; anos 1629 a 1639; est. 67, caj. 6, leg. 8."

3. _Letter from Corcuera,_ July 11.--The same as No. 2.

4. _Hospitals and hospital contributions._--The same as No. 2.

The following documents are obtained from MSS. in the Academia Real
de la Historia, Madrid; they are in "Papeles de los Jesuitas:"

5. _Relation of 1635-36._--In "tomo 119, n deg.. 16."

6. _Letter from Lara._--In "tomo 119, n deg.. 19."











NOTES


[1] Apparently referring to the gate (now Puerta Real) at the southern
end of the city which opens toward Bagumbayan, a district between
Manila and Ermita. Through this gate were made the formal entrances
of governors and archbishops previous to 1762, when the city was
taken by the English; after that time, these entrances were made by
the Puerta del Parian, at the north-eastern part of the wall.

[2] Spanish, _mas boluesele el sueno del perro_; literally, "a dog's
sleep fell on him."

[3] Spanish, _tres tratos de cuerda_; referring to punishment by
suspending the delinquent by his hands, which are tied behind his back.

[4] _i.e._, "gate of the magazines," or royal storehouses. The
northernmost gate of the city, not far east of the fort of Santiago,
and opening toward the Pasig River.

[5] So in the manuscript, probably a transcriber's error; but it
evidently refers to the Dominican Pinelo.

[6] The Editors are indebted to Rev. T. C. Middleton, O.S.A., of
Villanova College, and father Fray Juan but no Mateos, of the same
order, of the Escorial, but now (May, 1905) at Villanova, for valuable
help in the translation of this pasquinade. As much of the subject
matter of the lampoon is local tit-tat, and as many of the meanings
(although they would be perfectly apparent to the Manila populace)
are purposely veiled, assurance cannot be given that the present
interpretation is correct in every detail. There are also evident
plays upon words and phrases, which can only be guessed at. Hence,
the original is given partly for that reason.

The poetical form in which this pasquinade is written dates from an
early period in Castile. Cervantes has a poem of this class in Chapter
xxvii of the first part of Don Quijote; while Lope de Vega has also
employed it. The second, fourth, and sixth lines form a sort of echo
to the first, third, and fifth lines (the six lines being, however,
written as three in the pasquinade). See Clemencin's edition of Don
Quijote (Madrid, 1894), iii, pp. 7-9.

[7] See the book of Esther. This is the Hamah of the King James Bible.

[8] Father Fray Juan Mateos says of this passage: "The author seems
to use the word 'quesos' [cheeses], alluding to 'casos' [cases]
(a practical question of moral theology). I imagine that the text
refers to the accusation made against those fathers of being casuists
or adapters of the moral doctrine to their own convenience. From the
context, one can deduce that 'cera' [wax] is used in the meaning of
'dinero' [money], and the meaning in that case might be, that the
Jesuits were trying to get money by fitting up the consciences of
men with moral doctrines easy of fulfilment."

[9] This is a very obscure stanza, although the allusions were
doubtless well understood in Manila. The second line might be
translated "And who in hanging apples, saw tares;" although the
translation as given above is to be preferred.

[10] There is evidently a play on the word "cura," which may mean
either "cures," or "priests" [_i.e_.,"cures"]. The meaning of the
last line seems to refer to the ecclesiastical term.

[11] This may be another play on words, for "sinzera" may be the
adjective "sincere" or the two words "sin zera," "waxless," and
hence in this last meaning, an allusion to the third line of the
third stanza.

[12] This has been already given in Vol. XXV, pp. 216-219.

[13] See this paper in Vol. XXV, pp. 243-244.

[14] Continuing from this point, the present document resumes. It is
probable that the part omitted in the present document was originally
a portion of it; but, being written on a loose sheet of paper, has
suffered the fate common to many documents and portions of documents
in Spanish archives, and been lost.

[15] One of our two copies of this attestation bears date July 29,
1635, and the other November 19, 1635. We have adopted the date above,
as being more probably the correct one, errors in the transcripts
being due to the poor writing of the original.

[16] See these letters in Vol. XXV, pp. 207-208, 209-210.

[17] See _ante_, p. 61, note 12.

[18] Spanish, _condenatoria_; but the word _comminatoria_ is employed
in a similar expression in the "Letter from a citizen of Manila."

[19] So in our transcript, but evidently an error of the transcriber.

[20] As the reader will observe, this letter from Corcuera is, in part,
almost the same as that preceding; but it contains a considerable
quantity of matter (including several appended documents) which is
not found elsewhere, and is for that reason presented here. It is
probably one of the letters sent, either partly or wholly in duplicate,
by other routes to Spain, so that at least one set of the despatches
might reach the home government.

[21] Here used in a technical sense--the option or right to take action
or enjoy an advantage alternately with others, as in appointments to
ecclesiastical benefices, etc.; the creoles evidently demanding to
share those appointments with the clergy brought over from Spain.

[22] Several of the matters discussed in the above letter are answered
by the following royal decree:

The King. To Don Sevastian Hurtado de Corcuera, knight of the Order of
Alcantara, my governor and captain-general of the Philipinas Islands,
and president of my royal Audiencia therein. Your letter of June 30,
636, on ecclesiastical matters has been examined in my royal Council of
the Indias, and reply is now made to you. You say that the religious
of the Order of St. Augustine need correction, since they had not
obeyed the bulls of his Holiness nor the decrees which have been
issued in regard to the alternation; and that it was expedient not
to allow them any more religious for eight years. Because they have
many religious, as well as on account of the reasons that you bring
forward for that, it has seemed best to me to charge you that you
shall cause the decree for the alternation to be punctually executed,
without allowing any more religious in each mission than the number
which, conformably to my royal patronage, shall be enough for its
needs; and that the rest of them occupy themselves in missions and
preaching for which they were sent there. As for what you wrote me
about the advanced age of the archbishop of those islands--who is so
old that his hands and head tremble, and that it would be desirable
to give him a coadjutor, and that you would arrange for giving him
two thousand pesos of income besides the four thousand which the said
archbishop receives, without drawing it from my royal treasury or from
my vassals--I charge you to make known to me the measure or means by
which that sum could be obtained without loss to my royal exchequer
or my vassals, so that I may consent to your carrying it out if it be
worthy of acceptance. In order that the religious of St. Dominic and
of the other orders who are laboring in those islands may live with
the concord and good example which is proper, and that they may not
appropriate more Indian villages than those which are allowed them by
my decrees, you shall not permit them to select any new ones beyond
what shall be conformable to my patronage; and you shall, with the
agreement of the archbishop, endeavor to unite some of the villages
to others; and in those which are newly established you shall make
the same effort, by introducing secular priests when you find them
intelligent and competent. Madrid, September 2, 1638.

I the King

Countersigned by Don Gabriel de Ocana y Alarcon, and signed by the
Council. (Conserved in Archivo Historico Nacional, in the Cedulario
Indico, tomo 39, folio 225b.)

[23] _Para el efecto de propaganda fide_: evidently an allusion to the
Congregation of the Propaganda (vol. xxi, p. 164, note 40), and may
be freely rendered, "for carrying on the work of the [Congregation
for the] propagation of the faith"--Collado's friars being assigned
to mission work only.

[24] Expenses incurred either directly under the factor--one of the
royal officials--or in the trading ports established by the Spaniards.

[25] The above shows the form in which the accounts from this point
are entered. For the sake of greater condensation, we have reduced
the balance of the document to the following tabular form.

[26] From this and many other entries in these tables, it appears
that much of the money reported as paid from the royal treasury never
really left it, but that accounts were simply canceled. The benefit of
these transactions would accrue to the purchaser of the pay-check, for
he bought at a discount from the original holder; and, until the law
whereby all the creditors of the royal treasury made a _voluntary gift_
to the king of two-thirds of the account was enforced by Corcuera, he
could use the pay-check at its face value, thus making immense profits,
or canceling his debts to the royal treasury at small cost to himself.

[27] Probably planks one braza long.

[28] Spanish, _de guzmanes_; _i.e._, young men from noble families,
who served as midshipmen in the navy, or as cadets in the army.

[29] That is, what is saved on a short voyage is consumed by extra
expense on a long one; and the expenses average about the same,
one year with another.

[30] That is, the repartimientos or amounts assessed on each district
for the royal service, in rice, oil, and other products.

[31] Juan del Carpio was born at Rio Frio, Spain, in 1583. While a
youth, he met in Spain Alonso Humanes, who was going with missionaries
to the Philippines, and offered himself for that work. Humanes took
him to Mexico, where Carpio entered (1604) the Jesuit order; completing
there his education, he went to the Philippines in 1615. His missionary
labors were carried on among the Visayans, during eighteen years. He
was murdered by the Moro pirates, December 3, 1634. See account of
his life in Murillo Velarde's _Historia_, fol. 70 verso, 71.

[32] Juan Domingo Bilancio--thus Murillo Velarde (_Hist. de
Philipinas_, fol. 64); but Retana and Pastells (in Combes's _Hist. de
Mindanao_, cols. 740, 741) give the name as Juan Bautista Vilancio--was
born in the kingdom of Naples, about 1573. Before attaining his
majority, he entered the Jesuit order, and came to Manila in 1602,
spending the rest of his life in the Philippine missions. He was
captured by the Moro pirates in 1632, who demanded a heavy ransom
for him. This was raised in the following year, but he died in
captivity before the money reached him. His name (apparently Vilanci)
is given a Spanish form by all these writers; and he is not mentioned
by Sommervogel.

[33] The Paraguay missions, among the most famous of the Society of
Jesus, and an offshoot of those of Brazil, were founded in 1588. The
reductions formed from the converts early in the seventeenth century,
formed what has been called "the republic of Paraguay." There the
religious instructed them not only in religion, but in various trades
and industries, the products of their work being communal. The great
prosperity of the reductions was arrested (1631-32) by the heathen
tribes of Brazil, whereupon the Christian Indians abandoned them and
founded new missions at the Grand Rapids of the Parana River. In 1656
there were said to have been more than twenty towns all civilized,
each containing 5,000 or 6,000 Indians, and many other towns partly
civilized. Each reduction was governed by two priests. After the
expulsion the missions declined rapidly. See _Jesuit Relations_
(Cleveland reissue), xii, p. 276.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, 1493-1898 ***

***** This file should be named 27127.txt or 27127.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/1/2/27127/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
