The Project Gutenberg EBook of Food for the Traveler, by 
Dora Cathrine Cristine Liebel Roper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Food for the Traveler
       What to Eat and Why

Author: Dora Cathrine Cristine Liebel Roper

Release Date: November 12, 2008 [EBook #27245]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOOD FOR THE TRAVELER ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Tamise Totterdell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









 FOOD _for the_
 TRAVELER

 What to Eat and Why

 OVER 100 MENUS
 for three meals per day

 PRICE 25 CENTS




 Food for the Traveler

 What to Eat and Why

 _by_

 Dora C. C. L. Roper, D.O.

 R. S. KITCHENER, PRINTER, OAKLAND, CAL.
 1916




 Copyrighted 1916
 by
 DORA C. C. L. ROPER
 All Rights Reserved




    Man is composed of what he has assimilated from his
    spiritual, mental and physical food




INTRODUCTION


These pages are dedicated to those who are seeking light on the question
of rational living and to all who are suffering from the effects of
wrong living. Thought along this line expresses growth and progress, and
with it comes knowledge. Common sense and judgment, following a natural
instinct, will go a long way toward attaining better health. But those
who, through the constant use of cooked, or highly spiced and fermented
food, have lost their natural instincts and intuitions, will find the
study of the science of dietetical chemistry of inestimable value toward
a better understanding of natural laws, and be enabled to make the
selections and combinations of foods more suitable to their temperament.

Before the question as to meat eating and vegetarianism can be solved,
we must consider the first principle of nature, which is the law of
self preservation. Thereafter we may be able to think and strive to save
the lives of animals, now cruelly sacrificed largely for the sense
gratification of man. The artificial preparation of food is a fine art,
and no doubt has helped much toward the development of our central
nervous system.

The ordinary mixed diet with the addition of meat two or three times per
week is the safest method for most people who are compelled to work
eight, ten, or twelve hours out of every twenty-four and have to deprive
themselves of the proper amount of fresh air, sunshine and physical
exercise, which brings all the muscles and organs of the body into
proper action.

Inharmony, disease, and misfortune are largely caused by living a life
contrary to the laws of nature.

The fulfillment of high ideals must be accompanied by common sense and
judgment, so it becomes an evolution instead of revolution. The evolving
of man from the stage of a jelly fish to a being possessed of a bony
framework in an upright position by the eating of animals has developed
a higher self. After having reached this stage of evolution the nature
of some people has become so highly sensitized that meat, as a food,
becomes repugnant to them. What they need is a stepping stone. The very
food which has produced this state of over refinement or destruction
must be used for construction and minimized by degrees.

In examining the claims of the disciples of vegetarianism it is well to
consider those nations whose constitution and customs of work and
education resemble our own. And in doing so we find that while nearly
all European nations, as well as many of the Orient, practice moderation
in meat eating, still they are for the most part only "near
vegetarians," and therefore should not be used as examples in an
argument for vegetarianism.

It is possible for normal individuals under fairly normal conditions of
life to nourish perfectly their bodies on a vegetarian diet, provided
they are willing to live mainly on sun-kissed foods instead of on a mass
of sloppily-cooked, devitalized, starchy vegetables, and soft
nitrogenous foods that burden the digestive organs and produce obesity
and slow consumption.

I hope that the menus on the following pages will be a help to all who
seek simplicity from a standpoint of health as well as economy.

Note: For preparation of foods, consult Scientific Feeding.

    Some people think that we become like the food we eat. This
    is true when the vibrations of what we eat are stronger than
    the vibrations in our bodies. All food consumed has a
    vibration of its own and unless the vital force within can
    change the rate of vibration of the food eaten and tune it to
    the vibration of the body itself, one cannot become
    nourished, or in other words "he becomes like the food he
    eats." There is but one force or energy in the body, which is
    life or "spirit." Under normal conditions this force has in
    itself all the power to harmonize with the vibrations of the
    foods taken into the body. Provided there is a demand for
    food in the form of true hunger.

    Natural diet, deep rhythmic breathing with corresponding
    exercises awaken latent talents within us and rapid mental
    and spiritual unfoldment takes place. Inharmony, disease and
    pain are caused by living a life contrary to the laws of God
    and Nature.




HOW TO BECOME A VEGETARIAN.


Adopting a vegetarian diet should be done with great care, and not in a
hurry, especially when the person is not in perfect health.

The best time to begin is the Spring. People who have lived on excessive
meat should cut it down to two and three times per week, substituting
cured meat and fish part of the time.

It may take months, or even years to educate the cells of the stomach to
act upon nuts, legumes, and other heavy protein foods, so as to be
properly nourished. An individual with great adaptability may make this
change without much discomfort, but many people who desire to leave off
meat, do so because they are already sick from wrong eating. If they
feel benefited by the change for a while it is generally because their
system is eliminating the toxins which are the result of excessive meat
eating. After this has taken place, the body requires food, properly
combined and proportioned, or else nerve starvation and obesity are the
result.

To those who for various reasons desire to adopt a vegetarian diet I
would say, do not substitute bread and vegetables for meat. Do not spend
your energy making new and complex dishes as advocated in fashionable
vegetarian cook books. Compounds containing several soft proteins such
as beans, nuts, eggs and cream, besides starches, are a burden to the
liver and alimentary canal and lay the foundation for new diseases.

If cooked foods are required, study carefully the preparation of
nutritious soups, well boiled cereals, salads, and add as many raw foods
as possible.

Exercise more in the open air, live and work in sunny well ventilated
rooms, retire early and live as close to nature as you can.

I hope that the following pages may serve as a stepping stone for all
who desire to eat less meat, as well as for those who wish to become
vegetarians.

    In adopting a raw food diet, or in reducing heat-giving
    elements, such as artificial sugars and hot drinks, it is
    important to apply more external heat to the body for a
    while, or else have the morning meal served in a sunny room.
    Plenty of outdoor exercise is necessary to properly utilize a
    vegetarian diet.




FOOD REQUIREMENTS.


It is important that the diet should contain the proper amount of
protein, starches and fats, suitable to the individual needs. Age,
weight, height, occupation, season and climate must all be considered.
Numerous and careful researches regarding food requirements made during
the last fifty years have led to the realization that the majority of
civilized men and women consume from two to three times the amount of
food necessary.




FOOD FOR THE AGED.


Many people at the ages of sixty and seventy still lead an active life,
while others retire from activity at forty-five or fifty. Therefore, the
food should conform to the person's mental and physical requirements. If
the teeth are poor and the digestive powers weak, the food should be
light, consisting mainly of well cooked cereals, baked potatoes, rice,
cooked greens, a small amount of meat, raw fruits and raw greens in
combination with fatty foods, as salads, milk and buttermilk, toasted
breads and soups.

The total fuel requirement depends upon whether the individual leads a
quiet or active existence. For a person who lives mainly indoors, and
makes little use of the muscles of the arms, shoulders and trunk, 1000
to 1200 calories is sufficient for twenty-four hours. If more food is
eaten than the body requires, the excess will manifest itself by the
development of chronic ailments and obesity, or feeble-mindedness.

The morning and evening meals should consist of fluid and semi-fluid
foods, or of toasted breads and salads. Meats, eggs (except the yolks),
cheese, beans, peas and nuts should be eaten only during the middle of
the day in small quantities. One can cut down his amount of food greatly
by thoroughly chewing each morsel. The demand for protein at this period
is small, while the amount of fat should be increased.




WHAT SHALL WE DRINK WITH OUR MEALS?


This question is often asked. It depends entirely on the quality and
combination of food which is eaten.

A diet consisting of a variety of solids and vegetables with excessive
fluids gives the stomach nothing to do; the contents pass at once into
the intestines. Such mixtures are ingested instead of being digested;
they cannot be fully utilized because stimulation upon the drainage of
the body is lacking.

If dry foods are eaten, such as sandwiches, rice, macaroni, potatoes or
dry cereals, without the addition of fruits, vegetables or soups, a
small amount of liquid should be taken. Such simple foods do not form a
perfect meal, therefore milk or broths are preferable to water. Water is
best taken from five to fifteen minutes before the meal or from one to
two hours after meals.

    Note: These pages are not a perfected plan of right eating to
    be slavishly followed. Each man is a law unto himself, and
    with a little self-study and practical application this book
    may be worth its weight in gold to the true student of
    natural laws.




RIGHT AND WRONG FOOD MIXTURES.


DO NOT MIX

    Fat Pork and Cucumbers.
    Pork and Sweet Fruits.
    Pork and Fancy Fruits.
    Pork, Corn, Cucumbers.
    Meat and Fish and Legumes.
    Milk and Meat.
    Cooked Vegetables and Nuts.
    Boiled Eggs and Fresh Pork.
    Bananas and Pork.
    Boiled Eggs and Cheese.
    Cherries and Raw Milk.
    Fancy Fruits and Onions.
    Fancy Fruits and Cucumbers.
    Nuts, excess of Starchy Foods.
    Potatoes, Tomatoes or Acid Fruits.
    Potatoes, Fresh Yeast Bread.
    Potatoes and White Bread.
    Potatoes, Underground Vegetables.
    Cooked and Raw Greens.
    Cucumber, Sago and Pork.
    Strawberries and Tomatoes.
    Strawberries and Beans.
    Bananas and Corn.
    Raw Fruits, Cooked Vegetables.
    Milk and Cooked Vegetables.
    Raw Fruits and Cooked Cereals.
    Cheese (except Cottage) and Nuts.
    Boiled Eggs and Nuts.
    Boiled Eggs and Canned Corn.
    Boiled Eggs and Bananas.
    Boiled Eggs and Cheese.
    Bananas and Cucumbers.
    Skim-Milk and Fruit.
    Cheese and Bananas.
    Beans and Bananas.


GOOD COMBINATIONS

    Raw Greens and Meat or Eggs.
    Boiled Greens and Meat or Eggs.
    Meats and Acids.
    Eggs and Salted Meats.
    Raw Fruits and Raw Cereals.
    Raw Fruits, Raw Cereals and Nuts.
    Raw Fruits, Raw Greens and Nuts.
    Raw Cereals and Nuts.
    Raw Cereals and Raw Milk.
    Raw Cereals, Raw Vegetables.
    Boiled Cereals and Boiled Milk.
    Boiled Cereals and Boiled Cream.
    Raw Greens, Eggs and Acid Fruits.
    Boiled Greens, Eggs, Acid Fruits.
    Fats and Acids.
    Rye and Butter and Honey.
    Rye and Cream and Honey.
    Cream, Sweet or Acid Fruits.
    Eggs or Nuts, Apples, Green Leaves.
    Popcorn, Tomatoes and Lettuce.
    Cucumbers, Milk, Cereal Food.
    Cheese, Apples and Green Leaves.
    Cheese and Rye and Apples.
    Eggs and Pickled Vegetables.
    Eggs, Acid Fruits, Leaf Vegetables.
    Eggs and Greens and Rye.
    Nuts, Apples, Sweet or Acid Fruits.
    Nuts, Bananas, Sweet or Acid Fruits.
    Almonds, Rice and Green Leaves.
    Nuts, Raisins and Green Leaves.
    Boiled Cereals and Raw Nuts.

    The harmony and inharmony between the different foods as
    mentioned above are only stated in a general way. Certain
    combinations are absolutely harmful to every individual,
    others are either harmful to certain temperaments, or, to mix
    them means a waste in the animal economy of the body.




MENUS FOR BREAKFAST.


People who feel the need of laxative foods during the spring season will
find here a number of suitable breakfast menus to choose from:

     1. Cooked spinach or mustard greens, with rye or biscuit.
     2. Finely mashed boiled beets or turnips or carrots with parsley
        and bacon.
     3. Mushroom salad, lettuce, French dressing, bread and butter.
     4. Bacon with string beans, bread and butter, stewed prunes.
     5. Lettuce with dressing, baked potatoes, creamed beef.
     6. Celery with French dressing, fried sweet potatoes, cranberry
        sauce.
     7. Corned beef hash with eggs and buttered triscuits.
     8. Lettuce with syrup dressing and buckwheat cakes.
     9. Grated carrots with lettuce, unfired bread with nut-cream.
    10. Buttered toast with apple or apricot sauce, cheese.
    11. Cooked cereals with hot cream and dried sweet fruits.
    12. Baked apples with cream, toast and cream cheese.
    13. Rice with prunes, bacon, black crusts.
    14. Cooked cereal with hot cream or butter, cucumbers cut in halves.
    15. Sliced bananas and grapefruit with nut or mayonnaise dressing.
    16. Cabbage salad, hard boiled eggs, bread and butter.
    17. Strained canned tomato juice and bananas with lettuce.
    18. Fish cakes, steamed potatoes, parsley and butter, black crusts.
    19. Baked or plain boiled cauliflower with chipped beef.
    20. Boiled cauliflower with tomato sauce, bread, butter and cheese.
    21. Tomato puree with fried parsnips, black toast with butter.
    22. Radishes, green onions, whole wheat bread and butter.
    23. Asparagus salad with ham hash, bread and butter.
    24. Salted mackerel with creamed potatoes, milk.
    25. Pineapple with grapefruit, fish, apple salad, lettuce.
    26. Cherries with water eggnog, triscuit with chipped beef.
    27. Cherries with pineapple, cream cheese, egg food or fish.
    28. Bananas with tomato, cranberry or rhubarb compote.
    29. Apple or apricot sauce with Imperial Sticks or fruit toast.

    People who have difficulty in digesting eggs will find it
    more agreeable to eat the yolks and whites at different times
    of the day; the former prepared in salad dressing or boiled
    custards; the latter in the form of baked eggs with lemon and
    green vegetables.

    Learn by experience to select the kinds of food which yield
    nourishment and avoid those which disagree.




MENUS FOR DINNER.


     1. Apple salad, lettuce, broiled steak, shredded wheat with butter.
     2. Cream of pea soup, beef or roast pork, potatoes, stewed prunes.
     3. Broiled chops, young peas, creamed potatoes, oranges.
     4. Tomato salad, lettuce, veal with mushrooms and rice.
     5. Cream of tomato soup, veal chops with peas, stewed prunes.
     6. Sweet potatoes with roast beef, tomato puree, celery, nuts.
     7. Lettuce salad, mashed carrots, baked beans with lemon, bacon.
     8. Beefsteak with eggs and potatoes, celery, prunes.
     9. Pea soup with crackers, fish with apple salad, celery.
    10. Sour roast with potato dumplings, lettuce salad, prunes.
    11. Broth with egg, apple salad and lettuce, pork chops.
    12. Pea soup with toast, fish with apple rice, coffee and crusts.
    13. Game or pork with sauerkraut and potato dumplings.
    14. Tongue with mushroom sauce and potatoes, crusts and coffee.
    15. Boiled beef with string beans, potatoes with white sauce.
    16. Baked oatmeal with cranberry sauce and celery, nuts.
    17. Fish with potato salad and lettuce, grapes or pie.
    18. Roast mutton with peas and baked potatoes, celery.
    19. Bean soup with raw carrots, bread and butter.
    20. Barley soup with crackers, Swiss cheese and apple salad.
    21. Lettuce salad with omelet, stewed prunes or cranberries.
    22. Tomato and lettuce salad with pork tenderloin, oranges.
    23. Mashed carrots or beets with fat or lean meat, green grapes.
    24. Pea soup with fried bread, calves' liver with apple salad.
    25. Lentil soup, fried bread, codfish balls with apple sauce.
    26. Roast beef, greens, apples or potatoes, gelatine.
    27. Chicken soup, asparagus or peas, potatoes, meat.
    28. Spinach or lettuce, macaroni, cheese, pea or tomato puree.
    29. Tomato soup or salad, baked beans, lettuce, prunes.

    Drink sufficient pure natural water between your meals. There
    is danger in over-drinking as well as in under-drinking.

    All who are in the habit of eating more than their systems
    require and especially those who indulge in large amounts of
    bread at dinner, would do well to begin their meal with a
    soup. Legume and cream soups will furnish a satisfactory meal
    by themselves. Take toast or sun-dried bread at the end of
    the meal, with black coffee or postum.




LIGHT LUNCHES FOR CHILDREN, STUDENTS AT COLLEGE AND PEOPLE WHO HAVE TO
TOIL INDOORS.


     1. Corn and tomato soup with crusts or raw greens.
     2. Cream of tomato soup with zwieback or raw greens.
     3. Green pea soup with zwieback and celery, pie or pudding.
     4. Broth with egg, sandwiches with bologna or cold meat.
     5. Buttermilk with graham toast, stewed prunes with cream.
     6. Fresh milk with tomato toast, stewed prunes with cream.
     7. Fruit gruel with white of eggs, and buttered toast.
     8. Strained tomato juice with whole wheat toast and butter, celery.
     9. Orange juice, cooked leaf vegetable with fried bacon and eggs,
        toast.
    10. Pineapple salad with whipped cream and toast or triscuit.
    11. Apple or banana salad, lettuce, orange juice, nuts.
    12. Potato salad with lettuce and soft boiled eggs, ham or bacon.
    13. Strawberries or raspberries with rich milk and zwieback.
    14. Cherries and egg food, fish or nut foods, lettuce.
    15. Cream cheese with apples and sandwiches, lettuce salad.
    16. Fig or date butter with ryenuts and rich fresh milk.
    17. Raw huckleberries (3/4 cupful) with bread and butter or zwieback.
    18. Lettuce, bananas, one glass of cranberry or tomato juice.
    19. Apple salad with lettuce and almond cream or almonds.
    20. Apples, raisins, six to twelve nuts, lettuce, celery.
    21. Gelatine of fruit, or bread and bran with cream and toast.
    22. Clam broth or cream soup with toast and raw celery.
    23. Muskmelon with lemon and berries or cherries.
    24. Baked apples in gelatine with fish salad, lettuce.
    25. Ambrosia or apple sauce with whites of eggs and toast, malted
        milk.




MENUS FOR SUPPER.


     1. Rice with milk, black toast with fig butter or honey.
     2. Pea broth, tripe with tomato sauce and toast with butter.
     3. Melon, berries, codfish cakes with bread and butter.
     4. Cream of corn soup, tomato toast with milk.
     5. Rice flour with hot cream or milk, toast with eggs.
     6. Milk rice, soda crackers or toast or cake, coffee.
     7. Apple salad, puffed wheat with butter and fried bacon.
     8. Broth with egg, cracker, sprouts, lamb, toast, butter, oranges.
     9. Apple and celery salad, fruit cake with coffee or milk.
    10. Raspberries or strawberries, shredded wheat or cake, rich milk.
    11. Tomato or blackberry toast, one or two glasses of rich milk.
    12. Fruit gelatine with cream, sandwiches or cake, coffee or milk.
    13. Sterilized blackberry juice with zwieback, omelet, fruit sauce.
    14. Clabber milk with cream and dry toast, nuts if desired.
    15. Lemon pie with fresh milk, or sand tart with fruit salad.
    16. Raw huckleberries and zwieback with sweet butter, nuts.

    For those who require a liberal amount of food, add cream
    cheese, cottage cheese, Swiss cheese, fish, lamb chops, meat
    cakes, eggs, egg-toast, legume soups, etc. Apples, tomatoes
    and prunes combine well with many of the above mentioned
    foods.




MENUS FOR DINNER (WITHOUT MEAT).


     1. Asparagus or celery root salad with lettuce, pea loaf.
     2. Young peas, mashed potatoes, fried egg-plant.
     3. Mushroom salad with lettuce, Imperial Sticks, rice, nuts.
     4. Legume cheese or croquettes, carrot puree, celery, olives.
     5. Radishes, water cress salad, stuffed peppers and tomato puree.
     6. Apple pie or black bread, grated Swiss cheese, grapes or oranges.
     7. Spinach, eggs or omelet with tomato puree, olives.
     8. Raw soaked oats or wheat with dried soaked fruit and cream, nuts.
     9. Tomato cream soup or tomato salad, eggs, shredded wheat.
    10. Vegetable pudding or legume roast, string beans, carrots.
    11. Polenta with apricot or cranberry sauce and cheese.
    12. Boiled wheat with butter or hot cream and fruit, nuts.
    13. Baked rolled oats with cranberry sauce, celery, nuts.
    14. String beans, lima beans or cow beans with green salad.
    15. Asparagus salad, pea cheese with tomato sauce, prunes.
    16. Cherry soup, German pancakes with lettuce and syrup dressing.
    17. Blackberry soup, cereal or bread omelet, lettuce, honey dressing.
    18. Milk soup with sago, German pancakes, gooseberry compote.
    19. Cabbage, salad or stewed, steamed or plain bread pudding.
    20. Bread soup with apples, rice pudding with dried fruit.
    21. Bran or bread soup, apple salad with grated cheese, lettuce.
    22. Milk or huckleberry soup, unleavened apple pancakes.
    23. Clabber milk with cream and grapenuts or stale bread, nuts.
    24. Corn bread with apple salad and lettuce, nuts.
    25. Plain milk rice with currants, nuts or cheese.
    26. Bread dumplings with stewed prunes or pears, celery, nuts.
    27. Buttermilk soup with dried fruit, nuts or eggs.
    28. Peas with mashed carrots and lettuce salad.
    29. Rice and tomato soup, cabbage, plum pudding.

    For people of a bilious temperament eggs should not be mixed
    with milk or sweet foods at the same meal. Tomatoes, tart
    apples or green leaves, raw or cooked, are anti-bilious
    foods.

    If certain foods do not agree, or produce indigestion, study
    their combination and preparation carefully, also the
    proportion and time of the day when most suitable. If this
    does not prove satisfactory leave them alone.




MENUS SUITABLE FOR ANY MEAL. (WITHOUT MEAT)


     1. Cereal salad of rye with bananas or carrots, milk, green leaves.
     2. Raw or cooked lima beans with tomatoes or carrots, leaf salad.
     3. Apple and lettuce salad, fruit cake or fruit pie, Swiss cheese.
     4. Plain cake, gelatine, cream or green salad, milk or lemonade.
     5. Bananas with strained tomato juice and raw green peas.
     6. Plum salad, lettuce, mayonnaise dressing, walnuts.
     7. Strawberries, lettuce and oil or mayonnaise dressing, almonds.
     8. Apple or tomato salad, cheese and raw bread.
     9. Clabber milk, triscuits or zwieback, dried fruits, nuts.
    10. Raw blackberries or lemonade, zwieback, or raw bread.
    11. Raspberries or strawberries, rich milk, raw bread or nuts.
    12. Banana salad, lettuce, cherries or sweet fruits, almonds.
    13. Fruit pie or fruit toast, a glass of milk, pecans.
    14. Green grapes, black bread, Swiss or cream cheese.
    15. Cereal or fruit salad and lettuce, nuts.
    16. Fruit butter with cream or toast and almonds.
    17. Cherries with eggs or omelet or corn bread.
    18. Melon with lemon, banana salad, pecans or almonds.
    19. Bean salad with lettuce and raw carrots.
    20. Potato or carrot salad, lettuce, walnuts.
    21. Fruit soup (warm or cold) eggs or nuts.
    22. Pear salad with cranberries and celery, raw bread.
    23. Buttermilk or sweet milk with toast or raw bread.
    24. Raw rolled oats, plain or with fruit and cream.
    25. Mixed rylax and wheat with cream and fruit.
    26. Cabbage salad with hard boiled eggs, bread and butter.
    27. Peach or apricot salad, wheat or rye and nuts.
    28. Soaked whole wheat with cream, prunes or dates.
    29. Raw corn or bananas and strained tomato juice.
    30. Cooked pea or string bean salad and raw carrots.
    31. Baked apples with cream, toast with cheese.
    32. Carrot or tomato salad, olives, lettuce, legumes any style.
    33. Sweet potatoes, baked or boiled, buttermilk.
    34. Raw huckleberries, zwieback or raw wheat, butter, cream, nuts.
    35. Green pea soup, celery, bananas or sweet potatoes, cranberries.
    36. Bananas with berries and lettuce.

    Laxative foods: Fruit juices, plums, tomatoes, apples, pears,
    grapes, figs, fruit-soups, fruit-gruels, raisins, gelatines,
    corn, oats, spinach, oranges, carrots, parsnips, bran, oil,
    butter, cream, olives, yolks of eggs, pecans, walnuts, Brazil
    nuts, cucumbers, onions, greens, butter sauces.

    Constipating Foods: Skim-milk, liquid foods, fine flour
    bread, potatoes, tapioca, white of eggs, gluten, mush, cheese
    made from skim-milk.




DIET AND HYGIENE FOR BRAIN WORKERS.


Proper growth and activity of the brain and nervous system are promoted
by a healthy flow of blood. Pure air and sufficient food properly
combined and proportioned are essential. Choose more of the lighter
forms of protein and starchy foods, as fish, eggs, almonds, green peas,
bacon, a moderate amount of lamb and beef, rice, sago, wheat, and
vegetable gelatines. Foods rich in minerals are celery, apples,
tomatoes, greens, oranges, and practically all the fresh fruits and
vegetables, especially the small berries. Melons and starchy vegetables
in large quantities are suitable for muscular workers. Use as little as
possible of so-called pure chemical substances, such as refined sugar
and flour.

Avoid poisonous beverages, tobacco and all forms of drugs. Sleep at
least nine hours in a well ventilated room, facing east or south. Avoid
constipation. Combine mental work with moderate amounts of useful and
enjoyable exercise and physical work. Protect the eyes from strong
artificial light. Keep the feet warm. Relax before and after meals. A
certain amount of manual labor is absolutely necessary for the
brain-worker. It favors deep breathing and creates a demand for more air
and water, and thus improves digestion, oxidation and nutrition. The
body poisons are carried off quicker and nervous headaches and
despondency are avoided. Short walks out of doors before retiring are
very beneficial for people who suffer with cold hands and feet.

    Dress by an open fire or in a sunny room. A chill before
    breakfast produces indigestion and a desire for unnecessary
    hot foods. Never sleep by night lamps or any other artificial
    light. They are injurious to the eyes and absorb oxygen.

    Avoid fresh breads, inferior cakes and pastry. Do not eat
    unless you are hungry. Do not over-indulge in athletic or any
    other kind of exercise. Remember that natural feeding, pure
    air and sufficient sleep call for natural breathing and
    natural exercise. Unnatural feeding and late hours create
    disease or nervousness.




"THE IMMIGRANT."


All who leave the land of their birth should make themselves acquainted
with the art of living and the peculiarities of the new country in which
they intend to live.

To depart entirely from their old customs and habits is as dangerous as
to neglect the study of the new environment or the failure to adopt
necessary changes.

In some portions of the United States the climatic conditions are very
changeable; we have extreme heat and cold, an excess of rain with wind
storms and dryness alternating within a short time. West of the Rocky
Mountains we have a mild sea air. In the Southern States and near the
Pacific Coast we have low districts where malaria and catarrhal
conditions are easily acquired.

Tropical fruits and vegetables which are looked upon as luxuries in
Northern Europe are necessary articles of food in the country where they
grow, therefore the stranger should make himself acquainted with such
foods, and by degrees learn to eat them.




TRAINING CHILDREN IN CORRECT HABITS OF EATING.


A child should have his face and hands washed before and after each
meal. He should not be allowed to carry foodstuffs and candy about the
house, or touch carpets and furniture with sticky and greasy fingers. If
he requires food between meals, give him four or five meals per day, but
have him eat his food in the proper place.

The breeding of flies, mosquitoes and other disease carriers is greatly
favored by allowing children to eat at any and all times without
napkins, or special preservation of their dress, or without cleaning
their hands before and after eating, or before and after playing with
animals and pets.

The American child is given too much consideration at the table. There
is a great difference between the saying "I don't like a certain food"
and "I don't want it," because there are things which taste better.

To leave one's plate half full of foodstuffs and ask for, or accept,
other food is customary, but before the law of our Creator it is unclean
and disrespectful, wasteful and dangerous.

The physiological laws of our bodies are based on very economical plans:
nature utilizes everything and wastes nothing. Cooked foodstuffs,
whether they are wasted within our bodies by over-indulgence, or in the
garbage can, create decomposition and germs.




MENUS FOR DINNER FOR YOUNG CHILDREN.


     1. One-half orange, one ounce boiled fish, one-half of an apple,
        toast.
     2. One-half of an apple, one or two eggs, one to two tablespoons
        raw rylax.
     3. Cereal salad with carrots and fish.
     4. Legume soup, butter and bread, raw carrots.
     5. Well boiled macaroni, two tablespoons of cold grated cheese.
     6. Light rice with cold grated Swiss cheese.
     7. Cereal salad with apple and eggs.
     8. Lettuce, baked potatoes, beachnut bacon and one egg.
     9. Mashed carrots, two tablespoons of young peas, bacon.
    10. String beans with stale bread and butter, bacon and egg.
    11. Finely chopped spinach, bacon, egg, stale bread, butter.
    12. Three to five cherries, light omelet, lettuce.
    13. Cereal salad with apples, two to three tablespoons of cottage
        cheese.
    14. Baked oats with prunes or cranberry sauce and bacon.
    15. Whole wheat with sterilized cream and celery.
    16. Peach and cereal salad, beachnut bacon and one egg.
    17. Baked potato greens, meat, egg or fish.
    18. Legume puree or soup, carrots, bacon.

Legumes are a very important food for young children, and their use
should begin during the second year. They are easily digested if
prepared in the form of soups and purees, and combined as directed in
the different menus. They should not be given at night.

    Mothers of girls should think it more important to furnish
    healthful exercise, wholesome food and restful sleep during
    the years of budding womanhood, than to worry about lessons
    in music and art, or a business education. All these can be
    taken up with much greater benefit after maturity. Arrested
    development of the organs of reproduction will lay the
    foundation for many years of unhappiness and suffering.

    Many parents are impressed with the idea that their children
    require a large amount of sweets, in order to make them grow.
    We cannot force nature without paying the penalty. At
    maturity, we reap what has been sown for us, or what we have
    sown for ourselves.




MEMORANDUM




Prevention of Disease, Insanity and Crime

CONTENTS: Wet or Dry? The alcohol we take, the alcohol we make.
Treatment of chronic alcoholism. Preventative treatment. Mineral
starvation. Price 15 Cents


The Epicure of Medicine

The Key to successful treatment of chronic, so-called incurable diseases.
153 Pages. Cloth, $1.25; postpaid, $1.35. Paper, $1.00; postpaid, $1.10


EXTRACTS FROM REVIEWS AND LETTERS

    Your book, "The Epicure of Medicine," is worth its weight in
    gold.

          DR. F. SCHURMANN, Honolulu, T. H. (The Schurmann Institute).

    A knowledge based on such experience is worthy of the
    profoundest consideration. This accounts for the sincerity of
    the mode of writing.

                               DR. AXEL EMIL GIBSON, Los Angeles, Cal.

    The book is interesting and has value. The author's account
    of her own struggles with disease leads one to wonder how she
    could be alive and able to write a book. Few such struggles
    have ever been recorded. It is interesting to follow the
    author in her account of the combats she has had with the
    disease. There are many new and strange teachings in the book
    of which we shall express no opinion.

                               THE THERAPEUTIC RECORD, Louisville, Ky.

    The study of the book shows that the author, like many
    American physicians, is not a staunch believer in "drug
    cures," but considers that spiritual, mental and physical
    healing applied in the natural way are the only means to
    produce chemical changes within our bodies.

                                     PRACTICAL MEDICINE, Delhi, India.

    After a careful reading and understanding of DR. ROPER'S new
    work, I can heartily endorse her efforts to bring the right
    style of living before the people. Such a work as this seems
    a blessing to humanity.

    MRS. LOTTIE HALL, Pres. of Lincoln School Mothers' Club, Berkeley.

    The only cook book which I have seen, which gives the proper
    chemical combinations for each meal of the day.

                                    MRS. ESTHER TALBOTT, Oakland, Cal.

    Your book deserves to be circulated by the millions. Our club
    would consider it a favor if you could give us a lecture and
    demonstration on nutritious soups.

                                  MRS. IDA HOUGHTALING, Berkeley, Cal.

    "Scientific Feeding" is an open door to health. After being
    under the care and supervision of DR. ROPER for two months I
    feel confident that she has knowledge which leads to health
    through right living.

           MISS ELISABETH JEWETT, Kindergarten Director, Cleveland, O.

    Your book is a regular gold mine. I particularly like the
    chapter, "Study of Food." A copy should be in every school
    library.

                 ELEANOR MERROW (Public School Teacher for Ten Years).




                         DR. DORA C. C. L. ROPER

                            DIETETIC EXPERT

                       NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASES
                           OBESITY A SPECIALTY

     Dietetic Instructions by Mail      Accommodations for Patients
     For terms, state case and enclose addressed stamped envelope.
                 R. F. D. 1, Box 188, Oakland, Cal.

    Courses in Dietetic Chemistry given to nurses; in classes and by
    correspondence.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Food for the Traveler, by 
Dora Cathrine Cristine Liebel Roper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOOD FOR THE TRAVELER ***

***** This file should be named 27245.txt or 27245.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/2/4/27245/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Tamise Totterdell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
