Project Gutenberg's A Pioneer Railway of the West, by Maude Ward Lafferty

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Pioneer Railway of the West

Author: Maude Ward Lafferty

Release Date: November 14, 2008 [EBook #27256]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PIONEER RAILWAY OF THE WEST ***




Produced by David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Kentuckiana Digital Library)











A Pioneer Railway of the West

By Maude Ward Lafferty

[Illustration]




  This restoration of a portion of the original track of the
  Lexington and Ohio (now Louisville and Nashville) Railroad
    laid at Lexington in 1831, is dedicated to those men of
     forethought and courage who were pioneers in railroad
                   development in America.

                     Erected Anno Domini
                           MCMXVI.

                    Dedication Exercises
                          10 A. M.
                       May 30, 1916

        College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering
                   University of Kentucky




During the month of July, 1915, there appeared in a local newspaper an
account of the finding of "Old Rail Stones" and "Old Strap Iron Rails"
which had been used in the construction of the railroad generally known
as "the old Lexington and Frankfort Road," though it was incorporated
under the name of the "Lexington and Ohio Rail Road." It is believed by
many to have been the first railroad west of the Alleghany Mountains.
Be that as it may, the quaint and interesting relics had just been dug
up that week by the workmen who were reconstructing the freight yards
of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad. The workmen were moving more
recently laid tracks back to _the old original road bed of the pioneer
railroad_, and in doing so they unearthed those curious relics of 1831.

Although just starting that very day for a summer vacation, I hurried
down town a little before train time, and went to the Main Street
offices of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad where the interesting
relics were on display.

As I stood gazing at that worn and rusty bar of iron with its single
bent and rusty spike, I was whisked back across the years by some
strange trick of memory and I saw, instead, a dimly lighted sick room,
on a hot summer night--myself a little sufferer, and sitting beside me,
fanning my fevered brow, my beloved father, who, notwithstanding the
fatigue of a heavy and exacting practice sat thus night after night,
soothing me to sleep by telling me entertaining stories of his youth,
and as he was born one hundred and one years ago, the strange
experiences of his boyhood were thrilling indeed to his youthful adorer.

And so, I saw in my mind's eye that familiar room of my childhood--the
open window, the breezes blowing the curtains to and fro, the moonlight
casting strange shadows on the terrace outside, and I heard again that
voice which has meant so much to me telling how "when the first railroad
started" and all the people had gathered from far and near "to witness
its departure," he and a group of fellow students from Transylvania
University, mounted on fast horses, galloped ahead "to see if the
Wonderful Thing could round the curve without running off the track";
and how "it came in sight, thundering along, puffing out clouds of black
smoke, the engineer adding to the confusion by incessantly blowing his
shrill whistle," all of which so terrified his horse, he had great
difficulty in keeping his seat, but yet, how tremendously impressed he
was by the "gallant way in which the gentlemen seated in the coach
raised their stovepipe hats in greeting as they passed by like a streak
of lightning."

He said the locomotive had been invented by his old friend Tom Barlow,
in whose honor he had named our Tom Barlow, his favorite race horse.

He also said the old locomotive looked like a "thresher engine mounted
on a flat car," and that the coach was for all the world like an
"omnibus with seats on top as well as inside," and furthermore, he
added, when it had been proved safe he rode upon it himself, and then
"rode home on horseback" (a distance of thirty miles) to tell his mother
all about it.

And this was all that was left of that Wonderful Thing, this bit of
scrap iron and a few stone sills!

Finding myself gazing vacantly at that relic of the Past, and that
people were noting my abstraction, I hastily gathered myself together
and crossing the street to our beautiful Union Station, I started
on my journey. In a magnificent chair car, luxuriously furnished and
upholstered, a liveried porter raised the windows and adjusted screens,
turned on an electric fan, offered me the latest magazines and papers
fresh from the press, placed a footstool at my feet and a cushion at
my back. My safety was provided for by double tracking and unseen but
perfectly trained employees, but neither the reading matter in my lap,
the comfort of my surroundings, nor the always charming scenery from the
car window, could drive from my thoughts the quaint old railroad; and
when I came back to Lexington in the fall, in my eager desire to know
more about it, I immediately began my research which has grown into this
history of

  "A Pioneer Railway of the West."

        MAUDE WARD LAFFERTY.





The first locomotive engine in the world was built just one hundred
years ago by George Stephenson and used at Newcastle, England, at the
Killingworth Colliery.

According to the Encyclopedia Britannica _railways_ had their origin in
_tramways_ which were used more than two hundred years ago in the mining
districts of England to carry their output of coal to the sea.

The Stockton and Darlington Railway, about thirty-eight miles in length,
was operating a locomotive driven by Stephenson, with a signalman on
horseback, in advance, in 1825. The passenger coach in this instance was
named the "Experiment," and carried six persons inside and from fifteen
to twenty persons outside. But it was the year 1829, which became famous
in the annals of railways, not only for the opening of the Liverpool and
Manchester line, but for the invention and construction of the first
high speed locomotive of the standard modern type. Robert Stephenson's
engine, "The Rocket," was made under competition for the Liverpool and
Manchester Railway and it gained the prize of five hundred pounds for
lightness, power and speed, awarded by the directors.


FIRST RAILROADS AND LOCOMOTIVES IN THE UNITED STATES.

The newspapers of that period were filled with the wonderful
"performance" of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway and the people of
the United States, as well as those of Great Britain, became interested
in the question of railroad transportation. As early as 1828 charters
were obtained in several Eastern States and railroad companies
organized.

The first locomotive engine used in this country was operated on the
Delaware and Hudson Canal Company's railroad between the mines at
Carbondale and the town of Honesdale, Pennsylvania. This locomotive was
built at Stourbridge, England, and made its trial trip in August, 1829.


KENTUCKY'S FIRST RAILROAD.

Kentucky, which was one of the leading States in the Union in those days
in all progressive movements, was wide awake to the great advantages to
be gained by railroad transportation. And Lexington, which seems to have
been the "self-starter" of Kentucky, was aroused to the highest pitch of
excitement. The various "performances" of the English railroads were
published at length in the Kentucky Gazette, and the Observer and
Reporter. Lexington was the very heart of the great Blue Grass region of
Kentucky. The amazing richness of the soil had lured the first settlers
from the safety of their transmontane homes to the hardships of Indian
fighting and primitive living. Here they had built an ideal city adorned
with beautiful Colonial homes; established the first great seat of
learning west of the Alleghanies; built the first insane asylum; started
the first newspaper; established the first public library, and
surrounded by culture, wealth and refinement, with every want seemingly
supplied and every wish apparently gratified, their business men
declared there was yet one thing lacking--they needed an outlet to some
great water course. The town branch was beautiful to look upon and a
never-failing delight to those first inhabitants but useless for
navigation. Their bountiful crops demanded transportation to the markets
of the world. And now, like a miracle to solve their difficulties came
this railroad proposition. They read the local papers with interest,
discussed the question at public meetings, sent a man to England to
obtain all available information concerning it, and with a push and
energy which would startle the town today, they set to work to obtain a
charter from the Kentucky Legislature, then in its session of 1829-30,
asking for a railroad from Lexington, Kentucky, _to some point_ on the
Ohio River.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Reporter for February 3rd, 1830, _just one week_ after the Charter
was obtained, had the following article: "As considerable interest has
been excited in this community on the subject of Railroads by the Act of
the Legislature authorizing the formation of a Company to make one from
this town to the Ohio River, we have copied into this paper several
articles going to show their immense utility and importance.

However great the advantages of Railroads may be to any country we are
convinced that there is none where this beneficial influence could be
more intensely experienced than in this section of Kentucky."

       *       *       *       *       *

Then follows a notice calling attention to Section I of the Charter and
asking that subscription books be opened. On Monday, February 8th, 1830,
_just eleven days_ after the Charter was obtained, the books were opened
at Brennan's Tavern from ten a.m. until two p.m. on five successive
days. And in this incredibly short space of time the money was raised
by those public spirited, enterprising men. What a magnificent
achievement!

Digressing a moment here, it must be remembered that Brennan's Tavern,
which plays so conspicuous a part in this history of the railroad, was
none other than the famous old Postlethwaite's Tavern, known to us as
the Phoenix Hotel, which has been making history for Lexington since
1800. At this particular time it was leased and conducted by Mr.
Brennan, and so took his name for the time being.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the next issue of the Reporter, February 10th, 1830, we find:
"Agreeable to the notice published in our last, the subscription books
for stock in this company were opened on Monday last, and before two
o'clock p.m., the amount of stock subscribed was for $204,000. We have
procured the following list of the names of the subscribers with the
sums subscribed by each respectively, which we publish by way of showing
to those who are yet in doubt as to the practicability and policy of
this work, how the subject is viewed by men of practical experience."

Then follows a list of twenty-two subscribers.

"These liberal subscriptions by persons who have carefully investigated
the subject afford conclusive proof that they consider the project not
only a feasible one but one that offers to the Capitalist an opportunity
for a profitable investment of funds. They have doubtless taken into
consideration the peculiar advantages of the country in which the road
will be located. * * * It is impossible to imagine the full extent of
the varied mutual influences which the prosperity of this section of the
country and the Rail Road will exert, all tending to the convenience,
wealth and happiness of the community. * * *

P. S.--At the closing of the books at two p.m. on Tuesday, the following
additional subscriptions had been taken."

(Follows a list of forty-two subscribers.)

"Which makes a total amount of $310,800; $300,000 being all that is
necessary to vest corporate rights.

"At a meeting assembled for the purpose, Mr. Elisha I. Winter was
elected President and John Brand, Benjamin Gratz, George Boswell, Walter
Dunn, Richard Higgins, Henry Clay, Joseph Bruen, Henry C. Payne, Elisha
Warfield, Benjamin Dudley and Charlton Hunt, Directors of the Lexington
and Ohio Rail Road Co."


CONSTRUCTION.

The succeeding newspapers published a great deal on construction, and
when it is remembered that all of it was experimental at that time,
it will be interesting to note that the Lexington and Ohio Railroad
Company, patterned most closely after the English models, undertaking,
however, to improve upon them by the use of our native limestone sills
which they believed to be indestructible and found, to their sorrow, to
be most perishable.

The Reporter of November 24th, 1830, says: "A great deal of information
on the subject of Rail Roads has been disseminated by public spirited
individuals in the course of the past two or three years. A number of
such works have been projected in the United States and some of them
completed within that period. The Baltimore and Ohio is first and most
important in every point of view. To the efforts of the enterprising
Directors and Stockholders of that Company, we shall be indebted for
the creation in a short period of time of a greater extent of Railway
communication between the several parts of the Union than Centuries have
produced of artificial or canal navigation. We firmly believe that the
digging of canals in all parts of the country will cease and that many
now in use will be abandoned and railroads substituted in place of them.
* * * * * As to the mode of construction--the route is selected upon
a minute survey, with as little elevation as possible, with a view to
economy--the line is then graded by excavating the earth to near a
level, say 50 feet slope to the mile. The excavation for a single line
of rails need not be more than one-third the width of a turnpike and, of
course, this part of the work is proportionately cheaper than grading
for a turnpike. Large pieces of limestone, two feet or more in length
and from 3 to 12 inches thick, made straight on the upper edge, are then
firmly imbedded along the graduated road in two lines, 4 feet 3 inches
apart. On these lines of stone sills are laid iron bars or rails, 2
inches wide, 1-1/2 inches thick, fastened with iron bolts. Bridges to
pass water courses and drains to carry off the water are to be made in
the common way. * * * The work is now done. As to its cost--Unless the
route be through hills and vallies and, of course, a very unfavorable
one, the necessary grading of a narrow line for a railway will not cost
more than the like work for a wide turnpike. * * * The next item of
expense is stone work. The stone sills will cost 20 cents per foot, or
$2,112 per mile for two rows. The iron rails and bolts will cost $57 per
ton, or $969 per mile, allowing 17 tons which will do, fastening the
same from 1 to $200 a mile. * * * No greater difficulty exists in fixing
the precise cost of a railway than of a house of given dimensions or of
a brick wall. In reference to the Lexington and Ohio Railroad the
requisite data to form true estimates of the cost of each separate mile
will soon be in possession of the Company. The Engineers are of the
opinion that it is throughout an eligible cheap line. The whole cost
then is less than $8,000 a mile."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Reporter of December 1st, 1830, makes an interesting correction:
"In speaking in our last of the iron rails, we should have described
them as _half an inch_ thick instead of an inch and a half. The
engineers have run the experimental line on a grade thirty feet to the
mile instead of fifty feet as we supposed. A locomotive engine will act
advantageously upon a grade of forty feet or more, but the country
between Lexington and Louisville will admit of as low a grade as thirty
feet without expensive excavations or embankments, there being no
natural obstacle on the whole line except at Frankfort where an inclined
plane and stationary power will be required to reach the Kentucky River."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the issue of March 30th, 1831, the Reporter makes an interesting
calculation, proving in dollars and cents the value of the prospective
railroad. It says: "It appears by a statement of the performance on the
Liverpool and Manchester Railway that an engine has transported 142 tons
of freight 180 miles in one day, making six trips between the two towns,
and that on the next day, the steam engine travelled 120 miles with
similar loads. The transportation of 142 tons in 180 miles is equivalent
to the conveyance of one ton 4620 miles. Now, if as it is stated, the
cost of fuel, oil, attendance and all other charges requisite to the
operations of a Locomotive Engine be only $5 a day, it follows that
when once a Rail Road is completed and all its machinery prepared for
operations 4620 tons may be transported one mile for $5.00, or 100 tons
one mile for 12-3/4 cents. When these results are applied to our own
road it will be seen that estimating ten barrels of flour for a ton,
the transportation of 100 barrels 100 miles would cost 106-1/4 cents.
It is true that no one can suppose that this full result can ever be
reduced to continued practice but the simple fact of its having once
been accomplished will be sufficient to place Rail Roads far above all
other artificial means of transportation. At the same time it should not
be forgotten that the wagons on the Liverpool and Manchester Rail Road
are of the old construction and are known to require double the power
to draw them that the wagons do on our Rail Road."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Our Stockholders" pushed the work on "our Rail Road" with all speed;
the engineer submitted his report, and from the Kentucky Reporter,
September 1st, 1830, we find: "The examinations of the route for the
Rail Road from Lexington to the Ohio River has been made as far as
Frankfort which exhibit the following results:

1. There will be one Inclined Plane at Frankfort about 2200 feet long,
descending one foot in fourteen. All the residue of the road can be
graded to 30 feet or less in a mile which is a fraction over
one-fifteenth of an inch rise in a foot.

2. On that grade there will be no "cut" deeper than 19 feet at the apex
and but one of that depth.

3. There will be no embankment over 20 feet high, no bridge over 30 feet
high.

4. The distance to Frankfort will not be increased two miles in length
over the present travelled road.

5. There will not be as much rock excavation in the grading as will be
required to construct the road.

6. On the thirty feet grade which has been tentatively adopted, a single
horse is capable of travelling with seven tons weight with as much ease
as five horses can draw two tons on our present roads in their best
condition. Hence it follows that one man and two horses can transport on
the Railway as much weight in the same time as 35 horses and seven men
on our present roads."

       *       *       *       *       *

That part of the road from Lexington to Villa Grove, six miles west of
Lex. was known as the "first division"; from Villa Grove to Frankfort
was designated "second division."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Kneass, the chief engineer, submitted "a grade table and a table
exhibiting the length of straight line, length of curve and radius of
curvature" to the Directors on October 14th, 1831.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Holburn and Company were employed to furnish stone rail sills at
37-1/2 cents per perch.

       *       *       *       *       *

On April 20th, 1831, The Reporter, which by the way, was known as "Mr.
Clay's organ," gives a most entertaining description of a Directors
meeting. It says:

"The Stockholders of the Lexington and Ohio Rail Road Company met at the
Court House in Lexington on Saturday last. H. Clay was called to the
Chair and H. I. Bodley acted as Secretary.

The meeting was large, most of the Stockholders, representing upwards
of six hundred thousand dollars, were present. The Stockholders at
Louisville were represented by Messrs. J. S. Snead, B. Lawrence, S. S.
Nicholas, J. I. Jacob and George Keats.

Mr. E. I. Winter (President of the Company) addressed the meeting an
hour and a half. He described the route as surveyed by Mr. Kneass, the
Engineer, entered into explanations respecting the estimates and made
various calculations as to the probable cost of the work. He presented
a very satisfactory and clear view of the means of the Company--its
flattering prospects--the great resources of this section of the
country &c.

After much discussion it was

_Resolved_--That the Directors of the Lexington and Ohio Rail Road
Company be requested to take measures to put a proportion of the road
under contract, not exceeding eight miles at Louisville and seven at
Lexington, provided the same can be done at a cost not exceeding by 10
per cent the estimate made by Mr. Kneass, Engineer.

_Resolved_--That the Directors be authorized to call from the
Stockholders a sum not exceeding $150,000 pro rata. for the completion
of the 15 miles of Road named in the foregoing resolution, in such
proportion and at such times as the exigencies of the Company may
require, and that they are not authorized to extend their expenditures
beyond the said $150,000 until after the Stockholders shall have been
legally convened and a report laid before them of the progress made in
the work."

"The meeting then adjourned, but before the Company dispersed a
number of persons came forward and entered their names for stock.
The Stockholders dined together with the Louisville delegation at
Postlethwaite's Inn. We congratulate the friends of this noble
enterprise on the results of the meeting. We especially congratulate
the citizens of Lexington on the bright prospects ahead--the '_Winter_
of their discontent being made glorious summer'--by the proceedings
of this glorious day."

The Trustees of the town of Lexington later took $25,000 worth of stock.

       *       *       *       *       *

At last the great day arrived for the laying of the first rail stone,
and the Lexington Observer of October 28th, 1831, gives a brilliant
description of this most momentous occurrence. Gives it with a vividness
which brings the picture so clearly before the reader that in spite of
himself he joins the merry throng and takes his place in the spectacular
parade which marks a new epoch in the history of Lexington. The Observer
says:


LAYING FIRST RAIL STONE.

"Agreeable to the arrangements published in our last paper the ceremony
of Laying the First Rail Stone of the Lexington and Ohio Rail Road, was
performed in the presence of a large concourse of citizens and strangers
on Saturday last.

At 11 o'clock the three Military Companies which formed the escort
marched from their place of rendezvous to the College lawn, where they
were met by the various societies and individuals named in the order of
the Marshal. The procession was then formed in the following order--

  Col. Leslie Combs, Marshall, with J. B. Coleman, Esq., (his aid) on
  horseback.

  Maj. Gen. Pendleton and Staff, on horseback.

  Field Officers and Staff, on horseback.

  Officers of the Line--on foot.

  Capt. Hunt's Artillery, in Platoons.

  Gov. Metcalfe, supported by
    Prof. Caldwell, Orator of the Day, and
    Rev. N. H. Hall--Officiating Clergyman.

  Judges Underwood and Buckner--Court of Appeals.

  Judge Hickey, Fayette Circuit Court.

  Hon. R. M. Johnson, R. P. Letcher, T. A. Marshall, Members of Congress.

  Several Members of the Kentucky Legislature.

  Capt. T. A. Russell--Ass't. Marshal.

  President and Directors Lexington and Ohio R. R. Co.

  Samuel H. Kneass, Chief Engineer--His Assistants and Treasurer
  of the Co.

  Contractors and Pioneers with their implements of Labor.

  State Board of Internal Improvement.

  President, Engineers and Directors of Lexington and Maysville
  Turnpike Road.

  Mayor and Aldermen of Louisville (who did not come).

  Capt. Neet's Rifle Guards--in Platoons.

  Military Band of Music.

  Trustees of the Town of Lexington and Clerk.

  Justices of Fayette County Court and Clerk.

  Trustees and Professors of Transylvania University.

  Reverend Clergy.

  Surgeons and Physicians.

  Members of the Bar and Officers of Fayette County Court.

  Union Philosophical Society of Transylvania University.

  Medical and Law Students.

  Tutors and Students of Transylvania University.

  Principal of Preparatory Department and Pupils.

  Principal and Pupils of Wentworth Seminary.

  Principal and Tutors of Shelby Female Academy and Pupils.

  Principal and Professors of Eclectic Institute and Pupils.

  STRANGERS.

  Stockholders of Lexington and Ohio R. R. Co.

  Capt. Postlethwaite's Light Infantry Company--in Platoons.

  Lieut.-Col. A. Stevens--Ass't. Marshal.

  CITIZENS ON FOOT.

       *       *       *       *       *

"For many years we have not witnessed so imposing a pageant and never
one more interesting. A Federal Salute was fired by Capt. Hunt's
Artillery at sunrise and seven guns when the first stone sill was laid,
indicating the seven sections of the road under contract. The procession
first moved in a circle around the lawn where it was formed at which
time the bells in the various churches in town commenced a merry peal
which continued until the procession reached the place where the
ceremony was performed. The Military Escort then formed a hollow square
within which the whole civic procession was enclosed. Thousands of
delighted and anxious spectators were on the outside, among whom we were
gratified to see a large concourse of ladies for whose accommodation the
Marshal had directed the adjacent Market House to be appropriated.

A blessing on the stupendous undertaking was then invoked by the
officiating clergyman, after which E. I. Winter, Esq., President of the
Company, handed a hammer to the Governor of the State, who drove the
nail attaching the first iron rail to the beginning stone sill. The
music struck up "Hail Columbia" and afterwards "Yankee Doodle," which
was played until the Artillery ceased firing.

Prof. Caldwell then delivered a highly interesting and appropriate
address. The procession then returned to the University lawn after which
the Military marched to the Arsenal and were dismissed, having received
the thanks of the Directors and President of the Rail Road and the
compliments of the Marshal for their excellent marching and exemplary
good order on the occasion.

The arrangements for this interesting ceremony were hurried perhaps by
the zeal of those immediately concerned and a desire to proceed without
further delay with the work. A little more time and a little more
preparation would have been better but the whole proceeding was
conducted very handsomely. The procession was very numerous. The streets
through which the long line marched were crowded with spectators and
every window and every balcony were filled with ladies. The Military
looked uncommonly well. The pupils of the various institutions wore
appropriate badges. The ceremonies at the place of laying the corner
stone were not tedious. The omission to prepare a rostrum for the
Orator was a grievous oversight--thousands were unable to hear the
speech, but those who were more fortunate pronounced it appropriate
and eloquent and considering the very short notice upon which it was
prepared, the effort was worthy of the distinguished orator, which
alone, is saying enough in praise.

The prayer of the Rev. Mr. Hall, by which the occasion was preceded,
awakened the best feelings of the human heart. The Governor and the
President of the Company quickly dispatched the duty assigned them and
the procession moved from the ground in good order, nothing having
occurred in the slightest degree unpleasant. All were happy that the
good work was now in progress and delighted at the bright prospects
now dawning upon the towns and country through which the road is to
pass. Owing to the short notice the expected guests from Maysville and
Louisville did not attend but the Company was honored with the presence
of the Governor and several distinguished members of Congress and two
of the Judges of the Court of Appeals. These with other notable guests
dined with the President, Directors and Stockholders at Postlewaite's
Inn and during the even the Governor visited the Theater where he was
received with many rounds of applause."

       *       *       *       *       *

Down in our hearts we are truly thankful for the present century and all
its benefits and we would rather be plain Kentucky people living today
than any royalty in history. And yet when we read a great thrilling tale
like this we cannot overcome a strange sense of loss, a feeling of
regret that we too, could not have been there to see that wonderful
pageant pass by. The Military with its pomp and music; the professors
and their students; the officials and the rank and file; the lawyers,
and the doctors and the ministers; the contractors and "Pioneers and
their implements of Labor"; the old, the young, the great, the
small--all banded together in one great masterly pull for Lexington!
What a picture! What a privilege! What an inspiration! What would we not
give to have seen it with our own eyes, to have applauded it with our
own hands.

And yet, perhaps that is what we are doing now, applauding and giving
praise and credit to those splendid citizens whose generosity,
foresight, energy and progressive public spirit made Lexington a leading
city of its day!

But to return to our subject, the newspapers kept the people advised as
to the progress of the work and the Observer of February 3rd, 1832,
says:

"Those who feel an interest in this great work will be pleased to learn
that the grading of the first six miles put under contract last fall is
already in a state of much forwardness. The stones for the Rail Sills
are excavated from a quarry a short distance below the city. The ease
with which they are split out and fashioned into sills is truly
surprising. They are about twelve inches wide and many of them are
twenty or twenty-five feet in length."

       *       *       *       *       *

And again on May 24th, 1832--

"The grading of the first division of six miles is nearly completed.
Part of the Iron Rails for the first division have arrived at Louisville
from Liverpool by way of New Orleans, and the laying of the stone sills
will be forthwith commenced."

       *       *       *       *       *

The work progressed steadily in spite of many obstacles--chief of which
seems to have been the indifference of Louisville and lack of ready
money, and so in the Observer for March 16th, 1832, there is an
interesting and eloquent appeal:

"To the Citizens of Lexington and Fayette County--

"Now is the time for every man, who is a man and will act like one, to
come forward and put his shoulder to the wheel. The Lexington and Ohio
Rail Road can be finished to Frankfort before the 1st of November, 1832,
if those who are able will do their duty and take stock, or increase
their present subscriptions. Not one should hang back and let his
neighbors do for him what he ought to do for himself. If he loves money,
this is the way to improve his fortune; if he loves his country, this is
the sure way to advance her power and glory.

The work can be done and will be done in the time I have named if you
are true to your best interests and will act promptly on this occasion.
No time is to be lost--Come all--Come quickly. Let us have no more
theorizing but in its stead, efficient action."

       *       *       *       *       *

And again in the same month the Directors authorized the President, Mr.
Elisha I. Winter, to let the grading of the twenty-three sections of the
"Second Division."

The Observer and Reporter, June 28th, 1832, says:

"Laying the stone sills is rather a tedious operation. Messrs. Holburn
and Benson, who are the contractors for this branch of the work deserve
great praise for executing their contract not only faithfully but in
a style of beauty and elegance of workmanship which has excited the
admiration of all who have examined it. They are now putting in the Iron
Rails and we hope it will not be long before the Directors will have it
in their power to gratify the universal anxiety which daily increases in
intensity to behold the novel spectacle of a Rail Road Carriage in rapid
motion."

This desire was soon gratified according to an article in the Lexington
Observer dated August 9th, 1832, and entitled "Our Rail Road." It says:

"A splendid car (the Lexington and Ohio) was placed on the Rail Road on
Thursday last. It made two trips, the distance the road is finished,
having inside and outside about sixty passengers each trip. The crowd to
witness the experiment was very great and we never saw spectators more
delighted. The opening of the Rail Road from Lexington to the Ohio River
will be the commencement of a new era in the history of Kentucky. Let
unbelievers in the utility of Rail Roads witness but one experiment and
their scepticism will soon vanish.

"On Tuesday the 14th the road we understand will be formally opened and
the car afterwards kept constantly running for the accommodation of
passengers. The Governor of the State and the Mayor and Council of the
City of Louisville have been invited to be present on this occasion."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Observer and Reporter of August 16th, 1832, tells how "The Lexington
and Ohio Rail Road was formally opened on yesterday. Among the persons
present was Gov. Metcalf. At twelve o'clock precisely the Car left its
moorings at the upper end of the lower Market in fine style, having on
board about 40 passengers. The Road is completed entirely only about one
mile and a half from its termination in this city. Other portions are in
a state of great forwardness and will be ready for the Car in a few days
which will make the whole distance completed about 3 miles. The Car
travels at the rate of about 10 miles an hour."

       *       *       *       *       *

How eagerly they longed for its completion, using it for pleasure trips
when only a mile and a half was finished! And how quaintly they spoke of
it leaving "its moorings" as though they were still thinking in terms of
rivers and flat boats and steam boats, and could only describe it in
river terms! And how they dignified it with capitals, it was always the
Rail Road and the Car--as if the very immensity of the undertaking
demanded capital letters. To them the "Rail Road started" or "returned,"
or was "kept running," as in the article in the Observer of August 25th,
1832, which says:

"Two miles of the Lexington and Ohio Rail Road are now completed, and
the splendid car, "Lexington and Ohio," is kept constantly running this
distance to gratify those who feel an interest in Rail Roads, and are
desirous of testing their utility. The Car is sufficiently large to
accommodate 60 passengers and this number is drawn by one horse, with
apparently as much ease and rapidity as the same animal would draw a
light gig. The delight experienced at the sight of a car loaded by sixty
passengers and drawn by one horse at the rate of ten miles an hour
through a country where heretofore five miles per hour with one
passenger to a horse has been thought good speed, is sufficient of
itself to repay the beholder for the trouble of a journey of fifty
miles. We understand a locomotive steam engine is now being constructed
to be placed upon the road as soon as the distance is opened on the
whole of the First Division."

       *       *       *       *       *

Having always heard the Old Lexington and Ohio Road referred to as "the
first rail road built West of the Alleghany Mountains," I was greatly
surprised at this juncture to see how close the question of priority
between it and the old Pontchartrain Railway really was and being unable
to decide the question myself, I beg leave to lay the evidence before my
readers and let them decide the matter according to their own judgment.

Mr. J. H. Ellis, Secretary of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad, at
a banquet in Louisville in 1914, when speaking of the oldest railroads
built West of the Alleghanies and South of the Ohio River, said: "It is
commonly believed that the oldest road is the Lexington and Ohio, so it
may surprise you to know that in point of antiquity it is beaten by that
little old Pontchartrain Railroad, Charles Marshall's darling, but by
a remarkable coincidence, by only a week. For while the Pontchartrain
Railroad Company received its charter on January 20th, 1830, that of the
Lexington and Ohio Railroad Company is dated January 27th, 1830. And in
point of construction the latter likewise followed the Pontchartrain."

An article published in the Lexington Observer of October 4th, 1832,
taken from the New Orleans Emporium of September 15th, 1832, says:

"The beautiful locomotive Pontchartrain recently received from England
came up to the city this morning from the lake in a manner highly
gratifying to the directors of the company, who were present and a large
concourse of our citizens. It commences running Monday next at 12
o'clock. The Mayor and City Council are to be present and no doubt
hundreds of our citizens will fill the train which will accommodate
between three and four hundred people. This locomotive is said to be the
most perfect and elegant in the Union and that there are only two in
England equal to it. The display will be at once beautiful and imposing
and will no doubt attract thousands."

At this time _our_ first locomotive was "in course of construction," as
the Observer and Reporter of December 6th, 1832, says in an editorial:
"We yesterday had the pleasure of examining--at the machine shop of Mr.
Bruen--a new Locomotive Engine constructed for the Lexington and Ohio
Rail Road Company. We understand the Engine will be in readiness for an
experiment on the Rail Road sometime next week."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is evident therefore that the Charter for the Pontchartrain Railroad
was one week older than the Charter of the Lexington and Ohio Railroad.
It is also evident that the Lexington and Ohio Railroad was "formally
opened August 15th, 1832," while the formal opening of the Pontchartrain
Road did not occur until September 15th, 1832, one month later than
ours.

It is true the Pontchartrain opened with a real locomotive while the
Lexington and Ohio road first used horse power. But it must also be
remembered that the locomotive of the Pontchartrain Railroad was built
in Stourbridge, England, while the first locomotive for the Lexington
and Ohio road was invented and built in Lexington by two Lexington men,
Thomas Barlow and Joseph Bruen; that it was in course of construction at
the time of the opening, and that it made its trial run March 2nd, 1833,
"from Lexington towards Frankfort."--

So far as I have been able to learn our locomotive was the first one
built in the United States unless we except that of Peter Cooper, which
is said never to have given satisfaction.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the first of January, 1833, the first railroad advertisement appeared
headed:


                    "TRAVELING"

                      On The

            Lexington and Ohio Rail Road

  The First Six Miles of the Road Being Completed a
   Passenger Car will Daily Leave the Lower Market
       House for the end of the First Division
          at 9-1/2 O'clock A. M. and 2-1/2
                   O'clock P.M.

   Returning will leave the end of the Division for
       Lexington at 10 O'clock A. M. and 3-1/2
                   O'clock P.M.

  Companies of 12 or more can be accommodated with
      a Private Car by giving one hour's notice.

          Office L. & O. Rail Road Company

                 January 1st, 1833


And so the Rail Road became a popular diversion, and the work was
rapidly progressing all along the road toward Frankfort. Judging from an
advertisement in the Observer and Reporter of February 21st, 1833, some
change in construction must have been contemplated for it states "Sealed
Proposals will be received at the Company's Office until the 15th of
April next for laying 13 miles of the Second Division of the Lexington
and Ohio Rail Road with Stone Sills, and 9 miles with Sleepers and
Strong-pieces of wood.

  (Signed by) H. J. RANNEY, Chief Engineer."

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Muncey says: "In the 'Second Division' of the Road wood
sills--red cedar in most cases--were used in some places."

It is interesting to note here that the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad
advised our promoters in the first place to use the wooden sills.

Quoting from the Observer and Reporter of March 2nd, 1833, "The first
six miles of the Rail Road is now in successful operation. The Car for
some time past has run regularly three times a day and is usually filled
with passengers. It expedites the progress of mail about one hour each
trip."

Time was become a matter to be reckoned with you see.

       *       *       *       *       *

And in the same paper appeared the following modest announcement for
which I had searched for days:

"We are happy to learn that the steam locomotive constructed by our
ingenious townsmen, Mr. Bruen, is hereafter to make regular trips on
this road."

The car driver was allowed a salary of $22.50 a month. He and his
assistant were to handle the car and the horses, take up fares, handle
baggage and carry the United States mail.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a quaint epitaph in an old Scotch graveyard which says "Good
times and bad times and all times, get over"; and so it was with our
great little railroad. Its Charter had boldly set the Ohio River as
its destination. On October 21st, 1831, it timidly started "towards
Frankfort," and on January 31st, 1834, it reached that fair city with a
sigh of relief after many hardships had been endured and many obstacles
overcome. The cholera scourge of 1833 had halted its progress,
difficulties had arisen through bad calculations of its engineers, and
money was often sorely needed. Louisville seemed indifferent to its
construction, being comfortably "seated" on the much coveted "water
course." So the railroad stopped to rest at Frankfort and stopped
so long it became known as the "Lexington and Frankfort Rail Road."
Its arrival in Frankfort was celebrated by a grand ball at Brennan's
(or Postlethwaite's) which is glitteringly described in the Gazette on
January 31st, 1834, as follows:

"The fete given last night at Brennan's Hotel to the members of the
Legislature and to celebrate the opening of the Rail Road from here to
Frankfort was truly a most brilliant affair. The company bestowed just
praises on the taste and munificence of Mr. Brennan, for the splendor
and profusion of the supper and refreshments, which appeared as if
"earth and sky and sea" had been plundered of their sweets. The company
must have numbered from four to five hundred persons who were
distributed in the various rooms of the basement story where dancing
parties were kept up till two o'clock. Like the Brussells Ball, we too
had gathered from the Capital--

  'Her beauty and her chivalry, and bright
  The lamps shone over fair women and brave men,
  A thousand hearts beat happily; and when
  Music arose with its voluptuous swell
  Soft eyes looked love to eyes which spake again
  And all went merry as a marriage bell.'


A majority of the members of both branches of the Legislature were
present on the occasion it is said, together with the Mayor and Council
of Lexington. For ourselves we did not play a part in the mazy dance but
was content to look on others--

  'Steer with care through all that glittering sea
  Of gems and plumes and pearls and silks to where
  He deems it is his proper place to be
  Dissolving in the waltz to some soft air
  Or proudlier prancing with Mercurial skill
  Where science marshalls forth her own quadrille.'"


The same paper contains an account of an "elegant new locomotive," which
says:


RAIL ROAD.

"An elegant new locomotive of improved model has been running on the
Lexington and Ohio Rail Road for several days to Frankfort. The success
which has attended the experiment thus far equals the most sanguine
hopes of the projectors. Since the application of steam all doubts have
been vanished, and we confess a very great change has been wrought
in our own minds as to the utility and value of the undertaking. Its
advantages to the town are manifest now and if it should be completed
to Louisville it will be an immense advantage to the whole commonwealth
and reflect the highest credit on those who have planned and executed
it. Its superiority over every other kind of locomotion will carry
conviction to the minds of any who may doubt and convince the country
of the absolute necessity of completing it, to which purpose the
Legislature will no doubt contribute largely.

The trip from here to Frankfort will occupy about two hours when the
arrangements are complete."

       *       *       *       *       *

This "new locomotive" may have been the "Nottaway" or "The Logan" or the
"Daniel Boone." The latter, which was inclined to run behind time, was
the butt of many jokes. One traveller is said to have asked "What is
the matter, will we never arrive?" and another replied "Let us ask the
engineer to feed 'Boone' another stick of cord wood, or we will never
get there." Capt. Alfred Pirtle, Secretary of the Filson Club, says "The
Baldwin Locomotive Works have a record that they built an engine named
'Daniel Boone' for the Lexington and Ohio Rail Road in 1842."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Observer and Reporter January 24th, 1835, says:

"Several hundred of our citizens had the pleasure yesterday of
witnessing a successful experiment on the Rail Road with the new
Locomotive. Its performance justifies all our hopes. Two burthen cars
and the large passenger car filled with passengers were attached to the
engine. It moved off with great ease clearly indicating its ability to
perform all its requirements. Every one who witnessed the experiment
seemed to feel a high degree of patriotic enthusiasm that he lived in
a city which had originated and thus far successfully prosecuted this
magnificent and invaluable scheme. "We learn that the Locomotive made
the trip to the Villa, a distance of six miles, in a little over 20
minutes although badly provided with fuel."

       *       *       *       *       *

The "success of the experiment" had an unfortunate set back, however,
for in the Observer and Reporter, January 24, 1835, is an account of
the _Accident_ which caused profound distress.

"We have carefully prepared from authentic information the following
account of the melancholy occurrences of yesterday. To allay public
excitement and prevent misrepresentation or misapprehension of facts
we consider it our duty to give as brief and accurate account as
possible of those unfortunate accidents today which caused the death
of two individuals and severe injuries to four others.

"The splendid Locomotive Engine recently imported was placed on the
road two or three days since and has made one or more pleasure trips
each day to the Villa (6 miles) and back with perfect safety and entire
success. This morning it performed the trip with one large Passenger
Coach containing some fifty or sixty passengers, and one burden Car
also loaded, attached to it, in 19 minutes going and about 22 minutes
returning without accident. This afternoon, as the Engineer was
proceeding from the car house a quarter of a mile below the depot in
the city a number of boys were continually trying to jump upon the
tender although repeatedly forbidden to do so, till finally while the
Locomotive was going at the rate of only about five or six miles per
hour, a negro boy, 11 or 12 years of age, the property of Mrs. Ross, on
attempting to jump on the fore part of the tender fell under it and was
crushed to death. No possible blame can attach to the Engineer as he
stopped the moment he saw the boy fall, but was too late.

He then came up slowly to the depot, both sides of the road being lined
by hundreds of anxious spectators, and attached the Locomotive to two
burden Cars and the large Passenger Coach, before mentioned, altogether
containing, we suppose, over 150 persons, in the following order:

1st--The Engine and tender. 2nd--A common Burden Car with temporary
benches to sit on but no side on front or rear railing to protect the
passengers from falling or being pushed off; fastened with common trace
chains by means of the centre beams to which the shafts are used fixed
to the Locomotive. 3rd--Another common Burthen Car attached to the
second as it was to the first giving 10 to 12 inches loose play forward
and back but with only a single bench running through the centre from
front to rear. No railing or other protection to the passengers, who
were obliged to stand up, except a few standards along the sides for the
purpose of hauling wood. 4th--The large Passenger Coach attached to the
third as it was to the second. Before starting, more than one gentleman
who noticed the manner of attaching the cars, and the consequent jars
which they would inevitably receive, made remarks as to the dangerous
situation of the individuals crowded on the burden cars, but we made the
trip down safely in 24 minutes.

After remaining to Wood and Water we started back with position
reversed, the large Passenger Coach in front, then the two burthen cars
following each other, and lastly the Locomotive, each pushing forward
the one in front of it, by pressing the end of the centre beams, some
six inches square against each other, loosely attached as before
described, by common trace chains. We had proceeded in this manner about
a mile at a moderate pace when in passing a curve, the beam of the front
burthen Car was seen to pass to the right of the rear beam of the
Passenger Car, which jerked the wheels off the track and caused a
considerable shock and great alarm. Some of the passengers on the two
burthen Cars attempted to jump off, the ground being nearly on a level
with the road at that place; others, especially those standing in the
forward burthen Car were thrown backwards and knocked off, those near
the edge of it under the wheels of the other; some attempted to leap on
the bank, fell and rolled down, and thus all the mischief was done.
Lewis Lankard and Leonard Taylor, of Lexington, Ky.; William A. Cocke
and Joseph Holt, of Louisville; F. W. Trapnall, of Springfield, and
Daniel Green, of Fayette County, were in this way thrown off the forward
burthen Car and under the wheels of the other. Lankard was instantly
killed; Taylor and Green had each a leg broken; Messrs. Trapnall and
Holt had severe bruises and were probably saved by Lankard's falling
before them and in some measure stopping the car. Mr. Cocke had his
right foot firmly fastened in the forward wheel of the hindmost car and
was much injured and but for the presence of mind and promptness of the
Engineer in stopping at the moment must have lost his leg and most
probably his life; another quarter turn of the wheel would have been
fatal. He could only be released by taking that part of the Car to
pieces. Several other gentlemen were bruised and slightly injured. None
of the Cars turned over and if the burthen Cars had been substantially
railed round or if only passenger cars had been used or all had been
drawn and not pushed, nothing serious would have been the consequence.
Too much praise cannot be bestowed upon the Engineer. Although under
considerable headway he stopped almost instantly and much sooner than
a stage with horses could have been halted. May we now be permitted to
make a single suggestion or two to the Manager of the Rail Road?

1st--The number of passengers to go in each Car should be limited.
Huddling numbers on the top is extremely hazardous.

2nd--Unless a wire sieve is fastened over the top of the chimney of the
engine we shall soon have some dwelling house, barn or other building
near the road burnt down or the Cars themselves set on fire.

In conclusion we hope that the feeling of our citizens will not be again
excited by the occurrence of such a painful and heart-rending accident
as the one over which a number have been called to mourn, as we are
confident that by proper management and strict attention it may be
easily avoided."

       *       *       *       *       *

Now let us consider this first locomotive engine ever used on the
Lexington and Ohio Railroad. This locomotive was invented by Thomas
Harris Barlow (who afterward became world-famous as the inventor of
the Planetarium) and was constructed by Joseph Bruen at his machine
shops which stood near the corner of Water and Spring Streets.

That wonderful little locomotive is described by one who saw it with his
own eyes, who rode behind it often, and who knew the men who invented
and constructed it quite intimately. The old gentleman I refer to was
Samuel D. McCullough, who was born in 1803 and who wrote his diary,
which is now in the Lexington Public Library, in 1871.

"Mr. Thomas Harris Barlow was born in Nicholas County, Kentucky, (says
his son, Milton, in a letter to me) August 5th, 1789, and resided in the
State of his birth till the last year or two of his life and died in
Cincinnati June, 1865."

I shall condense Mr. Milton Barlow's short biography of his father,
which states that he had but a common school education. He was an
industrious and even a hard working student of mechanism for which he
had a wonderful natural gift, and which induced Col. R. M. Johnson to
appoint him principal Military Artificer in his Regiment. He was under
fire in the Battle of the Thames (1812) where he distinguished himself
for coolness and bravery. After his intermarriage with Miss Lizzie West
he turned his attention to erecting flour, saw and other mills and
building and overseeing their steam motive power. In 1825 he removed to
Lexington and opened a machine shop.

"I remember myself all which followed and give my own recollections.

Believing that Locomotives could be propelled at a greater velocity Mr.
Barlow and Mr. Joseph Bruen, another mechanical genius, built an engine
to run on the new Rail Road, just started from this place towards
Frankfort, the finished portion of the road extending then but five
miles from this City, and on which Sunday pleasure Cars were running
drawn by two horses.

The Steam Engine was an odd concern; not more than three or four feet
high wheels, boiler and all; the pistons working perpendicularly; two
cylinders _and a tongue in front to guide the steam wagon with the
necessary pilot wheel with its tiller ropes_. I never knew what became
of the engine but I have placed all that is left of the model in the
Museum of the Eastern Kentucky Lunatic Asylum along with the remnant of
Edward West's model steam engine for boats. Mr. Barlow and Mr. Bruen
also built another small steam engine which ran on a miniature oval Rail
Road, in the large room, third story of the factory, corner of Water and
Rose Streets, drawing after it a miniature car large enough to hold one
grown person or two children. I paid my 25 cents for a ride on it.
The novelty of the occasion brought multitudes of citizens, male and
female, to see it and as Mr. Barlow quaintly and truthfully observes,
'each of the visitors had to pay a small sum for the pleasure of riding
on land by steam.' I give the following remark of Mr. Barlow, Jr., just
as he used it without stopping to inquire whether it be genuine or
apocryphal. He says, 'This was the first steam locomotive engine ever
made in America.'

Mr. Barlow sold the miniature engine, Car and wooden rails to Mr. Samuel
Robb, of this county, who exhibited the workings of them in 1827 in the
cities of Louisville, Nashville, Memphis, Vicksburg, New Orleans, in
which city it was consumed by fire during the year 1828. Mr. Barlow
built another miniature engine for Mr. Rockhill who used it for
exhibition. I wish it distinctly remembered so as not to confuse dates,
that the first mattock struck and the first stone laid on the Lexington
and Louisville Rail Road were done in Lexington June 3rd, 1831, the
citizens, the Free Masons and the Military assisting in the ceremonies
which took place at the corner of Water and Upper Streets, not ten feet
from the present storage house of Hayman and Wooley. Prof. Charles
Caldwell, of Transylvania Medical School, made the address on the
occasion.

I remember again, that the model engine of Mr. Barlow and Mr. Bruen was
run on the miniature Rail Road _three or four years before_ the first
rail was laid on the track which was a flat iron rail on a stone sill.
The great danger occurring continually from the ends of the flat rails
turning upwards causing what was then called 'snake heads,' and the
disintegration of the stone sills induced the directors to change both
sills and rails to their present form.

I recollect the old horse car running from here to Frankfort and back to
Lexington.

It was in 1835, in company with my deceased friend, John J. Crittenden,
who with myself was watching a splendid comet in the North West during
our ride, the horse cars were four hours in running the distance of
twenty-four miles, or six miles an hour. Upon arriving upon the hill
near Frankfort the passenger trains were sent down an inclined plane
drawn by horses. Several accidents occurred which afterwards induced the
Directors to change the route to a more circuitous and safer place, the
road now in constant use. At Frankfort the passengers for Louisville
took seats in five and six four-horse coaches, eighteen to twenty-four
passengers each. The necessities of travel and commerce finally
culminated in finishing the Rail Road to Louisville. Lexington and
Frankfort with the counties of Fayette, Woodford and Franklin did their
parts nobly, and Louisville with that symptom of haggling so usual with
her, finally was induced to help finish the road to that city.

Whilst upon the subject of inventors, inventions and Rail Roads, I may
tell you that the two-horse-car ran from this City to Frankfort over the
'flat iron' rail until 18-- when a little steam locomotive called the
Nottaway made one trip to Frankfort and back the same day. It drew one
passenger coach built by Mr. Ashton, the venerable coach builder of this
city. The inside would accommodate about as many as a modern omnibus
and seats on the top with an iron railing all around would seat as many
more. I have an indistinct recollection where the baggage and mail
matter were stored but I think they were given in charge of the
engineer, who also in that capacity was baggage master and mail agent.

I recollect distinctly the little locomotives, Nottaway and Logan.
More than two-score times have I and other able bodied men gotten out of
the passenger car when the locomotive was not able to pull the load over
some slight elevation in the road and pushed passenger car and engine up
the inclined plane of less than one degree inclination. When we arrived
at the summit of the inclination, which was about nine miles from
Lexington in what was called the 'deep cut,' the engineer in the
meantime having raised steam enough to carry passengers to the next
slight ascension in the road, cried 'all aboard' and away we went.
'All out' was the engineer's next cry when he came to some slight
ascension in the road. Out we came and our shoulders were again applied
to help the little locomotive out of its terrible difficulty. Arriving
at the top of the hill at Frankfort from a four to six hours ride of
twenty-four miles we met with two serious questions either to go down
the inclined plane at nearly 40 degrees inclination free of charge or
take the hacks and carriages in waiting by paying 25 cents extra. My
old friend, Rev. Dr. R. J. Breckinridge and myself not wishing to risk
our lives on the incline plane took seats in a hack. I recollect Dr.
Breckinridge's remark, when he paid his extra quarter for hack hire:
'I agree to pay $1.00 to be carried safely to Frankfort. I pay this
additional 25 cents under protest as a swindle.' The driver 'took our
monies and went his ways' and proceeded to collect 25 cents from each
passenger going into Frankfort until some 'change' was made by the
Directors of the Rail Road."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Andy Shepherd in an interview said he remembered the old locomotives
Daniel Boone, Logan and Joe Davis.

He said the passenger coach was painted yellow. He described the first
locomotive as having a tall smoke stack, a single wheel, and a crank
axle, with no cab, the engineer standing unprotected through wind and
weather. He said it required a cord of two-foot wood to make the trip
from Lexington to Frankfort and return, that the engineer stopped at
Villa Grove and at Duckers "to wood and water." He said at first there
was one passenger and one freight train a day, that freight came from
Cincinnati to Frankfort by river, and from Frankfort to Lexington by
rail. When asked where the headlight for the locomotive was, he replied:
"They did not need a headlight because they only travelled by daylight."
(And yet one of the English commentaries which had made deepest
impression on the railroad promoters was that "Locomotives can travel
safely in the dark.")

Mr. Shepherd said the old engines were finally sold for scrap iron,
loaded on a flat car, and taken away. But the Logan was sold to a coal
mine.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Gazette, November 28th, 1835, says:

"There seems to be a perfect mania pervading the country on the subject
of railroads. Hardly a paper comes to hand but contains accounts of
meetings held for the purpose of projecting one through some part or
another."

       *       *       *       *       *

And on January 9th, 1836:

"The Mayor has called a meeting of the citizens of Lex. and Fayette Co.
on Monday next at 12 o'clock to take into consideration measures
relative to the contemplated Railroad from Charleston, S. C., to the
Ohio River. The meeting will take place in a Court House."

       *       *       *       *       *

On January 23rd, 1836:

We learn that "the Directors of the R. R. Co. have declined bringing
more fire wood to this city but have offered to the agents for procuring
fuel the use of their road and wood cars free of expense for the
transport of that article. The great quantity of freight at the depots
rendering this course necessary on the part of the Company."

       *       *       *       *       *

On December 12th, 1835, was an interesting article headed:


RAIL ROAD STOCK.

"Four shares of Lex. and Ohio R. R. Stock were sold at public auction on
Monday last at $101.00 per share, next dividend off being one per cent
advance. This is some evidence of the estimation in which this stock
is held. The next dividend to be struck 1st January and to which the
purchaser will not be entitled would probably have added about $5.00 per
share. We repeat that the citizens of Louisville do not duly appreciate
the importance to their city of the completion of the road from thence
to Frankfort with as little delay as possible."

       *       *       *       *       *

And in the same paper is an account of the sad fate of the attractive
little Villa:


FIRE.

"The neat little 'Villa,' so tastefully erected by Smith and Rainey and
kept for some time past by Mr. Clatterbuck, on the R. R., six miles from
Lex., was destroyed by fire on the night of Monday last together with
most of the furniture, liquors and a considerable sum of money. This
misfortune will be seriously felt not only by Mr. C----, but by the
travellers on the R. R., who were always sure of a kind reception and
the solace of a cup of hot sparkling coffee at daylight after making the
first stop from Lex. The benevolent we are sure will not be appealed to
in vain to contribute something towards enabling Mr. Clatterbuck again
to commence business. His loss in cash was about $700."

       *       *       *       *       *

And now I have told you all that I have been able to find concerning
this old Lexington and Ohio Railroad. I have traced its conception and
birth, its construction and success. I have not the heart to tell you
of its slow and lingering death, how it became antiquated, ridiculed,
supplanted and re-constructed, how it was mortgaged and sold, and
finally became merged into the great Louisville and Nashville system
and how its very history became clouded in tradition.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Pioneer Railway of the West, by 
Maude Ward Lafferty

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PIONEER RAILWAY OF THE WEST ***

***** This file should be named 27256.txt or 27256.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/2/5/27256/

Produced by David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Kentuckiana Digital Library)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
