The Project Gutenberg EBook of "Some Say", by Laura Elizabeth Howe Richards

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: "Some Say"
       Neighbours in Cyrus

Author: Laura Elizabeth Howe Richards

Release Date: November 13, 2008 [EBook #27251]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "SOME SAY" ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Diane Monico, and The Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










[Illustration: (cover)]




[Illustration: (frontispiece)]




"SOME SAY"

NEIGHBOURS IN CYRUS


BY

LAURA E. RICHARDS

Author of "Captain January," "Melody," "Queen Hildegarde,"
"Five-Minute Stories," "When I Was Your Age,"
"Narcissa," "Marie," "Nautilus," etc.


TWELFTH THOUSAND

[Illustration]

BOSTON
DANA ESTES & COMPANY
PUBLISHERS




_Copyright, 1896_,

BY ESTES & LAURIAT

_All rights reserved_


Colonial Press:

C. H. Simonds & Co., Boston, Mass., U.S.A.

Electrotyped by Geo. C. Scott & Sons




"SOME SAY"




TO MY
Dear Sister,
FLORENCE HOWE HALL,
THIS VOLUME
IS AFFECTIONATELY
DEDICATED

       *       *       *       *       *




"SOME SAY."




Part I.


"And some say, she expects to get him married to Rose Ellen before the
year's out!"

"I want to know if she does!"

"Her sister married a minister, and her father was a deacon, so mebbe
she thinks she's got a master-key to the Kingdom. But I don't feel so
sure of her gettin' this minister for Rose Ellen. Some say he's so
wropped up in his garden truck that he don't know a gal from a
gooseberry bush. He! he!"

The shrill cackle was answered by a slow, unctuous chuckle, as of a
fat and wheezy person; then a door was closed, and silence fell.

The minister looked up apprehensively; his fair face was flushed, and
his mild, blue eyes looked troubled. He gazed at the broad back of his
landlady, as she stood dusting, with minute care, the china ornaments
on the mantelpiece; but her back gave no sign. He coughed once or
twice; he said, "Mrs. Mellen!" tentatively, first low, then in his
ordinary voice, but there was no reply. Was Mrs. Mellen deaf? he had
not noticed it before. He pondered distressfully for a few moments;
then dropped his eyes, and the book swallowed him again. Yet the sting
remained, for when presently the figure at the mantelpiece turned
round, he looked up hastily, and flushed again as he met his hostess'
gaze, calm and untroubled as a summer pool.

"There, sir!" said Mrs. Mellen, cheerfully. "I guess that's done to
suit. Is there anything more I can do for you before I go?"

The minister's mind hovered between two perplexities; a glance at the
book before him decided their relative importance.

"Have you ever noticed, Mrs. Mellen, whether woodcocks are more apt to
fly on moonshiny nights, as White assures us?"

"Woodbox?" said Mrs. Mellen. "Why, yes, sir, it's handy by; and when
there's no moon, the lantern always hangs in the porch. But I'll see
that Si Jones keeps it full up, after this."

Decidedly, the good woman was deaf, and she had not heard. Could those
harpies be right? If any such idea as they suggested were actually in
his hostess' mind, he must go away, for his work must not be
interfered with, and he must not encourage hopes,--the minister
blushed again, and glanced around to see if any one could see him.

But he was so comfortable here, and Miss Mellen was so intelligent, so
helpful; and this seemed the ideal spot on which to compile his New
England "Selborne."

He sighed, and thought of the woodcock again. Why should the bird
prefer a moonshiny night? Was it likely that the creature had any
appreciation of the beauties of nature? Shakespeare uses the woodcock
as a simile of folly, to express a person without brains. Ha!

The door opened, and Rose Ellen came in, her eyes shining with
pleasure, her hands full of gold and green.

"I've found the 'Squarrosa,' Mr. Lindsay!" she announced. "See, this
is it, surely!"

The minister rose, and inspected the flowers delightedly. "This is it,
surely!" he repeated. "Stem stout, hairy above; leaves large, oblong,
or the lower spatulate-oval, and tapering into a marginal petiole,
serrate veiny; heads numerous; seeds obtuse or acute; disk-flowers, 16
x 24. This is, indeed, a treasure, for Gray calls it 'rare in New
England.' I congratulate you, Miss Mellen."

"Late, sir?" said Mrs. Mellen, calmly. "Oh, no, 'tisn't hardly five
o'clock yet. Still, 'tis time for me to be thinkin' of gettin'
supper."

"Don't you want I should make some biscuit for supper, mother?" asked
Rose Ellen, coming out of her rapt contemplation of the goldenrod that
Gray condescended to call rare, he to whom all things were common.

Her mother made no answer.

"Don't you want I should make a pan of biscuit?" Rose Ellen repeated.
Still there was no reply, and the girl turned to look at her mother in
some alarm.

"Why, mother, what is the matter? why don't you answer me?"

"Your mother's deafness," the minister put in, hurriedly, "seems
suddenly increased: probably a cold,--"

"Was you speakin' to me, Rose Ellen?" said Mrs. Mellen.

"Why, yes!" said the girl, in distress.

"Why, mother, how did you get this cold? you seemed all right when I
went out."

"Gettin' old!" cried Mrs. Mellen. "'Tis nothin' of the sort, Rose
Ellen! I've took a cold, I shouldn't wonder. I went out without my
shawl just for a minute. I expect 'twas careless, but there! life is
too short to be thinkin' all the time about the flesh, 'specially when
there's as much of it as I have. I've ben expectin' I should grow hard
of hearin', though, these two years past. The Bowlers do, you know,
Rose Ellen, 'long about middle life. There was your Uncle Lihu. I can
hear him snort now, sittin' in his chair, like a pig for all the
world, and with no idea he was makin' a sound."

"But it's come on so sudden!" cried Rose Ellen, in distress.

"That's Bowler!" said her mother. "Bowler for all the world! They take
things suddin, whether it's hoarsin' up, or breakin' out, or what it
is. There! you've heard me tell how my Aunt Phoebe 'Lizabeth come out
with spots all over her face, when she was standin' up to be married.
Chicken-pox it was, and they never knew where she got it; but my
grand'ther said 'twas pure Bowler, wherever it come from."

She gazed placidly at her daughter's troubled face; then, patting her
with her broad hand, pushed her gently out of the room before her.

"Mr. Lindsay's heard enough of my bein' hard of hearin', I expect,"
she said, cheerfully, as they passed into the kitchen.

"Don't you fret, Rose Ellen! You won't have to get a fog-horn yet
awhile. I don't know but it would be a good plan for you to mix up a
mess o' biscuit, if you felt to: Mr. Lindsay likes your biscuit real
well, I heard him say so."

"That's what I was going to do," said Rose Ellen, still depressed. "I
wish't you'd see the doctor, mother. I don't believe but he could help
your hearing, if you take it before it's got settled on you."

"Well, I won't, certain!" said Mrs. Mellen. "The idea, strong and well
as I be! Bowler blood's comin' out, that's all; and the only wonder is
it hasn't come out before."

All that day, and the next, the minister did not seem like himself. He
was no more absent-minded than usual, perhaps,--that could hardly be.
But he was grave and troubled, and the usual happy laugh did not come
when Rose Ellen checked him gently as he was about to put pepper into
his tea. Several times he seemed about to speak: his eye dwelt
anxiously on the cream-jug, in which he seemed to be seeking
inspiration; but each time his heart failed him, and he relapsed with
a sigh into his melancholy reverie.

Rose Ellen was silent, too, and the burden of the talk fell on her
mother. At supper on the second day, midway between the ham and the
griddle-cakes, Mrs. Mellen announced:

"Rose Ellen, I expect you'd better go down to Tupham to-morrow, and
stay a spell with your grandm'ther. She seems to be right poorly, and
I expect it'd be a comfort to her to have you with her. I guess you'd
better get ready to-night, and Calvin Parks can take you up as he goes
along."

Rose Ellen and the minister both looked up with a start, and both
flushed, and both opened wide eyes of astonishment.

"Why, mother!" said the girl. "I can't go away and leave you now, with
this cold on you."

Her mother did not hear her, so Rose Ellen repeated the words in a
clear, high-pitched voice, with a note of anxiety which brought a
momentary shade to Mrs. Mellen's smooth brow. The next moment,
however, the brow cleared again.

"I guess you'd better go!" she said again. "It'd be a pity if Mr.
Lindsay and I couldn't get along for a month or six weeks; and I wrote
mother yesterday that you would be up along to-morrow, so she'll be
looking for you. I don't like to have mother disappointed of a thing
at her age, it gives her the palpitations."

"You--wrote--that I was coming!" repeated Rose Ellen. "And you never
told me you was writing, mother? I--I should have liked to have known
before you wrote."

"Coat?" said Mrs. Mellen. "Oh, your coat'll do well enough, Rose
Ellen. Why, you've only just had it bound new, and new buttons put on.
I should take my figured muslin, if I was you, and have Miss Turner
look at it and see how you could do it over: she has good ideas,
sometimes, and it'd be a little different from what the girls here was
doin', maybe. Anyway, I'd take it, and your light sack, too. 'Twon't
do no harm to have 'em gone over a little."

Rose Ellen looked ready to cry, but she kept the tears back
resolutely.

"I--don't--want to leave you, with this deafness coming on!" she
shouted, her usually soft voice ringing like a bugle across the
tea-table.

"There! there! don't you grow foolish," her mother replied, with
absolute calm.

"Why, I can hear ye as well as ever, when you raise your voice a mite,
like that. I should admire to know why you should stay at home on my
account. I suppose I know my way about the house, if I be losin' my
hearing just a dite. It isn't going to spoil my cooking, that I can
see; and I guess Mr. Lindsay won't make no opposition to your going,
for any difference it'll make to him."

Mr. Lindsay, thus appealed to, stammered, and blushed up to his eyes,
and stammered again; but finally managed to say, with more or less
distinctness, that of course whatever was agreeable to Mrs. and Miss
Mellen was agreeable to him, and that he begged not to be considered
in any way in the formation of their plans.

"That's just what I was thinking!" said his hostess. "A man don't want
no botheration of plans. So that's settled, Rose Ellen."

Rose Ellen knew it was settled. She was a girl of character and
resolution, but she had never resisted her mother's will, nor had any
one else, so far as she knew. She cried a good deal over her packing,
and dropped a tear on her silk waist, the pride of her heart, and was
surprised to find that she did not care. "There's no one there to care
whether I look nice or not!" she said aloud; and then blushed
furiously, and looked around the room, fearfully, to be sure that she
was alone.

Early next morning the crack of a whip was heard, and Calvin Parks's
voice, shouting cheerfully for his passenger. The minister, razor in
hand, peeped between his shutters, and saw Rose Ellen come from the
house, wiping her eyes, and looking back, with anxious eyes. A wave of
feeling swept through him, and he felt, for the moment, that he hated
Mrs. Mellen. He had never hated any one before in his innocent life;
while he was pondering on this new and awful sensation, the pale,
pretty face had sunk back in the depths of the old red-lined stage,
the whip cracked, and Calvin drove away with his prey.

Mrs. Mellen came out on the steps, and looked after the stage. Then,
with a movement singularly swift for so stout a person, she made a few
paces down the walk, and, turning, looked up at the windows of the
houses on either side of her own. In both houses a figure was leaning
from a window, thrown half out over the sill, in an attitude of eager
inquiry. At sight of Mrs. Mellen they dodged back, and only a slight
waving of curtains betrayed their presence. The good woman folded her
arms deliberately, and stood for five minutes, absorbed in the distant
landscape; then she turned, and went slowly back to the house.

"There!" she said, as she closed the door behind her. "That'll keep
'em occupied for one while!" and there was infinite content in her
tone.

Mr. Lindsay, coming in to breakfast, found his hostess beaming behind
the teakettle, placid and cheerful as usual. He still hated her, and
found difficulty in replying with alacrity to her remarks on the
beauty of the morning.

"I expect you and me'll have a right cozy time together!" she
announced. "You no need to put yourself out to talk to me, 'cause I
reelly don't seem to be hearing very good; and I won't talk to you,
save and except when you feel inclined. I know an elder does love to
have a quiet house about him. My sister married a minister, and my
father was a deacon himself, so I'm accustomed to the ways of the
ministry."

Mr. Lindsay stirred his tea, gloomily. The words recalled to his mind
those which had so disturbed him a day or two ago, just when all this
queer business of the deafness had come on. He remembered the spiteful
tones of the two neighbours, and recalled how the words had hissed in
his ears. He had thought of going away himself, lest he should
encourage false hopes in the breast of his gentle young friend--or her
mother; surely Rose Ellen,--as he said the name to himself, he felt
his ears growing pink, and knew that he had not said the name before,
even to himself; straightway said it again, to prove the absurdity of
something, he was not sure what, and felt his throat dry and hot. Now
Rose Ellen herself was gone, and for an indefinite time. She had not
gone willingly, of that he was sure; but it was equally evident that
her mother had no such thoughts as those two harridans had suggested.
He glanced up furtively, to meet a broad, beaming glance, and the
question whether he felt feverish any.

"You seem to flush up easy!" said Mrs. Mellen. "I should be careful,
if I was you, Mr. Lindsay, and not go messing round ponds and such at
this season of the year. It's just this time we commonly look for
sickness rising in the air."

Mr. Lindsay stirred his tea again, and sighed. His mind seemed
singularly distracted; and that, too, when the most precious moments
of the year were passing. He must put all other matters out of his
head, and think only of his great work.

Had the Blackburnian Warbler been seen in this neighbourhood, as he
had been told? He could hardly believe in such good fortune. The shy,
mistrustful bird, hunting the thickest foliage of the tallest forest
trees,--how should his landlady's daughter have seen it when she was
seeking for ferns? yet her description had been exactly that of the
books: "Upper parts nearly uniform black, with a whitish scapular
stripe and a large white patch in the middle of the wing coverts; an
oblong patch--" but she had not been positive about the head. No, but
she _was_ positive as to the bright orange-red on chin, throat, and
forepart of the breast, and the three white tail-feathers. Ah! why was
she gone? why was she not here to show him the way, as she promised,
to the place where she had seen the rare visitor? He might possibly
have found the nest, that rare nest which Samuels never saw, which
only Audubon had described: "composed externally of different
textures, and lined with silky fibres and thin, delicate strips of
bark, over which lies a thick bed of feathers and horsehair."

It should be found in a small fork of a tree, should it? five or six
feet from the ground, near a brook? well, he might still search, the
next time he went out; meanwhile, there were the ferns to analyze, and
that curious moss to determine, if might be. "But mosses are almost
hopeless!" he said aloud, with an appealing glance across the table,
where he was wont to look for sympathy and encouragement.

"Soap dish?" said Mrs. Mellen, with alacrity.

"Well, I don't wonder you ask, Mr. Lindsay. Why, I found it full of
frogs' eggs this very morning, and I hove 'em away and scalt it out.
It's drying in the sun this minute, and I'll bring it right up to your
room directly."

She beamed on him, and left the room. Mr. Lindsay groaned; looked
about him for help, but found none, and retired, groaning, to his
study.




Part II.


The minister had had a delightful but exhausting afternoon. He had
gone to look for the nest of a marsh-hen, which he had some reason to
think might be in a certain swamp, about five miles from the village.
He did not find the nest, but he found plenty of other things: his
pockets bulged with mosses and roots, his hat was wound with a curious
vine that might possibly be Clematis Verticillaris, and both hands
were filled with specimens of every conceivable kind. Incidentally the
mosquitoes and black flies had found him: his face was purple, and,
like that of the lady at the Brick Lane Branch tea-party, "swellin'
wisibly;" and blood was trickling down his well-shaped nose from a
bramble-scratch. He had fallen down once or twice in the bog, with
results to his clothes; and altogether he presented a singular figure
to the view of his parishioners as he strode hastily through the
street. Heads were thrust out of windows, staid eyes rolled in horror,
but the minister saw nothing. He was tired, and absorbed in his new
possessions. It was good to sit down in his study, and spread his
treasures out on the broad table, and gloat over them. A clump of damp
moss rested quietly on his new sermon, "The Slough of Despond," but he
took no note. He was looking for a place to put this curious little
lizard in, and after anxious thought selected the gilt celluloid box,
lined with pink satin, which the Mission Circle had given him on
Christmas for his collars and cuffs. He felt, vaguely, that it was not
the right place for the lizard, but there seemed to be nothing else in
reach,--except the flitter-work pen-box, and Rose Ellen had made that
for him. Ah! if Rose Ellen were here now, how much she could help him!
it was so much easier for two to analyze than one. He at the
microscope, and Rose Ellen corroborating, correcting from the
textbook,--it was a perfect arrangement.

The minister sighed heavily. Mrs. Mellen brought in his tea, for it
was Wednesday evening, and he preferred an early cup of tea, and a
modest supper after the meeting. Food distracted his mind, he was apt
to say, from thought, a statement which his landlady treated with
indulgent contempt, as she had never known him to remark the
difference between "riz" bread and the soda article.

She set the cup down before him, and he promptly dipped a fern root
into it; then started back with a cry of dismay.

"Well indeed, sir!" said Mrs. Mellen, "I should think so, truly! What
did you do that for, and spoil your tea?"

"The--tea--a--that is, it is of no consequence about the tea!" said
Mr. Lindsay, hastily.

"I fear I have injured the root. I thought it was water. Dear! dear!
Miss Mellen was in the habit of bringing me a glass of water when I
brought plants home."

Mrs. Mellen said nothing, but brought the water, and a fresh cup of
tea; but Mr. Lindsay had fallen into the depths of the moss, and took
no notice of either.

She left the room, but presently returned, knitting in hand, and
stood, unnoticed, in the doorway, glancing from time to time at the
minister. He certainly was "a sight to behold," as she said to
herself. She may have thought other things beside, but her face gave
no sign. Presently the bell began to ring for Wednesday evening
meeting. Mrs. Mellen glanced again at the minister, but he heard
nothing. The botany was open before him, and he was muttering strange
words that sounded like witch-talk.

"Stamens six, hypogenous! anthers introrse! capsule cartilaginous,
loculicidally three-valved, scurfy-leaved epiphytic!" What did it all
mean? A slow flush crept over the woman's broad, placid face; her
eyelids quivered, her eye roamed restlessly about the room. She
shifted her weight from one foot to the other, and breathed heavily,
as if in distress; and still her eyes came back to the slender figure
in the great chair, bent in absorbed interest over the table.

Ding! dong! ding! the notes came dropping through the air, clear and
resonant. Even a deaf person might hear them, perhaps. Mrs. Mellen was
evidently struggling with herself. Once she opened her lips as if to
speak; once she stepped forward with outstretched hand, as if to shake
the man into wakefulness and attention; but she did not speak, and her
hand dropped again; and presently the bell stopped, and Sophronia
Mellen went away to her sitting-room, hanging her head.

Half an hour later there was knocking at the door, and the sound of
many voices, anxious voices, pitched high and loud, on account of Mrs.
Mellen's deafness.

"How's Mr. Lindsay? When was he took sick? Have ye had the doctor?"

"Do you think it's ketchin', Mis' Mellen? Think of all the young
children in this parish, if anythin' should get the rounds! My! it's
awful!"

"How does he look? Some say he was pupple in the face when they see
him coming home through the street. Most everybody did see him, and he
was a sight! Apoplexy, most likely!"

"Has he ever had fits, think? he don't look fitty, but you never can
tell."

"Have ye sent for his folks? You'd feel better to, I sh'd think, if
he's taken; some say he has a mother rollin' in wealth, down Brunswick
way."

"Well, some say he ain't nothin' of the sort. Christiana Bean saw an
aunt of his once, and she hadn't flesh enough on her to bait a
mouse-trap with, Christiana said so."

"Does he know you, Mis' Mellen? it's awful to see folks out of their
heads; I don't know how any one kin bear to see it; you'd better let
me come in and spell you a bit; you look clean tuckered out with the
fright you've had."

Mrs. Mellen stood and looked quietly at the crowd of "members" that
surged and cackled about her.

"I could hear better if one'd speak at a time!" she said, mildly.

"Did you want to see Elder Lindsay? it--it must be gettin' near
meetin'-time, isn't it?"

"Meetin'-time! meetin's over, and Mr. Lindsay never come nigh. Do you
mean to say he ain't sick? do you mean to say--"

"What _do_ you mean to say, Mis' Mellen?"

Mrs. Mellen held the door in her hand, and still gazed quietly at the
excited throng. At length,--

"Whatever's the matter with Mr. Lindsay," she said, in clear incisive
tones, "I ain't going to let in no lunatic asylum to drive him clean
out of his mind. Deacon Strong and Deacon Todd, if you'll step this
way, I presume Mr. Lindsay'll be pleased to see you. And if the rest
of you 'ud go home quiet, mebbe it might seem more consistent. There
has been a meetin', you say? the Baptists will be just about comin'
out now."

An hour later, the two deacons were taking their leave of Mr. Lindsay.
They stood, hat in hand, and were looking at the young man with
pitying eyes. They were elderly men, of kind disposition.

"Well, Mr. Lindsay," Mr. Todd was saying; "I guess we've said about
all there is to say. Of course 'twas a pity, and such things make
talk; but 'twon't occur again, I dare say. Some say--"

"It _may_ occur again," cried the young minister. He was sitting with
his head in his hand, and despair in his face.

"It may occur again! I seem to have no mind, no memory! I am unfit to
be a minister of the Christian Church. My brethren, what shall I do?"

The elder men exchanged glances: then Deacon Strong stepped forward
and laid his hands on the young man's shoulder, for he loved him.

"Mr. Lindsay," he said, kindly, "so far as I can see, there's only one
thing the matter with you; you want a wife!"

"A wife!" repeated Charles Lindsay. His tone suggested that he had
never heard of the article.

"A wife!" the deacon said again, with emphasis; and his fellow deacon
nodded assent.

"A sensible, clever young woman, who will help you in parish matters,
and be a comfort to you in every way,--a--hem! yes, in every way." The
deacon reddened through his beard, and glanced at Deacon Todd; but the
latter was a kind man, and knew Mrs. Strong, and gazed out of the
window.

"And--and tell you when it was time for meeting. I don't know as you'd
have to look more'n a hundred miles for the very young woman that
would make the right kind of helpmeet for you, but you know best about
that. Anyway, Mr. Lindsay, it is not good for man to be alone, we have
Scripture for that: and it's quite evident that it's particularly bad
for you to be alone, with your--a--your love of nature" (the deacon
caught sight of the lizard, peering disconsolately out of the gilt
celluloid box, and brought his remarks to a hasty conclusion). "And so
we'll be going, Mr. Lindsay, and don't you fret about to-night's
meeting, for we'll make it all right."

Mr. Lindsay bowed them out, with vague thanks, and muttered
expressions of regret. He hardly heard their adieux; the words that
were saying themselves over and over in his head were,--

"You want a wife!"

Did he want a wife? Was that what was the matter with him? Was that
why he went about all day and every day, these last weeks, feeling as
if half of him were asleep? He had always been a strong advocate of
the celibacy of the clergy, as far as his own case went. Nothing, he
had always assured himself, should ever come between him and his work.
A wife would be a perpetual distraction: she would want money, and
amusement, and a thousand things that he never thought about; and she
would interfere with his sermons, and with his collections, and--and
altogether, he would never marry. But now,--

And what was it that happened only the other day, here in the village?
A man and his wife had been quarrelling, to the scandal of the whole
congregation. They were an elderly couple, and when it came to
smashing crockery and emptying pails of water over each other, the
minister felt it his duty to interfere. So he called on the wife,
intending to reason with her first alone, and then, when she was
softened and convinced, to call in the husband and reconcile them, and
perhaps pray with them, since both were "members." But before he had
spoken a dozen of his well-arranged and logical sentences, he was
interrupted by loud and tearful outcries.

The lady never thought it would come to this, no, never! Some thought
she had enough to bear without this, but she knew how to submit to
the will of Providence, and no one should say she struv nor hollered.
She knew what was due to a minister, even if he was only just in
pants; she only hoped Mr. Lindsay wouldn't see fit to say anything to
her husband. Take Reuben Meecher when he was roused, and tigers was
tame by him: and if he should know that his wife was spoke to so, by
them as wasn't born or thought of when they was married, and nobody
couldn't say but they had lived respectable for forty years, and now
to come to this! The lady was well used to ministers, and some of the
most aged in the country, and she knew what was due to them; but for
her part, she thought 'twas well for ministers, as well as others, to
speak of what they'd had exper'ence in, and then there would be no
feeling!

The visit was not a success, nor did it cheer the minister to hear the
old couple chuckling to each other as he went sadly away, and to feel
that they were laughing at him.

But he was very humble, and he laid the spiteful words to heart.

What did he know? What had he to say to his people, when it came to
the real, terrible things of life? What had he had in his whole life,
save kindness and a sheltered home, and then study, and a little
divinity, and a little science? He sat and gazed at the image of
himself in his mind's glass, and found it a gibbering phantom, with
emptiness where should be eyes, and dry dust where should be living
waters.

As he sat thus sadly pondering, the sound of voices struck upon his
ear. The window was open, and now that his mind was awake, there was
no question of his hearing, when the two next-door neighbours leaned
out of their back windows, across Mrs. Mellen's back yard. He had
grown to loathe the sound of those two voices, the shrill cackling
one, and the fat chuckle that was even more hateful. What were they
saying now?

"You don't tell me she wants to git him for herself? speak jest a dite
louder! She can't hear ye, and he's so muddled up he never heard the
bell for meetin', some say; but there's others think he'd ben
drinkin', and Deacon Strong and Deacon Todd jest leagued together with
Sophrony Mellen to hide it. He was black in the face when he came
home, and reelin' in his walk, for I see him with these eyes."

Charles Lindsay started as if stung by a venomous snake. He put out
his hand to the window, but now the sharp voice broke in, anxious to
have its turn.

"Well, I shouldn't be a mite surprised if 'twas so, Mis' Bean, and
you've had experience, I'm sure, in such matters, after what you
suffered with Mr. Bean. But what I was sayin', some do say Phrony
Mellen's bound to have the minister for herself, and that's why she
sent Rose Ellen off, traipsin' way down to Tupham, when her grandma'am
don't need her no more'n a toad needs a tail."

"I want to know if they say that!" replied Mrs. Bean. "But you know,
some say Rose Ellen's got a beau down to Tupham, and that's why she
went off without askin' leave or license, and her ma deef and all. I
see her go myself, and she went off early in the mornin', and if ever
I see a person what you may call slink away secret, like she'd done
somethin' to be 'shamed of, 'twas that girl. _She_ knew what she was
goin' for, well enough. Rose Ellen ain't no fool, for all she's as
smooth as baked custard. Now you mark my words, Mis' Peake,--"

At this moment, the back door opened with a loud clang. Mrs. Mellen
stood on the doorstep, and her eyes were very bright. She said
nothing, but gazed calmly up and down the yard, as if considering the
beauty of the night. Then, after a few minutes, she turned and
scrutinized her neighbours' windows. Nothing was to be seen, only a
white muslin curtain waved gently in the moonlight: nothing was to be
heard, only a faint rustle, probably of the same curtain.

"It's an elegant night!" said Mrs. Mellen, aloud. "I thought I heard
voices, but my hearin' does play me such tricks, these days."

Her calm, sensible voice fell like balm on the distracted ears of the
minister. He was soothed, he knew not why. The horrors that those
harpies suggested,--could there be truth in them? Rose Ellen with
a--his mind refused to frame the detestable word! Was there anything
true in the world? Was it all scandal and hatefulness and untruth?

He rose and paced his study in anguish of mind, but his ears were
still awake,--he thought he never should regain the joy of losing
himself,--and now another sound came to them, the sound of wheels. Why
did his heart stop, and then beat violently? What was there in the
sound of wheels? It was the late stage, of course, and Calvin Parks
was driving fast, as usual, to get to his home, five miles away,
before ten o'clock at night. But that stage came from Tupham, and
Tupham meant Rose Ellen. Rose Ellen, who was as smooth as baked
custard, and who had a--the wheels were slacking; the steady beat of
the horses' feet stopped; the stage had paused at the Widow Mellen's
door.

"Here we be!" said Calvin Parks. "Take my hand, Rosy! so, thar she
goes! Hope ye'll find yer ma right smart! Give her my respects and
tell her,--wal, I swan!"

For the door flew open, and out ran the minister, torn and stained and
covered with dust, and caught Rose Ellen by both hands and drew her
almost forcibly into the house.

"Mother!" cried the girl. "How is she? I--I got so scared, not hearing
from her, I couldn't stay another day, Mr. Lindsay!"

"Oh,--your mother?" said Mr. Lindsay, incoherently. "She--a--she seems
to be in excellent health, except for her deafness. It is I who am
ill, Rose Ellen: very ill, and wanting you more than I could bear!"

"Wanting me?" faltered Rose Ellen, with lips wide, with blue eyes
brimming over. "You, Mr. Lindsay, wanting me?"

"Yes, Rose Ellen!" cried the minister. They were still standing in the
passage, and he was still holding her hands, and it was quite absurd,
only neither of them seemed to realize it.

"I have always wanted you, but I have only just found it out. I cannot
live at all without you: I have been only half alive since you went
away. I want you for my own, for always."

"Oh, you can have me!" cried Rose Ellen, and the blue eyes brimmed
over altogether with happy shining tears. "Oh, I was yours all the
time, only I didn't know you--I didn't know--"

She faltered, and then hurried on. "It--it wasn't only that I was
scared about mother, Mr. Lindsay. I couldn't stay away from--oh, some
said--some said you were going to be married, and I couldn't bear it,
no, I couldn't!"

But when Charles Lindsay heard that, he drew Rose Ellen by both hands
into the study, and shut the door. And only the lizard knew what
happened next.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a month later.

There had been a wedding, the prettiest wedding that the village had
ever seen. The whole world seemed turned to roses, and the sweetest
rose of all, Rose Ellen Lindsay, had gone away on her husband's arm,
and Deacon Strong and Deacon Todd were shaking hands very hard, and
blowing peals of joy with their pocket-handkerchiefs. Mrs. Mellen had
preserved her usual calm aspect at the wedding, and looked young
enough to be her own daughter, "some said," in her gray silk and white
straw bonnet. But when it was all over, the wedding party gone, and
the neighbours scattered to their homes again, Sophronia Mellen did a
strange thing. She went round deliberately, and opened every window of
her house. The house stood quite apart, with only the two houses close
beside it on either hand, and no others till you came quite into the
street itself. She opened every window to its utmost. Then she took a
tin pan, and a pair of tongs, and leaned out of the front parlour
window, and screamed three times, at the top of her lungs, beating
meanwhile with all her might upon the pan. Then she went to the next
window, and screamed and banged again, and so on all over the house.
There were twenty windows in her house, and by the time she had gone
the round, she was crimson and breathless. Nevertheless, she managed
to put her last breath into a shriek of such astounding volume that
the windows fairly rang. One last defiant clang of the tongs on the
tin pan and then she sat down quietly by the back parlour window, and
settled herself well behind the curtain, and prepared to enjoy herself
thoroughly. "They shall have their fill this time!" she murmured to
herself; "and I shall get all the good of it."

For some minutes there was dead silence: the event had been too awful
to be treated lightly. At length a rustling was heard, and very
cautiously a sharp nose, generously touched with colour, was protruded
from the window of the left-hand house.

"Mis' Bean," said the owner of the nose. "Be you there?"

"Well, I should say I was!" was the reply; and Mrs. Bean's fat curls
shook nervously out of her window.

"Maria Peake, what do you s'pose this means? Ain't it awful? Why, I've
got palpitations to that degree,--don't s'pose there's a robber in
the house, do ye? with all them weddin' presents about, 'twould be a
dreadful thing! 'Tain't likely he would spare her life, and she tryin'
to give the alarm like that! Most likely she's layin' dead this
minute, and welterin' in her--"

"Sssssssh!" hissed Mrs. Peake, in a deadly whisper. "Melissa Bean, you
won't let a person hear herself think. 'Tain't no robber, I tell ye!
She's gone out of her mind, Phrony Mellen has, as sure as you're a
breathin' woman!"

"You don't tell me she has!" Mrs. Bean leaned further out, her eyes
distended with awful curiosity, her fat lips dropping apart. She was
not a pleasant object, the hidden observer thought; but she was no
worse than the skinny cabbage-stalk which now stretched itself far out
from the opposite window.

"I tell ye," Mrs. Peake hissed, still in that serpent-whisper, the
most penetrating sound that ever broke stillness, "She's as crazy as a
clo'esline in a gale o' wind. Some say she's wore an onsettled eye for
six weeks past, and she glared at me yesterday, when I run in to borry
an egg, same as if I was one wild animal and she was another. Ssssh!
'Tis Bowler, I tell ye! They go that way, jest as often as they git a
chance! I call it an awful jedgment on Elder Lindsay, bein' married
into that family. Some say his mother besought him on her bended
knees, but he was clean infatooated. I declare to you, Mis' Bean, I'm
terrified most to death, to think of you and me alone here, so near to
a ravin' lunatic. I don't think nothin' of robbers, alongside o'
madness. She might creep in while you're standin' there,--your house
is more handy by than mine, 'count of there bein' no fence, and--"

"Yah! bah! ha! ha! ha! hurrah!" sounded in sharp, clear tones from
Mrs. Mellen's window. Two ghastly faces, white with actual terror,
gazed at each other for an instant, then disappeared; and immediately
after was heard a sound of bolts being driven home, and of heavy
furniture being dragged about.

But Mrs. Mellen sat and fanned herself, being somewhat heated, and
gazed calmly at the beauty of the prospect.

"I've enjoyed myself real well!" she said. "I couldn't free my mind,
not while Rosy and Mr. Lindsay was round; I've had a real good time."

She fanned herself placidly, and then added, addressing the universe
in general, with an air of ineffable good will:

"I shouldn't wonder if my hearin' improved, too, kind o' suddin, same
as it came on. That's Bowler, too! It's real convenient, bein' a
Bowler!"

       *       *       *       *       *




NEIGHBOURS IN CYRUS




NEIGHBOURS IN CYRUS.


"Hi-Hi!" said Miss Peace, looking out of the window. "It is really
raining. Isn't that providential, now?"

"Anne Peace, you are enough to provoke a saint!" replied a peevish
voice from the furthest corner of the room. "You and your providences
are more than I can stand. What do you mean this time, I _should_ like
to know? the picnic set for to-day, and every soul in the village
lottin' on goin', 'xcept those who _would_ like best to go and can't.
I've been longin' for these two years to go to a picnic and it's never
ben so's I could. And now, jest when I _could_ ha' gone, this
affliction must needs come to me. And then to have you rejoicin'
'cause it rains!"

The speaker paused for breath, and Miss Peace answered mildly: "I'm
real sorry for you, Delia, you know I am; and if the' was any way of
getting you to the grove,--but what I was thinking of, you know I
couldn't finish Jenny Miller's dress last night, do what I could; and
seeing it raining now, thinks I, they'll have to put off the picnic
till to-morrow or next day, and then Jennie can go as nice as the
rest. She does need a new dress, more than most of the girls who has
them. And she's so sweet and pretty, it's a privilege to do for her.
That's all I was thinking, Delia."

Mrs. Delia Means sniffed audibly, then she groaned.

"Your leg hurting you?" cried Miss Peace, with ready sympathy.

"Well, I guess you'd think so," was the reply. "If _you_ had red-hot
needles run into your leg. Not that it's any matter to anybody."

"Hi-hi," said Miss Peace, cheerily. "It's time the bandages was
changed, Delia. You rest easy just a minute, and I'll run and fetch
the liniment and give you a rub before I put on the new ones."

Mrs. Means remaining alone, it is proper to introduce her to the
reader. She and Miss Peace were the rival seamstresses of Cyrus
Village; that is, they would have been rivals, if Mrs. Means had had
her way; but rivalry was impossible where Anne Peace was one of the
parties. She had always maintained stoutly that Delia Means needed
work a sight more than she did, having a family, and her husband so
weakly and likely to go off with consumption 'most any time. Many and
many a customer had Anne turned from her door, with her pleasant
smile, and "I don't hardly know as I could, though I should be pleased
to accommodate you; but I presume likely Mis' Means could do it for
you. She doos real nice work, and I don't know as she's so much drove
just now as I am."

Delia Case had been a schoolmate of Anne Peace's. She was a pretty
girl, with a lively sense of her own importance and a chronic taste
for a grievance. She had married well, as every one thought, but in
these days her husband had lost his health and Delia was obliged to
put her shoulder to the wheel. She sewed well, but there was a sigh
every time her needle went into the cloth, and a groan when it came
out.

"A husband and four children, and have to sew for a living!"--this was
the burden of her song; and it had become familiar to her neighbours
since David Means had begun to "fail up," as they say in Cyrus.

Anne Peace had always been the faithful friend of "Delia Dumps." (It
was Uncle Asy Green who had given her the name which stuck to her
through thick and thin--Uncle Asy believed in giving people their due,
and thought "Anne made a dreffle fool of herself, foolin' round with
that woman at all.") Anne had been her faithful friend, and never
allowed people to make fun of her if she were present.

A week before my story opens, when Mrs. Means fell down and broke her
leg, just as she was passing Miss Peace's house, the latter lady
declared it to be a special privilege.

"I can take care of her," she explained to the doctor, when he
expressed regret at being obliged to forbid the sufferer's being moved
for some weeks, "just as well as not and better. David isn't fit to
have the care of her, and--well, doctor, I can say to you, who know it
as well as I do, that Delia mightn't be the best person for David to
have round him just now, when he needs cheering up. Then, too, I can
do her sewing along with my own, as easy as think; work's slack now,
and there's nothing I'm specially drove with. I've been wishing right
along that I could do something to help, now that David is so poorly.
I'm kin to David, you know, so take it by and large, doctor, it doos
seem like a privilege, doesn't it?"

The doctor growled. He was not fond of Mrs. Means.

"If you can get her moved out of Grumble Street and into Thanksgiving
Alley," he said, "it'll be a privilege for this village; but you can't
do it, Anne. However, there's no use talking to you, you incorrigible
optimist. You're the worst case I ever saw, Anne Peace, and I haven't
the smallest hope of curing you. Put the liniment on her leg as I
told you, and I'll call in the morning. Good day!"

"My goodness me, what was he saying to you?" Mrs. Means asked as Anne
went back into the bedroom. "You've got something that you'll never
get well of? Well, Anne Peace, that does seem the cap sheaf on the
hull. Heart complaint, I s'pose it is; and what would become of me, if
you was to be struck down, as you might be any minute of time, and me
helpless here, and a husband and four children at home and he failin'
up. You did look dretful gashly round the mouth yisterday, I noticed
it at the time, but of course I didn't speak of it. Why, here I should
lay, and might starve to death, and you cold on the floor, for all the
help I should get." Mrs. Means shed tears, and Anne Peace answered
with as near an approach to asperity as her soft voice could command.

"Don't talk foolishness, Delia. I'm not cold yet, nor likely to be.
Here, let me 'tend to your leg; it's time I was getting dinner on this
minute."

It continued to rain on the picnic day; no uncertain showers, to keep
up a chill and fever of fear and hope among the young people, but a
good, honest downpour, which everybody past twenty must recognize as
being just the thing the country needed. Jenny Miller came in, smiling
all over, though she professed herself "real sorry for them as was
disappointed." "Tudie Peaslee sat down and cried, when she saw 'twas
rainin'," she said, as she prepared to give her dress the final
trying-on. "There, Miss Peace. I did try to feel for her, but I just
couldn't, seems though. Oh, ain't that handsome? that little puff is
too cute for anything! I do think you've been smart, Miss Peace. Not
that you ever was anything else."

"You've a real easy figure to fit, Jenny," Miss Peace replied,
modestly. "I guess that's half the smartness of it. It doos set good,
though, I'm free to think. The styles is real pretty this summer,
anyhow. Don't that set good, Delia?"

She turned to Mrs. Means, who was lying on the sofa (they call it a
l'unge in Cyrus), watching the trying-on with keenly critical eyes.

"Ye-es," she said. "The back sets good enough, but 'pears to me
there's a wrinkle about the neck that I shouldn't like to see in any
work of mine. I've always ben too particklar, though; it's time thrown
away, but I can't bear to send a thing out 'cept jest as it should
be."

"It _don't_ wrinkle, Mis' Means!" cried Jenny, indignantly. "Not a
mite. I was turning round to look at the back of the skirt, and that
pulled it; there ain't a sign of a wrinkle, Miss Peace, so don't you
think there is."

Mrs. Means sniffed, and said something about the change in young
folks' manners since she was a girl. "If I'd ha' spoke so to my
elders--I won't say betters, for folks ain't thought much of when they
have to sew for a livin', with a husband and four children to keer
for--I guess I should ha' found it out in pretty quick time."

"Hi-hi!" said Miss Peace, soothingly. "There, Delia, Jenny didn't mean
anything. Jenny, I guess I'll have to take you into the bedroom, so's
I can pull this skirt out a little further. This room doos get so
cluttered with all my things round." She hustled Jenny, swelling like
an angry partridge, into the next room, and closed the door carefully.

"You don't want to anger Mis' Means, dear," she said gently, taking
the pins out of her mouth for freer speech. "She may be jest a scrap
pudgicky now and again, but she's seen trouble, you know, and she doos
feel it hard to be laid up, and so many looking to her at home. Turn
round, dear, jest a dite--there!"

"I can't help it, Miss Peace," said Jenny. "There's no reason why Mis'
Means should speak up and say the neck wrinkled, when anybody can see
it sets like a duck's foot in the mud. I don't mind what she says to
me, but I ain't goin' to see you put upon, nor yet other folks ain't.
I should like to know! and that wrapper she cut for Tudie Peaslee set
so bad, you'd think she'd fitted it on the pump in the back yard,
Mis' Peaslee said so herself."

"Hi-hi!" cried Anne Peace, softly, with an apprehensive glance toward
the door; "don't speak so loud, Jennie. Tudie ain't so easy a form to
fit as you, not near. And you say she was real put about, do ye, at
the picnic being put off?"

"She was so!" Jenny assented, seeing that the subject was to be
changed. "She'd got her basket all packed last night, she made so sure
'twas goin' to be fine to-day. Chicken sandwiches, she had, and baked
a whole pan of sponge-drops, jest because some one--you know who--is
fond of 'em." Miss Peace nodded sagely, with her mouth full of pins,
and would have smiled if she could; "and now they've put it off till
Saturday, 'cause the minister can't go before then, and every livin'
thing will be spoiled."

"Dear, dear!" cried Miss Anne, her kind face clouding over; "that does
seem too bad, don't it? all those nice things! and Tudie makes the
best sponge-cakes I ever eat, pretty nigh."

Jenny smiled, and stretched her hand toward a basket she had brought.
"They won't really be wasted, Miss Peace," she said. "Tudie thought
you liked 'em, and I've got some of 'em here for you, this very
minute. You was to eat 'em for your own supper, Tudie told me to tell
you so."

"Well, I do declare, if that isn't thoughtful!" exclaimed Miss Peace,
looking much gratified. "Tudie is a sweet girl, I must say. Delia is
real fond of cake, and she's been longing for some, but it doos seem
as if I couldn't find time to make it, these days."

"I should think not!" cried Jenny (who was something of a pepper-pot,
it must be confessed), "I should think not, when you have her to take
care of, and her work and yours to do, and all. And, Miss
Peace,--Tudie meant the sponge-drops for _you_, every one. She told me
so."

"Yes, dear, to be sure she did, and that's why I feel so pleased, just
as much as if I had eaten them. But bread _is_ better for me,
and--why! if she hasn't sent a whole dozen. One, two, three--yes, a
dozen, and one over, sure as I stand here. Now, that I call generous.
And, I'll tell you what, dearie! Don't say a word, for I wouldn't for
worlds have Tudie feel to think I was slighting her, or didn't
appreciate her kindness; but--well, I _have_ wanted to send some
little thing round to that little girl of Josiah Pincher's, that has
the measles, and I do suppose she'd be pleased to death with some of
these sponge-drops. Hush! don't say a word, Jenny! it would be a real
privilege to me, now it would. And you know it isn't that I don't
think the world of Tudie, and you, too; now, don't you?"

Jenny protested, half-laughing, and half-crying; for Tudie Peaslee had
declared herself ready to bet that Miss Peace would not eat a single
one of the sponge-drops, and Jenny had vowed she should. But would she
or would she not, before ten minutes were over she had promised to
leave the sponge-drops at the Pinchers' door as she went by, for
little Geneva. There was no resisting Miss Peace, Tudie was right; but
suddenly a bright idea struck Jenny, just as she was putting on her
hat and preparing to depart. Seizing one of the sponge-drops, she
broke off a bit, and fairly popped it into Miss Peace's mouth, as the
good lady was going to speak. "It's broke, now," she cried, in high
glee, "it's broke in two, and you can't give it to nobody. Set right
down, Miss Peace, and let me feed you, same as I do my canary bird."
She pushed the little dressmaker into a chair, and the bits followed
each other in such quick succession that Miss Peace could make no
protest beyond a smothered, "Oh, don't ye, dear; now don't! that's
enough!--my stars, Jenny, what do you think my mouth's made of?"
(Crunch!) "There, dear, there! It is real good--oh, dear! not so fast.
I _shall_ choke! Tell Tudie--no, dearie, not another morsel!"
(Crunch.) "Well, Jenny Miller, I didn't think you would act so, now I
didn't."

The sponge-cake was eaten, and Jenny, with a triumphant kiss on the
little rosy, withered-apple cheek, popped her head in at the parlour
door to cry, "Good day, Mis' Means!" and flew laughing away with her
victory and her cakes.

"Well, Anne Peace," was Mrs. Means's greeting, as her hostess came
back, looking flushed and guilty, and wiping her lips on her apron,
"how you can stand havin' that Miller girl round here passes me. She'd
be the death of me, I know that; but it's lucky other folks ain't so
feelin' as I am, I always say. Of all the forward, up-standin' tykes
ever I see--but there! it ain't to be supposed anybody cares whether
I'm sassed or whether I ain't."

Saturday was bright and fair, and Anne Peace stood at the window with
a beaming smile, watching the girls troop by on their way to the
picnic. She had moved Mrs. Means's sofa out of the corner, so that she
could see, too, and there was a face at each window. Miss Peace was a
little plump, partridge-like woman, with lovely waving brown hair, and
twinkling brown eyes. She had never been a beauty, but people always
liked to look at her, and the young people declared she grew prettier
every year. Mrs. Means was tall and weedy, with a figure that used to
be called willowy, and was now admitted to be lank; her once fair
complexion had faded into sallowness, and her light hair had been
frizzed till there was little left of it. Her eyebrows had gone up,
and the corners of her mouth had gone down, so that her general effect
was depressing in the extreme.

"There go Tudie and Jenny!" cried Miss Peace, in delight. "If they
ain't a pretty pair, then I never saw one, that's all. Jenny's dress
doos set pretty, if I do say it; and after all, it's her in it that
makes it look so well. There comes the minister, Delia. Now I'm glad
the roses are out so early. He doos so love roses, Mr. Goodnow does.
And the honeysuckle is really a sight. Why, this is the first time you
have fairly seen the garden, Delia, since you came. Isn't it looking
pretty?"

"I never did see how you could have your garden right close 't onto
the street that way, Anne," was the reply. "Everybody 't comes by
stoppin' and starin', and pokin' their noses through the fence. Look
at them boys, now! why, if they ain't smellin' at the roses, the
boldfaced brats. Knock at the winder, Anne, and tell 'em to git out.
Shoo! be off with you!" She shook her fist at the window, but,
fortunately, could not reach it.

"Hi-hi!" said Anne Peace. "You don't mean that, Delia. What's roses
for but to smell? I do count it a privilege, to have folks take
pleasure in my garden." She threw up the window, and nodded pleasantly
to the children. "Take a rose, sonny, if you like 'em," she said.
"Take two or three, there's enough for all. Whose little boys are
you?" she added, as the children, in wondering delight, timidly broke
off a blossom or two. "Mis' Green's, over to the Corners! Now I want
to know! have you grown so 't I didn't know you? and how's your
mother? Jest wait half a minute, and I'll send her a little posy.
There's some other things besides roses, perhaps she'd like to have a
few of."

She darted out, and filled the boys' hands with pinks and mignonette,
pansies and geraniums.

It was not a large garden, this of Anne Peace's, but every inch of
space was made the most of. The little square and oblong beds lay
close to the fence, and from tulip-time to the coming of frost they
were ablaze with flowers. Nothing was allowed to straggle, or to take
up more than its share of room. The roses were tied firmly to their
neat green stakes; the crown-imperials nodded over a spot of ground
barely large enough to hold their magnificence; while the phlox and
sweet-william actually had to fight for their standing-room.

It was a pleasant sight, at all odd times of the day, to see Miss
Peace bending over her flowers, snipping off dead leaves, pruning, and
tending, all with loving care.

Many flower-lovers are shy of plucking their favourites, and I recall
one rose-fancier, whose gifts, like those of the Greeks, were dreaded
by his neighbours, as the petals were always ready to drop before he
could make up his mind to cut one of the precious blossoms; but this
was not the case with Anne Peace. Dozens of shallow baskets hung in
her neat back entry, and they were filled and sent, filled and sent,
all summer long, till one would have thought they might almost find
their way about alone. It is a positive fact that her baskets were
always brought back, "a thing imagination boggles at;" but perhaps
this was because the neighbours liked them better full than empty.

"Makin' flowers so cheap," Mrs. Means would say, "seems to take the
wuth of 'em away, to my mind; but I'm too feelin', I know that well
enough. Anne, she's kind o' callous, and she don't think of things
that make me squinch, seem's though."

Weeks passed on, the broken leg was healed, and Mrs. Means departed to
her own house. "I s'pose you'll miss me, Anne," she said, at parting,
"I shall you; and you have ben good to me, if 't _has_ ben kind o'
dull here, so few comin' and goin'." (Miss Peace's was generally the
favourite resort of all the young people of the village, and half the
old ones, but the "neighbouring" had dropped off, since Mrs. Means
had been there.) "Good-by, Anne, and thank you for all you've done. I
feel to be glad I've been company for you, livin' alone as you do,
with no husband nor nothin' belongin' to you."

"Good-by, Delia," replied Anne Peace, cheerfully. "Don't you fret
about me. I'm used to being alone, you know; and it's been a
privilege, I'm sure, to do what I could for you, so long as we've been
acquainted. My love to David, and don't forget to give him the syrup I
put in the bottom of your trunk for him."

"'Twon't do him any good!" cried Mrs. Means, as the wagon drove away,
turning her head to shout back at her hostess. "He's bound to die,
David is. He'll never see another spring, I tell him, and then I shall
be left a widder, with four children and--"

"Oh, gerlang! gerlang, _up_!" shouted Calvin Parks, the stage-driver,
whose stock of patience was small; the horse started, and Mrs. Means's
wails died away in the distance.

In this instance the predictions of the doleful lady seemed likely to
be verified; for David Means continued to "fail up." Always a slight
man, he was now mere skin and bone, and his cheerful smile grew
pathetic to see. He was a distant cousin of Anne Peace's, and had
something of her placid disposition; a mild, serene man, bearing his
troubles in silence, finding his happiness in the children whom he
loved almost passionately. He had married Delia Case because she was
pretty, and because she wanted to marry him; had never known, and
would never know, that he might have had a very different kind of
wife. Perhaps Anne Peace hardly knew herself that David had been the
romance of her life, so quickly had the thought been put away, so
earnestly had she hoped for his happiness; but she admitted frankly
that she "set by him," and she was devoted to his children.

"Can nothing be done?" she asked the good doctor one day, as they came
away together from David's house, leaving Delia shaking her head from
the doorsteps. "Can nothing be done, doctor? it doos seem as if I
couldn't bear to see David fade away so, and not try anything to stop
it."

Doctor Brown shook his head thoughtfully. "I doubt if there's much
chance for him, Anne," he said kindly. "David is a good fellow, and if
I saw any way--it might be possible, if he could be got off to Florida
before cold weather comes on--there is a chance; but I don't suppose
it could be managed. He has no means, poor fellow, save what he
carries in his name."

"Florida?" said Anne Peace, thoughtfully; and then she straightway
forgot the doctor's existence, and hurried off along the street, with
head bent and eyes which saw nothing they rested on.

Reaching her home, where all the flowers smiled a bright welcome,
unnoticed for once, her first action was to take out of a drawer a
little blue book, full of figures, which she studied with ardour. Then
she took a clean sheet of paper, and wrote certain words at the top of
it; then she got out her best bonnet.

Something very serious was on hand when Miss Peace put on her best
bonnet. She had only had it four years, and regarded it still as a
sacred object, to be taken out on Sundays and reverently looked at,
then put back in its box, and thought about while she tied the strings
of the ten-year-old velvet structure, which was quite as good as new.
Two weddings had seen the best bonnet in its grandeur, and three
funerals; but no bells, either solemn or joyous, summoned her to-day,
as she gravely placed the precious bonnet on her head, and surveyed
her image with awestruck approval in the small mirror over the
mantelpiece.

"It's _dreadful_ handsome!" said Miss Peace, softly. "It's too
handsome for me, a great sight, but I want to look my best now, if
ever I did."

It was at Judge Ransom's door that she rang first; a timid, apologetic
ring, as if she knew in advance how busy the judge would be, and how
wrong it was of her to intrude on his precious time. But the judge
himself opened the door, and was not at all busy, but delighted to
have a chance to chat with his old friend, whom he had not seen for a
month of Sundays. He made her come in, and put her in the biggest
armchair (which swallowed her up so that hardly more than the bonnet
was visible), and drew a footstool before her little feet, which
dangled helplessly above it; then he took his seat opposite, in
another big chair, and said it was a fine day, and then waited, seeing
that she had something of importance to say.

Miss Peace's breath came short and quick, and she fingered her
reticule nervously. She had not thought it would be quite so dreadful
as this. "Judge," she said--and paused, frightened at the sound of her
voice, which seemed to echo in a ghostly manner through the big room.

"Well, Miss Peace!" said the judge, kindly. "Well, Anne, what is it?
How can I serve you? Speak up, like a good girl. Make believe we are
back in the little red schoolhouse again, and you are prompting me in
my arithmetic lesson."

Anne Peace laughed and coloured. "You're real kind, judge," she said.
"I wanted--'twas only a little matter"--she stopped to clear her
throat, feeling the painful red creep up her cheeks, and over her
brow, and into her very eyes, it seemed; then she thought of David,
and straightway she found courage, and lifted her eyes and spoke out
bravely. "David Means, you know, judge; he is failing right along, and
it doos seem as if he couldn't last the winter. But Doctor Brown
thinks that if he should go to Florida, it might be so 't he could be
spared. So--David hasn't means himself, of course, what with his poor
health and his large family, and some thought that if we could raise a
subscription right here, among the folks that has always known David,
it might be so 't he could go. What do you think, judge?"

The judge nodded his head, thoughtfully.

"I don't see why it couldn't be done, Miss Peace," he said, kindly.
"David is a good fellow, and has friends wherever he is known; I
should think it might very well be done, if the right person takes it
up."

"I--I've had no great experience," faltered Anne Peace, looking down,
"but I'm kin to David, you know, and as he has no one nearer living, I
took it upon myself to carry round a paper and see what I could raise.
I came to you first, judge, as you've always been a good friend to
David. I've got twenty-five dollars already--"

"I thought you said you came to me first," said the judge, holding out
his hand for the paper. "What's this? A friend, twenty-five dollars?"

"Yes," said Anne Peace, breathlessly. "They--they didn't wish their
name mentioned--"

"Oh, they didn't, didn't they?" muttered the judge, looking at her
over his spectacles. Such a helpless look met his--the look of
hopeless innocence trying to deceive and knowing that it was not
succeeding--that a sudden dimness came into his own eyes, and he was
fain to take off his spectacles and wipe them, just as if he had been
looking through them. And through the mist he seemed to see--not Miss
Anne Peace, in her best bonnet and her cashmere shawl, but another
Anne Peace, a little, brown-eyed, slender maiden, sitting on a brown
bench, looking on with rapture while David Means ate her luncheon.

It was the judge's turn to clear his throat.

"Well, Anne," he said, keeping his eyes on the paper, "this--this
unknown friend has set a good example, and I don't see that I can do
less than follow it. You may put my name down for twenty-five, too."

"Oh, judge," cried Miss Peace, with shining eyes. "You are too good. I
didn't expect, I'm sure--well, you _are_ kind!"

"Not at all! not at all!" said the judge, gruffly (and indeed,
twenty-five dollars was not so much to him as it was to "them," who
had made the first contribution).

"You know I owe David Means something, for licking him when he--"

"Oh, don't, Dan'el--judge, I should say," cried Anne Peace, in
confusion. "Don't you be raking up old times. I'm sure I thank you a
thousand times, and so will Delia, when she--"

"No, she won't," said the judge. "Tell the truth, Anne Peace! Delia
will say I might have given fifty and never missed it. There! I won't
distress you, my dear. Good day, and all good luck to you!" and so
ended Miss Peace's first call.

With such a beginning, there was no doubt of the success of the
subscription. Generally, in Cyrus, people waited to see what Judge
Ransom and Lawyer Peters gave to any charity, before making their own
contribution. "Jedge Ransom has put down five dollars, has he? Well
he's wuth so much, and I'm wuth so much. Guess fifty cents will be
about the right figger for me:" this is the course of reasoning in
Cyrus. But with an unknown friend starting off with twenty-five
dollars and Judge Ransom following suit, it became apparent to every
one that David Means must go to Florida, whatever happened. The dollar
and five-dollar subscriptions poured in rapidly, till, one happy day,
Anne Peace stood in her little room and counted the full amount out on
the table, and then sat down (it was not her habit to kneel, and she
would have thought it too familiar, if not actually popish) and
thanked God as she had never found it necessary to thank Him for any
of the good things of her own life.

So David Means went to Florida, and his wife and two children went
with him. This had been no part of the original plan, but at the bare
idea of his going without her, Mrs. Means had raised a shrill cry of
protest. "What? David go down there, and she and the children stay
perishing at home? she guessed not. If Florida was good for David, it
was good for her, too, and she laid up ever sence spring, as she might
say, and with no more outing than a woodchuck in January. Besides, who
was to take care of David, she'd like to know? Mis' Porter's folks,
who had a place there? She'd like to know if she was to be beholden to
Jane Porter's folks for taking care of her lawful husband, and like
enough laying him out, for she wasn't one to blind herself, nor yet to
set herself against the will of Providence." Doctor Brown stormed and
fumed, but Anne Peace begged him to be quiet, and "presumed likely"
she could raise enough to cover the expenses for Delia and the two
older children. 'Twas right and proper, of course, that his wife
should go with him, and David wouldn't have any pleasure in the trip
if he hadn't little Janey and Willy along. He did set so by those
children, it was a privilege to see them together; he was always one
to make of children, David was.

She did raise the extra money, this sweet saint, but she ate no meat
for a month, finding it better for her health. Joey and Georgie Means,
however, never wanted for their bit of steak at noon, and grew fat and
rosy under Miss Peace's kindly roof.

It was a pathetic sight when the sick man took leave of the little
group of friends and neighbours that gathered on the platform at the
station to bid him farewell. He had lost courage, poor David; perhaps
he had not very much to start with, and things had gone hard with him
for a long time. He knew he should never see these faces again, this
homely, friendly place. He gazed about with wistful eyes, noting every
spot in the bare little station. He had known it all by heart, ever
since he was a child, for his father had been station-master. He could
have built the whole thing over, with his eyes shut, he thought, and
now he should never see it again. Yet he was glad to go, in a way,
glad to think, at least, that he should die warm, as his wife
expressed it, and that his tired eyes were going to look on green and
blossoming things, instead of the cold, white beauty which meant
winter to him.

He had scarcely ever left Cyrus for more than a day or two; he had a
vague idea that it was not creditable to go to the other world, and be
able to give so little account of this one. Now, at least, he should
be able to look his seafaring grandfather and his roving uncle in the
face, if so be he should happen to meet them "over yender."

He stood on the platform with his youngest child clasped close in his
arms. This was the hardest part of all, to leave the children. His
wife and the two older children had already taken their places in the
car, and the good-natured conductor stood with his watch in his hand,
willing to give David every second he conscientiously could. He came
from East Cyrus himself, and was a family man.

Anne Peace stood close by, holding fast the hand of little Joey.
Strange sounds were in her ears, which she did not recognize as the
beating of her own heart; she kept looking over her shoulder, to see
what was coming. Her eyes never left David's face, but they were
hopeful, even cheerful eyes. She thought he would come back much
better, perhaps quite well. Doctor had said there was a chance, and
she did hear great things of Florida.

And now the conductor put up his watch and hardened his heart. "Come,
David, better step inside now. All aboard!"

"Good-by, David!" cried Doctor Brown, waving a friendly hand.

"Good-by, David!" cried Anne Peace, lifting little Joey in her arms,
though he was far too heavy for her.

"Look at father, Joey dear, throw a kiss to father; good-by, good-by,
David!" The train moved out of the station, but David Means, his eyes
fixed on the faces of his children, had forgotten to look at Anne
Peace.

Winter came, and a bitter winter it was. No one in Cyrus could
remember such steady cold, since the great winter of sixty years ago,
when the doctor's grandfather was frozen to death, driving across the
plains to visit a poor woman. The horse went straight to the place,
his head being turned that way and his understanding being good; but
when the farmer came out with his lantern, there sat the old doctor
stiff and dead in his sleigh. Those were the days when people, even
doctors, had not learned how to wrap up, and would drive about all
winter with high, stiff hats and one buffalo robe, not tucked in, as
we have them nowadays, but dropping down at their feet. There was
small chance of our Doctor Brown's freezing to death, in his
well-lined sleigh, with his fur cap pulled down over his nose and his
fur coat buttoned up to his chin and the great robes tucked round him
in a scientific manner. Still, for all that, it was a bitter winter,
and a good many people in Cyrus and elsewhere, who had no fur coats,
went cold by day and lay cold by night, as one good lady pathetically
expressed it. There was little snow, and what there was fell in
wonderful crystals, fairy studies in geometry, which delighted the
eyes of Joey and Georgie Means, as they trotted to school, with Miss
Peace's "nuby" over one little head and her shawl over the other.
Every morning the sun rose in a clear sky, shining like steel; every
evening the same sky glowed with wonderful tints of amethyst and
tender rose, fading gradually, till all was blue once more, and the
stars had it all their own way, throbbing with fierce, cold light.

It was a great winter for Joey and Georgie! They never thought of its
being too cold, for every morning their toes were toasted over the
fire before schooltime, as if they had been muffins, and they were
sent off nice and hot, with a baked potato in each pocket, in case
their hands should be cold through the two pairs of thick mittens
which Aunt Peace had provided.

Then, when they came home, dinner was waiting, such a dinner as they
were not in the habit of having; a little mutton pie, or a smoking
Irish stew, with all the dumplings and gravy they wanted (and they
wanted a great deal), and then pancakes, tossed before their very
eyes, with a spoonful of jam in the middle of each, or blanc-mange
made in the shape of a cow, which tasted quite different from any
other blanc-mange that ever was. Also, they had the freedom of the
corn-popper, and might roast apples every evening till bedtime.
Doctor Brown shook his head occasionally, and told Anne Peace she
would unfit those children for anything else in life than eating good
things; but it was very likely that was jealousy, he added, for
certainly his medicines had never given the children these rosy cheeks
and sparkling eyes.

And when bedtime came, and the two little brown heads were nestled
down in the pillows of the big four-poster in the warm room, Anne
Peace would humbly give thanks that they had been well and happy
through another day, and then creep off to the cold, little room which
she had chosen this winter, "because it was more handy." Often, when
awakened in the middle of the night by the sharp, cracking frost
noises, which tell of intensest cold, she would creep in to feel of
the children, and make sure that they were as warm as two little
dormice, which they always were. I do not know how many times she took
a blanket or comforter off her own bed to add to their store; but I do
know that she would not let Jenny Miller go into her room to see. She
almost rejoiced in the excessive cold, saying to herself with
exultation, "Fifteen below! well, there! and I s'pose it's like summer
in Florida, this minute of time!" And then she fancied David sitting
under an orange-tree, fanning himself, and smiled, and went meekly to
work to break the ice in her water-butt.

Every week letters came from David Means to his children, telling them
of the beauty all around him and wishing they were there. He said
little of his health, but always assured them that Janey and Willy
were real smart, and sent his love to Anne Peace and his remembrance
to all friends at home.

The letters were short, and each time they grew a little shorter, till
by and by it was only a postal card, written in a faint and trembling
hand, but saying that the weather was fine, and father was so glad to
get their little letter, and he would write more next time, but was
very busy just now. When she read one of these, Anne Peace would go
away into her little cold room for a while, and then would come back
smiling and say that now they must write a real _good_ letter to
father, and tell him how well they were doing at school.

At last came a week when there was no postal card; another week, and
there came a letter edged with black and written in Mrs. Means's hand.
The children were at school when it came, and Jenny Miller, coming in
by chance to bring a pot of head-cheese of her mother's making, found
Miss Peace crouching in the corner of the sofa, weeping quietly, with
the letter lying on her lap.

"Why, Miss Peace," cried Jenny, frightened at the sight of tears in
those steadfast eyes, "What is the matter? Do tell me, dear! Why,
you're real cold in here. I do believe the fire has gone out. You've
had bad news, Miss Peace, have you? Do tell me, that's a dear soul,
and don't cry."

"Yes," said Anne Peace. "The fire is out, Jenny, and David is dead."

She held out the letter, saying something about
"privilege--think--rest;" but Jenny Miller was already on her knees,
putting kindlings into the stove at a reckless rate. Then, when the
fire was crackling merrily, she ran to fetch a shawl and wrapped it
round the poor trembling shoulders, and chafed the cold hands in her
own warm, young fingers. But soon Miss Peace grew uneasy; she was not
used to being "done for," having only the habit of doing for others.
She pointed eagerly to the letter. "Read it, Jenny," she said,
anxiously. "I--I am all right, dear. It's come rather sudden, that's
all, and those poor little children--but read the letter." The words
died away, and Jenny, sitting down beside her, took the paper and
read.

It began "Friend Anne," and went on to say that the writer's poor
husband died yesterday, and she was left, as she always knew she
should be, a widow with four children. It did seem to her as if he
might have been let die to home, instead of being carted all the way
down there and then have to send the remains back. She had to promise
him she would send them back, though it did seem a pity with the
beautiful "semetary" they had there, and full of Northern folks as it
would hold and the undertaker a perfect gentleman, if she ever saw
one. But the widow hoped she knew her duty, and she would not wish to
be thought wanting in anything.

Now she supposed they would want to know how David passed away, though
she had no "strenth" to write, not having had her clothes off for days
or, you might say, weeks, nor slep' one consektive hour the last ten
nights. Well, he had seemed to gain a little when they first came, but
it wasn't no real gain, for he lost it all again and more too. The
pounds just fell off from that man, it seemed as if you could see them
go. The last month he fairly pined away, and she thought right to let
the folks at home know that he was called to depart, but he wouldn't
hear to it. "He said, Delia, he said, if you want me to die easy, he
said, don't let on to no one at home but what I'm doing all right." So
she set by and held her peace, though it went against her conscience.
Last Monday he couldn't leave his bed, and she said, "David, she said,
you never will leave it till you're carried," and he said, p'raps
'twas so, but yet he wouldn't allow it, for fear of scaring the
children. So that night he sat up in bed and his arms went out and he
said "Home!" just that word, two or three times over, and dropped
back and was gone. There she was, a widow with four small children,
and what she should do she didn't know.

Away there in a strange land as you might say, if it _was_ all one
country, it did seem as if them as sent them might have thought of
that and let them stay at home among their own folks. Not but what
there was elegant folks there. Everybody hed been as kind as could be;
one lady who was in "morning" herself had lent her a bonnet to wear to
the funeral (for she wasn't one to send the remains off without
anything being said over them); it was a real handsome bonnet, and she
had taken a pattern of it, to have one made for herself. The lady was
from New York way, and real stylish.

Mrs. Means intended to stay on a spell, as the money was not all gone,
and her strength needed setting up, after all she had been through.
Mr. Tombs, the undertaker, said he never saw any one bear afflicktion
so; she told him she was used to it. He was a perfect gentleman, and a
widower himself, so he could feel for her. Miss Peace might be
thankful that she was never called on to bear afflicktion, with no one
but herself to look out for; not but what 'twas lonesome for her, and
Mrs. Means supposed she'd be glad enough to keep Georgie and Joey on
a spell longer for company. Tell them they are poor orphans now, with
no father to earn their bread. The writer wished her husband's remains
to be buried in his father's lot, as she had no money to buy one. Miss
Peace might see if any one felt to put up a moniment for David; he
hadn't an enemy in the world, and he never begredged a dollar when he
had it to give, for anything there was going. If he had thought a
little more about her, and less about everybody's cat and dog, she
might have something now to put bread in her children's mouths, let
alone her own. Not that she had any appetite, a flea wouldn't fatten
on what she ate. Lawyer Peters was his mother's third cousin if she
was living. He spent more on those girls of his than would clothe the
writer and her children for a year.

The remains went by the same boat with this letter, so Miss Peace
would know when to expect them. Mrs. Means looked to her to see that
David had a decent funeral; a handsome one she couldn't expect, folks
in Cyrus were close enough about all that didn't go on their own
backs, though she shouldn't wish it said.

So now there was no more, from Miss Peace's unfortunate friend, "the
Widow Means."

After reading this precious epistle, Jenny Miller found herself,
perhaps for the first time in her life, with nothing to say. She
could only sit and press her friend's hand, and thrill, as a girl
will, at the touch of a sorrow which she only now began dimly to
guess. It was Miss Peace who broke the silence, speaking in her usual
quiet tone.

"Thank you, Jenny, dear! I'm sure it was a privilege, having you come
in just now. David Means was kin to me, you know, and I always set by
him a great deal; and then the poor little children!" she faltered
again for an instant, but steadied her voice and went on: "You'd
better go home now, dear, for the fire is going beautiful, and I don't
need anything. I--I shall have to see to things for the funeral, you
know. And don't forget to thank your mother for the cheese. It looks
real good, and Georgie doos like it the best of anything for
breakfast. I guess I'll get on my bonnet, and go to see Abel Mound,
the sexton."

But here Jenny found her voice, and protested. Miss Peace should not
have anything at all to do with all that. 'Twasn't fitting she should,
as the nearest kin poor Mr. Means had in Cyrus. Her father would see
to it all, Jenny knew he would, and Doctor Brown would help him. She
would go herself and speak to the doctor this minute. Miss Peace would
have to be here to tell the children when they came home from school,
poor little things! and that was all she should do about it.

Anne Peace hesitated; and then Jenny had an inspiration, or, as she
put it in telling Tudie Peaslee afterwards, "a voice spoke to her."

"Miss Peace," she said timidly, "I--I don't suppose you would feel to
pick those flowers you were going to send over to Tupham for the
Sunday-school festival? I know they kind o' lot on the flowers you
send, 'cause they're always so fresh, and you do them up so pretty.
But if you don't feel to do it, I can send them word, or ask some one
else"--

"The idea!" cried Anne Peace, brightening up. "I forgot the flowers,
Jenny, I did so! I should be pleased to pick them, and I'll do it this
minute. There--there isn't anything I should like so well. And I do
thank you, dear, and if you really think your father wouldn't mind
seeing--I am sure it is a privilege to have such neighbours, I always
say. There couldn't anybody be more blessed in neighbours than I have
always been."

In ten minutes Miss Peace was at work in her garden, cutting,
trimming, tying up posies, and finding balm for her inward wound in
the touch of the rose-leaves, and in the smell of mignonette, David's
favourite flower. No one in Cyrus had such mignonette as Miss Peace,
and people thought she had some special receipt for making it grow and
blossom luxuriantly; but she always said no, it was only because she
set by it. Folks could most always grow the things they set most
store by, she thought.

So the Sunday-school festival at Tupham Corner was a perfect blaze of
flowers, and the minister in his speech made allusion to generous
friends in other parishes, who sent of their wealth to swell our
rejoicings, and of their garden produce to gladden our eyes; but while
the eyes of Tupham were being gladdened, Anne Peace was brushing
Joey's and Georgie's hair, and tying black ribbons under their little
chins, smiling at them through her tears, and bidding them be brave
for dear father's sake, who was gone to the best home now, and would
never be sick any more, or tired, or--or sad.

It was a quiet funeral: almost a cheerful one, the neighbours said, as
they saw the little room filled with bright flowers (they all seemed
to smell of mignonette, there was so much of it hidden among the
roses), and the serene face of the chief mourner, who stood at the
head of the coffin, with a child in either hand. It was an unusual
thing, people felt. Generally, at Cyrus funerals, the mourners stayed
up-stairs, leaving the neighbours to gather round the coffin in the
flower-scented room below; but it did not seem strange in Anne Peace,
somehow, and, after the first glance, no one could fancy any one else
standing there. The old minister, who had christened both David and
Anne on the same day, said a few gentle, cheering words, and the choir
sang "Lead, kindly Light;" then the procession went its quiet way to
the churchyard, and all was over.

Jenny Miller and the doctor followed Miss Peace home from the
churchyard, but made no attempt to speak to her. She seemed
unconscious of any one save the children, to whom she was talking in
low, cheerful tones. The doctor caught the words "rest," "home,"
"happiness;" and as she passed into the house he heard her say
distinctly: "Blessed privilege! My children now, my own! my own!"

"So they are!" said Doctor Brown, taking off his glasses to clear
them. "So they are, and so they will remain. I don't imagine Delia
will ever come back, do you, Jenny?"

"No," said Jenny, "I don't. She'll marry the undertaker before the
year is out."

And she did.

THE END.




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Original spelling and punctuation have been preserved except for the
joining of common contractions.

Page 8: Added closing quotes: (you seemed all right when I went out.")

Page 9: Phoebe had oe ligature in original book. (you've heard me tell
how my Aunt Phoebe 'Lizabeth)

Page 56: Removed extra quotation mark before I: ("You are too good. I
didn't expect, I'm sure--well, you are kind!")








End of Project Gutenberg's "Some Say", by Laura Elizabeth Howe Richards

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "SOME SAY" ***

***** This file should be named 27251.txt or 27251.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/2/5/27251/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Diane Monico, and The Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
