Project Gutenberg's The Mentor: The War of 1812, by Albert Bushnell Hart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mentor: The War of 1812
       Volume 4, Number 3, Serial Number 103; 15 March, 1916.

Author: Albert Bushnell Hart

Release Date: December 22, 2008 [EBook #27586]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: THE WAR OF 1812 ***




Produced by Gerard Arthus, Greg Bergquist and The Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note

The punctuation and spelling from the original text have been faithfully
preserved. Only obvious typographical errors have been corrected.




LEARN ONE THING EVERY DAY

  MARCH 15 1916

  SERIAL NO. 103

THE MENTOR

[Illustration: Perry's Pennant on the "Lawrence"]

THE WAR OF 1812

By Professor ALBERT BUSHNELL HART

  DEPARTMENT OF
  HISTORY

  VOLUME 4
  NUMBER 3

FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY




Heroes of the Fleet


PERRY

  "September the tenth, full well I ween
  In eighteen hundred and thirteen,
  The weather mild, the sky serene,
    Commanded by bold Perry,
  Our saucy fleet at anchor lay
  In safety, moor'd at Put-in Bay;
  'Twixt sunrise and the break of day,
    The British fleet
    We chanced to meet;
  Our admiral thought he would them greet
    With a welcome on Lake Erie."

  --_Old Song_


LAWRENCE

  "Let shouts of victory for laurels won
  Give place to grief for Lawrence, Valor's son.
  The warrior who was e'er his country's pride
  Has for that country bravely, nobly died."

  --_Lines published in June, 1813._




THE WAR OF 1812

By ALBERT BUSHNELL HART

_Professor of Government, Harvard University_

  _MENTOR GRAVURES_

  CAPTAIN JAMES
  LAWRENCE

  COMMODORE
  STEPHEN DECATUR

  COMMODORE
  WILLIAM
  BAINBRIDGE

  _MENTOR GRAVURES_

  COMMODORE
  OLIVER HAZARD
  PERRY

  THE BATTLE OF
  LAKE ERIE

  GENERAL ANDREW
  JACKSON

[Illustration: Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry]




THE MENTOR . DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY MARCH 15, 1916


Our defeat of Great Britain in the Revolutionary War was conclusive;
though "we" in that case included France, without whose aid the patriots
must have been defeated. It is not so easy to discover a fund of
military glory in the War of 1812.

That was a great war year. Within a few days of the declaration of war
by the United States against Great Britain, Napoleon's Grand Army of
over 400,000 men crossed the Niemen into Russia. Six months later 4,000
of that host recrossed, pursued by the Russians; and probably not more
than 100,000 of the whole number ever saw their homes again. In 1813,
while the Americans were fighting on the ocean and on Lake Erie,
Napoleon was driven out of Germany. A few weeks before the Battle of
Lundy's Lane, Napoleon was compelled to abdicate. Soon after the news of
the Peace of Ghent with Great Britain was received in the United States,
in 1815, Napoleon broke loose from Elba; and a few months later he was
again a prisoner and sent to St. Helena.

[Entered at the Postoffice at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.
Copyright, 1916, by The Mentor Association, Inc.]

To most of Europe the American War of 1812 seemed an unwarrantable flank
attack in the great running fight of the nations. Russia and
Prussia resented it that American statesmen should throw the weight of
their country on the side of the great military despot of his time. They
wanted none of the military and naval strength of Great Britain to be
diverted across the ocean. The suggestion was even made in Congress that
the United States ought to declare war at the same moment on both France
and England. That idea has been carried out by Captain Marryat in his
once popular novel "Midshipman Easy," where he describes a triangular
duel between three sailors; but nations could hardly engage in such a
game.

[Illustration: ANDREW JACKSON

From the painting by John Vanderlyn]


THE ELEPHANT AND THE WHALE

Nevertheless Congress found some difficulty in selecting the enemy to
fight; for the conditions were remarkably like those of the year 1915.
People used to talk then about the "war between the elephant and the
whale": the elephant being the land army of Napoleon, which apparently
nothing could withstand, and the whale being the navy of Great Britain,
which had command of the sea. That struggle reached a crisis in 1806,
when the two belligerents, not being able to reach and hammer each
other, did their best to hammer the neutral carrying trade, which was
carried on largely in American ships.

[Illustration: THE SURRENDER OF GENERAL HULL

General Hull surrendered to General Brock, Governor of Upper Canada, at
Detroit on August 16, 1812]


BY ORDERS IN COUNCIL

Great Britain declared the whole French coast blockaded from Brest to
the Elbe, just as in 1915 the same power declared the whole North Sea
coast to be blockaded. By Decrees France declared the whole British
Islands to be in a state of blockade, exactly as Germany recently
declared those coasts to be a "naval zone." The consequence was that the
French captured 600 American merchantmen in the next nine years, and the
British took 900.

In this long controversy the French were the wiliest, the British were
the most arrogant. The United States would have been justified in war
against either of these powers, on the basis of their disregard of our
right to keep up neutral trade with both belligerents.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF LUNDY'S LANE

In this battle, which took place on July 25, 1814, and lasted from
sunset to midnight, the Americans under General Jacob Brown were left in
possession of the field, but were unable to carry away the heavy
artillery which they had captured]

At that time the United States found it hard to provide a remedy. The
most obvious method was to refuse to trade with either of the nations.
Accordingly an Embargo was laid by Congress in 1807, by which no cargoes
of any kind were allowed to leave American ports, bound to a foreign
destination. The embargo very nearly brought England to terms; but the
United States had not patience to wait for its results. The shipping
trade was paralyzed, and the farmers and planters could not export their
surplus. In view of these losses, Congress after fourteen months'
experience repealed the embargo.


CAUSES OF THE WAR

Since neither France nor Great Britain would accept the opportunity to
make a friend of the United States, the captures went on; and England
added the impressment of American seamen from American merchant vessels.
The idea that a subject of the British Empire could change his
allegiance and become the citizen of another nation seemed to England a
dangerous novelty. Still, if the great sea-power had been willing to pay
a little more wages to her men-of-warsmen, she could have filled her
ships by enlistment. If she had been content to "press" men from her own
merchant ships, she would not have aroused the antipathy of the
Americans. To save a few hundred thousand pounds and to assert a right
to claim Englishmen who had become American citizens, Great Britain
gave unpardonable offense to the little United States.

When the war broke out, more than 5,000 Americans had been at one time
or another impressed; and 2,000 or 3,000 were actually serving on board
British men-of-war till the hostilities began. Then, having been
originally seized without reason, they were made prisoners of war.

[Illustration: COLONEL MILLER AT THE BATTLE OF CHIPPEWA

At the Battle of Chippewa on July 5, 1814. Colonel Miller with three
hundred men captured a height, the key to the British position. It was a
desperate and courageous exploit]

Considering the eventual result of the war, it is striking that the
United States government placed little dependence on its navy, but
expected to carry on a brilliant land campaign. Canada was to be
conquered, and then, as Henry Clay put it, they could "negotiate a peace
at Quebec or Halifax."

This was not a new thought. In the Revolutionary War Canada was invaded
by Montgomery and Arnold and all but annexed to the new United States.
How could Canada resist? Its population in 1812 was about 50,000; that
of the United States was nearly 8,000,000. During the nine years from
1803 to 1812 the United States had tried every means short of war; and
the vigorous young "war hawks," headed by Henry Clay of Kentucky and
John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, were tired of accepting what they
felt to be a standing offence to their nation.

[Illustration: JAMES MADISON

President of the United States, 1809-1817

From the portrait by Gilbert Stuart]


THE LAND WAR

In accordance with the plan of invasion, several "armies" of 2,000 or
3,000 men were pushed to the Canadian frontier; but in the very first
fight the tables were turned, and Detroit was captured by the British.
It took more than a year and 20,000 men to push back the British into
Canada. Five different American commanders were ignominiously headed or
defeated in attempting to invade Canada across the Niagara River or the
St. Lawrence River. Except for Harrison's little victory at the Battle
of the Thames, and for the drawn Battle of Lundy's Lane, the Canadian
campaigns were all humiliating defeats.

[Illustration: THE DEATH OF GENERAL ROSS AT BALTIMORE

On September 12, 1814, General Ross in command of the British force
advancing on Baltimore, was shot as he rode at the head of his troops by
two American troopers concealed in a hollow. Baltimore was defended
bravely, and the British were repulsed]

This disagreeable chapter in our military history was due to the fact
that the government had made no sufficient preparation of men or
materials, and was obliged to rely upon untrained volunteer militia.
These were men of personal courage and intelligence; and under such
commanders as Jacob Brown and Andrew Jackson they showed that they had
the instincts of soldiers. Nevertheless they were poorly drilled and
equipped. In one campaign they stopped short when they reached the
Canadian line, because they said they were not constitutionally bound to
fight, except for the defense of their own country.

[Illustration: JAMES MONROE

Secretary of State, 1811-1817. He also acted as Secretary of War in
1814-1815. President, 1817-1825. From the portrait by John Vanderlyn]

The result was that, starting with a regular army of only 7,000, which
finally included about 50,000 men, 400,000 additional recruits were
raised during the war. The total number of Canadians and British troops
engaged in the war was not over 20,000. The Americans lost 30,000 men;
and when the war was over the United States was not in possession of one
foot of Canadian territory, while the British were occupying about half
of the present state of Maine.

This heartbreaking result ought not to be charged to the soldiers so
much as to the administration. John Armstrong, Secretary of War, allowed
the British to land 5,000 men on the Chesapeake and to march fifty miles
overland to Washington. Within a distance of two days' land travel from
that city lived nearly 100,000 able-bodied men, most of them accustomed
to handle a gun. Yet the British force was allowed to capture
Washington, to burn the public buildings, and to retire to its fleet
almost without losing a man. Till James Monroe became Secretary of War
the whole administration was slack and incompetent.

[Illustration: ANDREW JACKSON

Victorious leader at the Battle of New Orleans. President, 1829-1837.
From a drawing from life by J.B. Longacre]


WAR AT SEA

A proof that the defeats of the War of 1812 were not due to lack of
fiber among the American people as a whole, was the brilliant success of
the operations on the high seas. Jefferson and Madison both thought the
navy would do more harm than good. The British had twice seized the
little navy of the Danes, and it seemed as though our ships would only
be a whet to the appetite of the British naval giant. Against our 18
ships of war, of which only six were sizable frigates, the British could
oppose 170 large ships and 700 others. They had the prestige of a
hundred years of naval supremacy; they had driven the French and Spanish
ships of war from the sea.

Therefore it was a joy to the nation when, seven weeks after the
outbreak of the war, the frigate _Constitution_ captured the _Guerriere_
and later the _Java_; then the _United States_ captured the
_Macedonian_; the _Frolic_ took the _Wasp_; the _Essex_, the first
American ship of war to appear in the Pacific, captured numbers of
British whalers there. In thirteen duels, one ship on each side, the
Americans won eleven victories.

Gradually the fleet was worn down; the _Chesapeake_ was taken by the
_Shannon_; the _President_ and the _Adams_ were captured; and at the end
of the war there was not a public ship on the ocean flying the flag of
the United States. However the navy in two unexpected directions won new
laurels. On Lake Erie Oliver Hazard Perry defeated the British fleet at
the battle of Put-in Bay, and sent his ever memorable despatch, "We have
met the enemy and they are ours: two ships, two brigs, one schooner and
one sloop." On Lake Champlain, Commodore Macdonough beat the British;
while McComb with his militia withstood and repelled the British attack
at Plattsburg.

[Illustration: WILLIAM HENRY HARRISON

Harrison was one of the few able leaders that the United States had
during the War of 1812. He was President for only one month in 1841. He
died in office.

From the portrait of by J.B. Lambdin]

When the cruisers were driven off the sea, the privateers continued the
naval war. At that time a merchantman could be turned into a capable
fighting ship by adding strengthening timbers and providing the
necessary guns. Such a ship, when commissioned as a privateer by the
United States government, could capture the enemy's merchantmen and on
occasion fight small cruisers. For instance, the brig _Yankee_, 160 tons
burden, eighteen guns, 120 men, captured twenty-nine prizes, one of
which sold for more than $500,000. The money was divided equally between
the owners and the men on board. The privateers together captured about
2,000 British vessels; though over 1,500 American vessels were captured
by the English. The whole British nation felt the shock of this
unexpected naval resistance; and it was the pressure of the shippers and
shipowners of England which caused that power to make favorable terms of
peace.

[Illustration: Courtesy, Harper's Magazine Copyright, Harper & Brothers

PERRY RECEIVING THE SURRENDER OF THE BRITISH COMMANDERS ABOARD THE
"LAWRENCE"

From the painting by W.J. Aylward]

For a hundred years experts have been trying to find out just why the
United States was so successful in the naval war. The British newspapers
of the day tried to prove that it was because they called a vessel a
frigate when it was really bigger and stronger than the British frigate.
That did not affect the captain of the _Guerriere_ when he accepted
battle with the _Constitution_: he evidently thought that he had size
and power enough to capture his adversary. The Americans appear to have
had heavier guns, better training in handling the guns, better
marksmanship, to have been quicker and smarter.

It was the privateers that were in the long run most effective. The
London Times complained toward the end of 1814 that "there are
privateers off this harbor which plunder every vessel coming in or going
out, notwithstanding we have three line of battle, six frigates, and
four sloops here." The Morning Chronicle complained that a great part of
the coast of Ireland had "been for above a month under the unresisted
dominion of a few petty 'fly-by-nights' from the blockaded ports of the
United States--a grievance equally intolerable and disgraceful." The
Annual Register thought it a mortifying reflection that, notwithstanding
a navy of a thousand ships, "it was not safe for a vessel to sail
without convoy from one part of the English or Irish Channel to
another."

[Illustration: From "Naval Actions of The War of 1812," by James Barnes.

Copyright 1896, by Harper & Brothers

THE NIAGARA BREAKS THE ENGLISH LINE

When Perry's flagship, the "Lawrence," was riddled by the enemy, he
transferred himself in a small boat to the "Niagara." This ship broke
the British line, and then the battle was won. From a painting by
Carlton T. Chapman]

In March, 1915, a British squadron captured the German frigate _Dresden_
in the neutral Chilean waters of the Island of Juan Fernandez. A similar
episode occurred in 1814, when the United States ship _Essex_ was
cornered and destroyed by two British vessels in the harbor of
Valparaiso. The American privateer _General Armstrong_ was also cut out
and destroyed by the British under the guns of the Portuguese fort at
Fayal in the Azores.


EFFECT ON THE AMERICANS

On the face of it there was not much cause for congratulation in a war
in which the United States trebled its national debt and lost 30,000 men
and 1,500 merchant ships, without gaining any territory and without
securing any promise at the end of the war that the disturbance of
neutral trade and the impressment of American seamen would not begin
again.

[Illustration: COMMODORE DAVID PORTER

The Commander of the "Essex"

From the painting by Chappel]

Another group of troubles arose from the fact that the New England
States were against the war from the beginning, refused to allow their
militia to join in the forces intended to invade Canada, and in 1814
sent delegates to a convention at Hartford. That convention sat in
secret, and nobody knows exactly what was said; but the resolutions
passed by it and sent out to the country demanded changes in the
Constitution which would have made it hard to carry on a federal
government. Fortunately before they could be presented to Congress the
news of peace was received.

[Illustration: From "Naval Actions of the War of 1812," by James Barnes.

Copyright, 1886, by Harper & Brothers

THE "ESSEX" BEING CUT TO PIECES

The "Essex" was under the command of David Porter, and drove British
shipping from the Pacific Ocean. The vessel was finally destroyed by the
"Phoebe" and the "Cherub." From a painting by Carlton T. Chapman]

These uncomfortable facts may be cheerfully admitted in view of a strong
list of reasons for national congratulation. One was the notable victory
of Andrew Jackson at New Orleans, January 8, 1815, after peace had been
made, though neither of the armies knew it. Critics have pointed out
that Jackson was slow in divining where the British would strike; that
he threw up no sufficient intrenchments; that if the British had placed
cannon on the west side of the river, they could have fired into his
rear and compelled him to retreat. All that does not diminish the glory
of Jackson's victory. He showed the energy and determination which
brought together a force of 3,500 men, mostly raw militia. This little
command lying behind the lines at Chalmette received the attack of 6,000
men. Over 2,000 of the British attacking column were sacrificed, and
Jackson remained master of the field, with a loss of seventy-one.

This brilliant success proved that Jackson was a good soldier, which in
due time helped to make him President of the United States. It proved
also that American militia behind breastworks could repel the attacks of
twice their number of experienced soldiers who had recently helped to
overthrow Napoleon.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN JAMES LAWRENCE

From the painting by Gilbert Stuart]

The greatest result of the War of 1812 was to make the Americans realize
at once their weakness and their strength. Just at the end of the war
Robert Fulton put on the waters of the Hudson a steamship of war,
forerunner of the majestic steam fleets of today. Our forefathers
suffered for want of roads by which they could convey their armies and
their supplies to the frontiers. Therefore they set out to remedy that
condition, and four years after the peace they had the Cumberland Road
completed from the upper Potomac to the Ohio River. Six years later the
Erie Canal was opened to Lake Erie. The people had suffered for want of
a national bank during the war: in 1816 Congress created one. Their
trade had been disturbed for over twenty years: in 1816 they passed a
tariff, designed to establish American manufactures. War, and especially
such a disappointing war as that of 1812, has many bad effects upon a
nation; but it does strengthen the feeling of a common danger and a
common duty.

[Illustration: WILLIAM BAINBRIDGE

Commodore in the United States Navy.

From the portrait by J.W. Jarvis]

The War of 1812 also for the first time gave the United States an
unquestioned place in the sisterhood of modern nations. Though the
population in 1815 was only about eight and a half millions, the success
of the navy inspired a wholesome respect for Yankee ships and Yankee
sailors. In place of the captured ships a new merchant marine was
quickly provided, which developed into the famous clipper ships, the
triumph of American skill and the glory of the seas. From this time
dates the friendship of several European nations, particularly of
Russia, whose Czar Alexander was a friend and correspondent of Thomas
Jefferson.

[Illustration: From "Naval Actions of the War of 1812," by James Barnes.

Copyright, 1896, by Harper & Brothers

THE "CHESAPEAKE" LEAVING THE HARBOR

Captain Lawrence, commanding the "Chesapeake," was mortally wounded, and
his vessel was captured by the "Shannon" off Boston Roads. It was in
this engagement that he uttered his famous words, "Don't give up the
ship." From a painting by Carlton T. Chapman]

Our former enemy, Great Britain, was converted into a respectful friend
who saw the advantages of friendship. The proof is that eight years
later George Canning asked the United States to join in a declaration
with Great Britain in favor of the Latin-American States; and the idea
developed into our independent Monroe Doctrine. The American people were
entitled to forget their weakness and defeats; for the net result of the
War of 1812 was to inspire the greatest naval and colonial power in the
world with a respect for American character and an acceptance of the
United States as a great National power.

[Illustration: From "Naval Actions of the War of 1812," by James Barnes.
Copyright, 1896, by Harper & Brothers

THE "CONSTITUTION" TAKING THE "CYANE"

The "Cyane" was one of the crack sloops of war in the English service.
The "Constitution" after a running fight captured both this ship and the
"Levant." From a painting by Carlton T. Chapman]

       *       *       *       *       *

SUPPLEMENTARY READING


HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

_By Henry Adams_

     Vols. VI-IX contain the best account of the War of 1812.

THE LIFE OF ANDREW JACKSON

_By John Spencer Bassett_

     Vol. 1, chapters vi-xiii, treat of Jackson's part in the war.

THE NAVAL WAR OF 1812

_By Theodore Roosevelt_

     Best account of the naval strategy of the war.

A FULL AND CORRECT ACCOUNT OF THE MILITARY OCCURRENCES OF THE LATE WAR
BETWEEN GREAT BRITAIN AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

_By William James_

     (2 vols.) The standard English account.

THE CANADIAN WAR OF 1812

_By Charles Prestwood Lucas_

     Recent English point of view.

SEA POWER IN ITS RELATIONS TO THE WAR OF 1812

_By Alfred Thayer Mahan_

     (2 vols.) A study of the whole struggle for neutral rights, and the
     war.

RISE OF AMERICAN NATIONALITY, 1811-1819

_By Kendric Charles Babcock_

     (American Nation, Vol. XIII.)

     Most convenient brief account of the war. Recent and impartial.

NAVAL ACTIONS OF THE WAR OF 1812

_By James Barnes_

     Popular and well illustrated.

Information concerning the above books and articles may
be had on application to the Editor of The Mentor.




THE OPEN LETTER

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF NEW ORLEANS]


If the telegraph had been in existence a century ago, the battle of New
Orleans would not have taken place. It was unique in history as a battle
fought after a war was over. And it was the only real victory won by the
land forces of America in the War of 1812. It was one of the most
conclusive battles in history, and a brilliant demonstration of the
military ability of Andrew Jackson. General Jackson believed in
preparedness. During the second year of the War of 1812 he learned that
the British planned to invade Louisiana, so he concentrated troops four
miles below New Orleans in a line of entrenchments a mile in length,
extending from the Mississippi River far into the swamp, making both
ends impassable. Jackson had 3,500 expert marksmen at his command. They
were a strange mixture of men, including long-limbed, hard-faced
backwoodsmen, Portuguese and Norwegian seamen, dark-skinned Spaniards
and swarthy Frenchmen, besides about 1,000 militiamen selected from the
Creoles of Louisiana. They were a rough and violent lot. Theodore
Roosevelt characterizes them as: "Soldiers who, under an ordinary
commander, would have been fully as dangerous to themselves and their
leaders as to their foes. But," he adds, "Andrew Jackson was of all men
the one best fitted to manage such troops. Even their fierce natures
quailed before the ungovernable fury of a spirit greater than their own;
and their sullen, stubborn wills were bent before his unyielding temper
and iron hand."

       *       *       *       *       *

On the morning of the 8th of January, 1815, General Pakenham advanced
upon New Orleans with a force of about 6,000 trained and experienced
fighting men. Jackson knew that the British would have to cross his
entrenchments before entering the city. So he placed his force of fierce
and deadly fighters within the trenches and opened upon the enemy with
volley after volley. The mortality on the British side was frightful.
The lines wavered and General Pakenham fell in front of his troops.
Utterly demoralized by the withering blast of the American muskets,
these hardy British veterans hurried to their camp and escaped to ships.
The British lost about 2,000 men killed, wounded and prisoners, while in
the American lines there were only about seventy casualties.

So weak and ineffective had been the showing of the American forces in
several of the battles of this war that they had incurred the contempt
of the enemy. In one final, brilliant blow General Jackson restored the
prestige of American arms.

[Illustration: [Signature of] W.D. Moffat]

  EDITOR




THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

ESTABLISHED FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A POPULAR INTEREST IN ART,
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, HISTORY, NATURE, AND TRAVEL


  THE ADVISORY BOARD

  JOHN G. HIBBEN, _President of Princeton University_

  HAMILTON W. MABIE, _Author and Editor_

  JOHN C. VAN DYKE, _Professor of the History of Art, Rutgers College_

  ALBERT BUSHNELL HART, _Professor of Government, Harvard University_

  WILLIAM T. HORNADAY, _Director New York Zoological Park_

  DWIGHT L. ELMENDORF, _Lecturer and Traveler_

The purpose of The Mentor Association is to give its members, in an
interesting and attractive way, the information in various fields of
knowledge which everybody wants to have. The information is imparted by
interesting reading matter, prepared under the direction of leading
authorities, and by beautiful pictures, produced by the most highly
perfected modern processes.

     THE MENTOR IS PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH

     SUBSCRIPTION, THREE DOLLARS A YEAR. FOREIGN POSTAGE 75 CENTS EXTRA.
     CANADIAN POSTAGE 50 CENTS EXTRA. SINGLE COPIES FIFTEEN CENTS.
     PRESIDENT, THOMAS H. BECK; VICE-PRESIDENT, WALTER P. TEN EYCK;
     SECRETARY, W.D. MOFFAT; TREASURER, ROBERT M. DONALDSON; ASST.
     TREASURER AND ASST. SECRETARY, J.S. CAMPBELL




COMPLETE YOUR MENTOR LIBRARY

Subscriptions always begin with the current issue. The following numbers
of The Mentor Course, already issued, will be sent postpaid at the rate
of fifteen cents each.


  Serial
  No.

  1. Beautiful Children in Art
  2. Makers of American Poetry
  3. Washington, the Capital
  4. Beautiful Women in Art
  5. Romantic Ireland
  6. Masters of Music
  7. Natural Wonders of America
  8. Pictures We Love to Live With
  9. The Conquest of the Peaks
  10. Scotland, the Land of Song and Scenery
  11. Cherubs in Art
  12. Statues With a Story
  13. Story of America in Pictures: The Discoverers
  14. London
  15. The Story of Panama
  16. American Birds of Beauty
  17. Dutch Masterpieces
  18. Paris, the Incomparable
  19. Flowers of Decoration
  20. Makers of American Humor
  21. American Sea Painters
  22. Story of America in Pictures: The Explorers
  23. Sporting Vacations
  24. Switzerland: The Land of Scenic Splendors
  25. American Novelists
  26. American Landscape Painters
  27. Venice, the Island City
  28. The Wife in Art
  29. Great American Inventors
  30. Furniture and Its Makers
  31. Spain and Gibraltar
  32. Historic Spots of America
  33. Beautiful Buildings of the World
  34. Game Birds of America
  35. Story of America in Pictures: The Contest for North America
  36. Famous American Sculptors
  37. The Conquest of the Poles
  38. Napoleon
  39. The Mediterranean
  40. Angels in Art
  41. Famous Composers
  42. Egypt, the Land of Mystery
  43. Story of America in Pictures: The Revolution
  44. Famous English Poets
  45. Makers of American Art
  46. The Ruins of Rome
  47. Makers of Modern Opera
  48. Duerer and Holbein
  49. Vienna, the Queen City
  50. Ancient Athens
  51. The Barbizon Painters
  52. Abraham Lincoln


Volume 2

  53. George Washington
  54. Mexico
  55. Famous American Women Painters
  56. The Conquest of the Air
  57. Court Painters of France
  58. Holland
  59. Our Feathered Friends
  60. Glacier National Park
  61. Michelangelo
  62. American Colonial Furniture
  63. American Wild Flowers
  64. Gothic Architecture
  65. The Story of the Rhine
  66. Shakespeare
  67. American Mural Painters
  68. Celebrated Animal Characters
  69. Japan
  70. The Story of the French Revolution
  71. Rugs and Rug Making
  72. Alaska
  73. Charles Dickens
  74. Grecian Masterpieces
  75. Fathers of the Constitution
  76. Masters of the Piano


Volume 3

  77. American Historic Homes
  78. Beauty Spots of India
  79. Etchers and Etching
  80. Oliver Cromwell
  81. China
  82. Favorite Trees
  83. Yellowstone National Park
  84. Famous Women Writers of England
  85. Painters of Western Life
  86. China and Pottery of Our Forefathers
  87. The Story of The American Railroad
  88. Butterflies
  89. The Philippines
  90. Great Galleries of The World: The Louvre
  91. William M. Thackeray
  92. Grand Canyon of Arizona
  93. Architecture in American Country Homes
  94. The Story of The Danube
  95. Animals in Art
  96. The Holy Land
  97. John Milton
  98. Joan Of Arc
  99. Furniture of the Revolutionary Period
  100. The Ring of the Nibelung


Volume 4

  101. The Golden Age of Greece
  102. Chinese Rugs


NUMBERS TO FOLLOW

April 1. GREAT ART GALLERIES OF THE WORLD--THE NATIONAL GALLERY, LONDON.
_By Professor John C. Van Dyke._

April 15. MASTERS OF THE VIOLIN--Joachim, Paganini, Ole Bull, Maud
Powell, Ysaye, Kreisler, and others. _By Henry T. Finck, Author and
Music Critic._


  THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.

  52 EAST 19th STREET, NEW YORK, N.Y.




THE MENTOR

AS A REFERENCE LIBRARY


Every Number of The Mentor is valuable. The back numbers are as useful
and entertaining at any time as on the date of publication. Therefore,
many members wish to own a complete file of back numbers.

For those who own a complete set and desire to use The Mentor as a
reference library, we have provided a simple and convenient method of
filing and cataloguing The Mentor. In a booklet which we have especially
provided for our members, the various Mentors are grouped under headings
which link similar numbers together in sets. Attached to the name of
each Mentor is a list of the gravure pictures accompanying it, together
with a short synopsis of the contents. This gives immediate information
as to what each Mentor contains. We will be glad to send this booklet
free of charge.

We also provide for our members file boxes the size of The Mentor. These
are furnished stamped in gold lettering for forty cents apiece. In these
The Mentors may be grouped according to sets.

We also supply a binder which holds twelve or thirteen Mentors and has
proved satisfactory in every way. This binder has been arranged so as to
hold The Mentor complete, and it has tie-pins to which the pictures are
attached, so that they swing freely in their place and the pictures can
be enjoyed as well as the text on the back. The price of these binders
is one dollar each.

When our members desire to refer to a picture or look up a fact, it is
only necessary for them to consult the booklet, finding there in which
Mentor the information may be sought.

The price of all back numbers of The Mentor is fifteen cents each.

Write and let us explain the plan more fully.


THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, Inc.

52 East Nineteenth Street-New York City, N.Y.

[Illustration: IN THE POSSESSION OF THE NEW YORK HISTORICAL SOCIETY

COMMODORE STEPHEN DECATUR

FROM THE PAINTING BY REMBRANDT PEALE]




The War of 1812

STEPHEN DECATUR

Monograph Number Three in The Mentor Reading Course


The father of Stephen Decatur, also named Stephen, was a native of
Newport, Rhode Island, and a captain in the United States navy. Stephen
Decatur, Jr., was born at Sinnepuxent, Maryland, on January 5, 1779. He
entered the American navy as a midshipman in 1798 on board the frigate
_United States_. A year later he was promoted to lieutenant and in that
rank saw a little service in the short war with France.

In 1801 Decatur sailed as first lieutenant of the _Essex_, one of
Commodore Dale's squadron, to the Mediterranean. As a result of a duel
with a British Officer--which resulted fatally for the
Englishman--Decatur was sent home for a time. In 1803 he was back in the
Mediterranean in command of the _Enterprise_. He distinguished himself
almost immediately.

Conceiving the daring idea of recapturing or destroying the frigate
_Philadelphia_, which had been captured by the pirates and lay in the
harbor of Tripoli, on February 31, 1804, he manned a little boat called
the _Intrepid_, with seventy volunteers, and, braving the enemy, he
reached the _Philadelphia_, set it afire and got away, with the loss of
only one man.

For this gallant achievement Congress voted Decatur thanks and a sword.
He was also promoted to captain.

Following this, Decatur was engaged in all the attacks on Tripoli from
1804 to 1805. In the War of 1812 the ship which he commanded, the
_United States_, captured the British vessel, the _Macedonian_, after a
desperate struggle. In 1813 he was appointed commodore to command a
squadron in New York Harbor, which was blockaded by the British. In 1813
he attempted to get to sea to break the blockade with the _United
States_, the _Hornet_, and the _Macedonian_, which had been by this time
converted into an American ship. A superior British squadron forced
Decatur to run into the Thames, and he lay off New London for several
months. He sent a challenge to the commander of the blockading squadron
to come on and fight, but the challenge was not accepted.

At length, unable to get to sea, two of the ships were dismantled, and
Decatur returned to New York, where he took command of a squadron
destined for the East Indies. In the frigate _President_ he put to sea
on the 14th of January, 1815. The blockading British squadron pursued
the ship, and after a desperate running fight forced Decatur to
surrender.

Soon afterward Decatur returned to the United States, peace between
England and America was declared. But the Barbary pirates were once more
giving trouble. Decatur took a command in the Mediterranean.

He arrived before Algiers on June 22, 1815, and immediately demanded a
treaty from the Dey. His terms were very brief: no more annual tribute
or ransom for prisoners; all enslaved Americans to be released; and no
American ever again to be held as a slave. The question of tribute was
the most difficult to settle. The Dey feared that other European powers
would demand the same terms.

"Even a little powder," said the Dey, "might prove satisfactory."

"If," replied Decatur, "you insist upon receiving powder as tribute, you
must expect to receive the balls with it."

In forty-eight hours the treaty was negotiated, giving to the United
States privileges and immunities never before granted by a Barbary state
to a Christian power.

In 1819 a quarrel arose between Commodore James Barron and Decatur. They
met at Bladensburg, Maryland, on March 22, 1820. At the first shots
Barron was dangerously wounded. Decatur was also hit, and he died the
same evening.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 4. No. 3, SERIAL No. 103

  COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.

[Illustration: IN THE POSSESSION OF THE NEW YORK HISTORICAL SOCIETY

COMMODORE WILLIAM BAINBRIDGE

FROM THE PAINTING BY REMBRANDT PEALE]




The War of 1812

WILLIAM BAINBRIDGE

Monograph Number Two in The Mentor Reading Course


William Bainbridge was born at Princeton, New Jersey, on May 7, 1774. He
was a son of Dr. Absalom Bainbridge, a Physician of the town. He
received comparatively little education; for he went to sea in a
merchant vessel at the age of fourteen. A few years after this, while he
was the mate of the ship _Hope_, on a voyage to Holland he saved the
life of his captain, who had been seized by a mutinous crew with the
intention of throwing him overboard. On his return home, because of his
good conduct and abilities, he was promoted to the command of a ship in
the Dutch trade. He continued in command of various ships until 1798.

During this time the war between France and Great Britain made it
difficult for neutrals to carry on trade. Therefore as master of a ship
Bainbridge had to elude, or beat off a great deal of interference on the
part of French and British ships alike.

In 1798, when war was about to break out between France and the United
States and the American navy was organized, Bainbridge was appointed
commander of the United States Schooner _Retaliation_, of fourteen guns,
with the rank of lieutenant. In November his ship was captured by two
French frigates--but it was released shortly afterward.

Bainbridge sailed for the West Indies as master commandant of the brig
_Norfolk_. During this cruise he gave protection to the merchant trade
of the United States and captured several of the enemy's merchantmen.

In 1800 Bainbridge was promoted to the rink of captain. On the frigate
_George Washington_ he sailed to the Dey of Algiers with presents. These
"presents" were bribes which the United States paid to the Algerian
pirates to secure exemption from capture for its merchant ships in the
Mediterranean. Bainbridge was disgusted at having to pay the tributes.
While his ship was at Algiers war was declared by the pirates against
France, and the French consul and citizens were ordered to leave the
country in forty-eight hours. Captain Bainbridge received them all on
his ship and landed them safely.

When the United States found that bribes to the pirates did not protect
their commerce, they decided to use force. Captain Bainbridge was given
command of the frigate _Philadelphia_, and sailing to Algiers, blockaded
Tripoli. Being driven from his cruising grounds, Bainbridge pursued a
strange ship that was trying to break the blockade. He gave chase, but
ran upon a reef on the morning of October 31, 1803. The pirates
immediately attacked, and when the ship could no longer be defended they
captured and scuttled her, imprisoning the officers and crew. After a
treaty of peace between the Dey and the United States had been
concluded, the Americans were released on February 3, 1805.

Captain Bainbridge returned for a time to the merchant service, but when
the War of 1812 broke out, he was appointed to command the United States
frigate _Constitution_. In this ship he captured two British frigates
and many merchantmen. On his return he was received with an enthusiastic
welcome by his countrymen. The _Constitution_ became an object of
national pride, and because of the little damage it sustained in the
numerous encounters in which it engaged, received the popular name of
"Old Ironsides."

After the conclusion of the War of 1812, Bainbridge once more served
against the Barbary pirates. Later he served on the board of navy
commissioners. Commodore Bainbridge died in Philadelphia on July 28,
1833.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 4, No. 3, SERIAL No. 103

  COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.

[Illustration: IN THE POSSESSION Of THE NEW YORK HISTORICAL SOCIETY

COMMODORE OLIVER HAZARD PERRY

FROM THE PAINTING BY REMBRANDT PEALE]




The War of 1812

OLIVER HAZARD PERRY

Monograph Number Five in The Mentor Reading Course


Oliver Hazard Perry was born at South Kensington, Rhode Island, on
August 23, 1785. His father was Christopher Raymond Perry, captain in
the navy. His first position was that of a midshipman on the sloop of
war _General Greene_, in 1798. The first action that he saw was against
the Barbary pirates. In this war he secured the affection and respect of
the officers and men in the squadron.

In 1810 he was a lieutenant-commandant in the schooner _Revenge_. This
vessel was attached to the squadron under Commodore Rodgers, and was
employed in Long Island Sound to uphold the embargo which the United
States had at that time put upon trade with England and France.

Shortly after, the war with England began. Perry was placed in command
of a flotilla at Newport, but was not pleased with this commission, and
begged to be ordered to Lake Ontario. His wish was granted, and he and
his men--who eagerly volunteered to go with him--re-inforced Commodore
Chauncey on the Great Lakes.

When he arrived at Lake Ontario, however, Chauncey ordered Perry to Lake
Erie to superintend the building of vessels. The English had a powerful
force on the Great Lakes and the United States wanted to build
sufficient ships to meet them. Perry worked hard, and on August 4, 1813,
he got his squadron into the deep waters of Lake Erie. This squadron
consisted of three brigs, five schooners, and one sloop. On the 10th of
September Perry met the British fleet with Captain Robert H. Barclay in
command in the Battle of Put-in Bay. This was the great fight of Perry's
life, and he fought it with skill, bravery and perseverance.

The effects of this victory were felt all over the United States.
National pride was kindled and the people celebrated the victory with
enthusiasm. In reward Perry was made a captain in the navy and received
the thanks of Congress.

However, the gallant officer did not rest upon his laurels, and, seeing
no more hostile fleets to conquer, offered himself as aid to General
Harrison, who was then pursuing the British, and took part in the Battle
of Moravian Town on October 5th. When Virginia and Maryland were invaded
by the English, under General Ross and Admiral Cockburn, Perry had a
command on the Potomac.

At the end of the War of 1812 Captain Perry took command of the _Java_,
a frigate of the first class, and sailed with Commodore Stephen Decatur
to punish the Dey of Algiers, who had plundered the commerce of the
United States when this country was busy during the war of 1812. This
expedition, which reached the Mediterranean in June, 1815, was
successful, and Perry returned to the United States. While the _Java_
was lying at Newport in mid-winter, he received information that a
merchant vessel was on a reef about five or six miles from that place,
and that the crew were in danger. Leaping into his barge he turned to
his oarsmen and said, "Come, my boys, we are going to the relief of
shipwrecked seamen; pull away!" The eleven men of the crew were rescued.

In 1819 Perry was sent in the _John Adams_ to the West Indies with
sealed orders. Pirates had swarmed in that vicinity, and his commission
was to drive them from the sea. He executed his orders with diligence,
but unfortunately caught yellow fever and died on August 23, 1819, at
Port of Spain, in Trinidad. Every tribute of national grief was paid to
his memory, and he was buried with military honors.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 4, No. 3, SERIAL No. 103

  COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: The War of 1812, by
Albert Bushnell Hart

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: THE WAR OF 1812 ***

***** This file should be named 27586.txt or 27586.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/5/8/27586/

Produced by Gerard Arthus, Greg Bergquist and The Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
