The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Christmas Faggot, by Alfred Gurney

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Christmas Faggot

Author: Alfred Gurney

Release Date: January 20, 2009 [EBook #27851]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHRISTMAS FAGGOT ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Louise Pattison and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









A CHRISTMAS FAGGOT


[Illustration: THAT AT THE NAME OF JESUS EVERY KNEE SHOULD BOW [Cross]
TO THE GLORY OF GOD THE FATHER.]


A CHRISTMAS FAGGOT

BY

ALFRED GURNEY, M.A.

VICAR OF S. BARNABAS', PIMLICO

AUTHOR OF 'THE VISION OF THE EUCHARIST AND OTHER POEMS' ETC.


  'The Darling of the world is come,
  And fit it is we finde a roome
  To welcome Him. The nobler part
  Of all the house here is the heart,
  Which we will give Him, and bequeath
  This hollie and this ivie wreath
  To do Him honour who's our King,
  The Lord of all this revelling'
                  HERRICK, _A Christmas Carol_


LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, & CO., 1 PATERNOSTER SQUARE
1884


(_The rights of translation and of reproduction are reserved_)


             _TO_

        _MY GODCHILDREN_

  ETHEL,               ALBINIA,
  CYRIL,               BASIL,
  BERTRAM,             WILFRID,
  LOUISE,              HELEN,
            ARTHUR.

  When the Angel of the waters
    With a gold and silver wing
  Gently stirred the wave baptismal,
    Heard ye not their carolling
  Who of old to Eastern shepherds
    Heralded their King?

  To the shepherds of His people
    Still those angel-voices tell
  How God's river feeds the fountain
    Opened by Emmanuel,
  Yielding the baptismal waters
    Of salvation's well.

  Children, you have passed those waters,
    Love-begotten from the dead;
  Will you make a gallant promise
    When my verses you have read--
  'We will trace life's lovely river
    To the Fountain-head'?

LOCH LEVEN: 1884.




PREFACE.


Most of the following poems have appeared in the 'S. Barnabas' Parish
Magazine.' For my godchildren and my people I have made them up into a
little bundle of sticks--a Christmas faggot to feed the fires in the
winter palace of our King.

It is the Incarnation that justifies all joy, and song is the expression
of joy. The Gospel Songs all celebrate the Great Nativity. Birth and
marriage are the occasions most sacred to mirth and music among men; and
Christmas is at once the Birthday and the Marriage Festival of Humanity.

Glad and thankful shall I be if any song of mine should help to fan the
flame of rejoicing love in any Christian heart at this holy and happy
season.




CONTENTS.


                                           PAGE

YULE TIDE                                    1

THE MADONNA DI SAN SISTO                     6

BETHLEHEM GATE                              11

SAINT JOSEPH                                16

A CRADLE SONG                               18

A CRADLED CHILD                             23

AN EMPTY CRADLE                             26

NEW YEAR'S EVE                              28

THE VICTIM                                  30

THE DAYSMAN                                 33

THE PHYSICIAN                               36

THE POET                                    40

THREE SISTERS                               43

A CHRISTMAS PUZZLE                          46

FOUR EPIPHANIES                             48

THE CHILDREN'S EUCHARIST                    56

THE GOSPEL SONGS:

       I. Benedictus                        59

      II. Magnificat                        63

     III. Nunc Dimittis                     66

NOTES                                       69




_YULE TIDE._

  'They bring me sorrow touched with joy,
  The merry merry bells of Yule.'
                   TENNYSON, _In Memoriam_.


  The Royal Birthday dawns again,
    A stricken world to bless;
  And sufferers forget their pain,
    And mourners their distress.

  Love sings to-day; her eyes so fair
    With happy tears are wet;
  She is too humble to despair,
    Too faithful to forget.

  Her voice is very soft and sweet,
    Her heart is brave and strong;
  Her vassal, I would fain repeat
    Some fragments of her song.

  A Birthday-song my heart would sing
    Its rapture to express;
  My Father's son must be a king,
    And share His consciousness.

  Of God's Self-knowledge comes the Word
    That utters all His Thought;
  That Word made Flesh by all is heard
    Who seek as they are sought.

  His seeking and His finding make
    Our search an easy thing;
  He sows good seed, and bids us take
    The joys of harvesting.

  Yet must His children do their part,
    And what He gives accept;
  No heart can understand His Heart
    That has not bled and wept.

  All seasons, bring they bale or bliss,
    His priceless treasures hold;
  The Winter's silver all is His,
    And His the Summer's gold.

  Life's harvest is not reaped until
    The Christ within has grown
  To perfect manhood, and self-will
    By love is overthrown.

  Such manhood gained concludes the strife
    That makes the babe a boy;
  'T is thus the seed becomes a life,
    The life becomes a joy.

  The eyes that weep are eyes that see,
    And swift are pilgrim-feet;
  Ah! hope at length may come to be
    Than memory more sweet.

  So keeping festival to-day,
    With children's laughter near,
  It is not hard to sing and pray,
    'T is hard to doubt or fear.

  Father, my heart to Thee I bring,
    To Thee my song address;
  From Winter pain and toil of Spring
    Grows Summer happiness.




_THE MADONNA DI SAN SISTO._[1]

'The Lord Himself shall give you a sign; behold, a Virgin shall conceive
and bear a Son.'


  Behold, by Raphael shown, Love's sacrament!
    Earth's curtains part, God's veil is lifted up;
  There comes a Child, forth from His Bosom sent
    To rule the feast of life, His Bread and Cup,
    His purpose making plain with man to sup.
  Out-streams the light, accomplished is the Sign,
  A Virgin-Mother clasps a Babe Divine.

  Her lovely feet descend the cloudy stair,
    Great succour bringing to a world forlorn;
  On either side a man and woman share
    A common rapture, welcoming the dawn
    Of God's new day, the everlasting morn--
  Of such a day as shall from East to West
  Dispel the darkness, doing Love's behest.

  He turns a face all radiant to the Sun,
    Enamoured of the sight he looks upon;
  She to the end of what is now begun
    Downgazes, stooping, shadowed by the throne
    Made by a Maiden's arms, maternal grown;
  Than ivory most fair, than purest gold,
  More pure, more fair, and stronger to uphold.

  On cherubs twain, whom watching has made wise,
    A spell has fallen--a prophetic dream;
  Their upward-gazing and far-seeing eyes,
    Like stars reflected in a tranquil stream,
    To look beyond the Child and Mother seem;
  A twisted thorn-branch and a cross to them
  Are manifest--His throne and diadem.

  High heaven open stands, and there a crowd
    Of worshippers with love-lit eyes appear,
  Like stars down-gazing through a fleecy cloud,
    Dimly discerned as morning draweth near
    Spreading a radiant pall upon night's bier.
  The blessed thing the Sign doth signify
  They partly know, and are made glad thereby.

  But more the Mother knows, and more she sees
    Than soaring angel or than climbing saint;
  Her heart familiar grown with mysteries
    Of God's own working under love's constraint,
    The remedy she knows for man's complaint.
  The clouds are all beneath her, and above
  The light of life, the radiancy of love.

  And He, Whom Lord of love and life we hail,
    Is on her bosom borne, a blossom fair;
  The pentecostal breath that lifts her veil
    Has fanned His royal brow, and stirred His hair,
    And kissed His lips just parted for a prayer.
  That spirit-wind shall blow, that Face shall shine,
  Till all His brothers know their Father's Sign.

DRESDEN: 1883.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] _See_ Note A, page 69.




_BETHLEHEM GATE._

A PICTURE BY DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.[2]


  Of old through gates that closed on them
    Two exiles went with eyes downcast;
    The Present now retrieves the Past,
  God's Eden is in Bethlehem.

  An Eden that no walls enclose
    By Mary's arms encompassed,
    A living shrine, a 'house of bread,'
  A very haven of repose.

  Behold the Prince of Peace! around
    His cradle angry tempests rage;
    He needs must go on pilgrimage,
  An exile, homeless and discrowned.

  And yet, His Rank to designate,
    The unquenched Star of Bethlehem
    Shines forth, a radiant diadem;
  While Angels on His footsteps wait.

  E'en now the Father's Face they see,
    A triumph-song e'en now they sing,
    And, wondering and worshipping,
  Attend His Pilgrim-Family.

  Two guard the frowning gateway: one
    Is of a solemn countenance;
    To him a rapid backward glance
  Reveals a massacre begun.

  The other, forward gazing, sees
    The glory of the age to come,
    The fruitfulness of martyrdom,
  Of deaths that are nativities.

  O weeping mothers, dry your tears!
    The Mother whom this canvass shows
    Nor fears, nor weeps, although she knows
  An anguish deeper than your fears.

  She knows a comfort deeper still
    For all who fare on pilgrimage;
    By suffering from age to age
  God seals the vassals of His Will.

  Her Burden is upholding her;
    And, guided by the Holy Dove,
    She sees the victory of Love
  Beyond the Cross and Sepulchre.

  To shield her, Joseph stands: his care
    The shadow of God's Providence.
    How fragrant is the frankincense
  Of their uninterrupted prayer!

  Through ever-open gates they press,
    A new and living way they tread,
    So gain they the true 'House of Bread,'
  A garden for a wilderness.

  A flight it seems to us; to them
    It is a going forth to win
    The world from Satan and from sin,
  And build the New Jerusalem.

  Lord Christ! for every seeking soul
    Thou art Thyself the Door, the Way;
    All, all shall find one coming day
  Thy Heart their everlasting goal!

LOCH LEVEN: 1884.


FOOTNOTES:

[2] _See_ Note B, page 71.




_S. JOSEPH._


  A cloistered garden was the place
    Where Mary grew, God's perfect flower;
  One, only one, discerned her grace,
    And visited her bower.

  God's choice was his; by love made strong
    To guard the Mother of the King;
  No heart, save hers, had e'er a song
    So sweet as his to sing.

  Yet lives there on the sacred page
    No record of a word from him;
  God's Ark he guards, a silent sage,
    Pure as the Cherubim.

  But sweeter than the sweetest word
    Recorded of the wise and good,
  His silence is a music heard
    On high, and understood.

  Blessed are all who take their part
    Amid the carol-singing throng;
  Thrice blest the meditative heart
    Whose silence is a song.

BALLACHULISH: 1884.




A CRADLE SONG.


  Sing, ye winds, and sing, ye waters,
    May the music of your song
  Silence all the dark forebodings
    That have plagued the world too long;
  He who made your voices tuneful
    Comes to right the wrong.

  Warble on, ye feathered songsters,
    Lift your praises loud and high,
  Merry lark, and thrush, and blackbird,
    In the grove and in the sky
  Make your music, shame our dumbness,
    Till we make reply.

  Children's laughter is a music
    Flowing from a hidden spring,
  Which, though men misdoubt its virtue,
    Well is worth discovering;
  Slowly dies the heart that knows not
    How to laugh and sing.

  Hark, a cradle-song! the Singer
    Is the Heart of God Most High;
  All sweet voices are the echoes
    That in varied tones reply
  To that Voice which through the ages
    Sings earth's lullaby.

  Oftentimes a sleepless infant
    For a season frets and cries:
  All at once an unseen finger
    Curtains up the little eyes.
  So the cradled child He nurses
    God will tranquillise.

  His the all-enfolding Presence;
    Oh, what tutelage it brings
  To the little lives that ripen
    'Neath the shelter of its wings;
  God's delays are no denials,
    As He waits He sings!

  They alone are seers and singers
    Who invalidate despair
  By the lofty hopes they cherish,
    By the gallant deeds they dare,
  By the ceaseless aspirations
    Of a life of prayer.

  Brothers, sisters, lift your voices,
    May the rapture of your song
  Put to flight the sad misgivings
    That have vexed the world too long;
  God would have us share the triumph
    That shall right the wrong.

LOCH LAGGAN: 1884.




_A CRADLED CHILD._

(To E. A. G.)


  Behold! the world's inheritance,
    The treasure-trove of happy homes;
    Whereby the poorest hut becomes
  A fairy-palace of romance.

  A cradle is the mother's shrine:
    Two lamps o'erhang it--her sweet eyes,
    Whose love-light falls, Madonna-wise,
  On sleeping infancy divine.

  The presence of a 'holy thing,'
    Madonna-wise, her heart discerns,
    And like a fragrant censer burns,
  O'ershadowed by an angel's wing.

  Her brooding motherhood is strong;
    A trembling joy her bosom stirs,
    Her thoughts are white-robed worshippers,
  'Magnificat' is all her song.

  'Mid angels whispering 'all-hails'
    The waking moment she awaits,
    The opening of two pearly gates,
  The lifting of two silken veils.

  Ah! then, what words can tell the bliss,
    The rapture of the fond embrace,
    When mother's lips on baby's face,
  Feast and are feasted with a kiss?

  And who can tell of hands and feet
    The dimpled wonders, hidden charms,
    The dainty curves of legs and arms,
  So sweet and soft, so soft and sweet?

  This is the world's possession still,
    The treasure-trove of wedded hearts,
    Whereby a Father's love imparts
  His joy, their gladness to fulfil.

TYNTESFIELD: 1884.




_AN EMPTY CRADLE._


  All empty stands a little cradle-bed,
    A mother's falling tears the only sound;
    But not of earth her thoughts, nor underground;
  Up-gazing she discerns the Fountain-head
  Of life; the living Voice she hears that said
    'Fear not' to weeping women who had found
    An empty tomb, and angels watching round,
  Who asked 'Why seek the living with the dead?'

  So weeps our Mother Church--her tears outshine
    Sun-smitten dewdrops on a summer's morn;
  God's rainbow girdles her, Hope's lovely sign,
    Whereby she knows that smiles of tears are born;
  Fulfilled of life herself, she would assure
  Her children all of death's discomfiture.

CARLISLE: 1884.




_NEW YEAR'S EVE._


  God grant through coming years and days
    Our beating hearts may be
  The harps that celebrate His praise
    Who loves eternally!

  No ache can be without relief
    When Love Himself draws near;
  No cup can empty stand, no grief
    Embitter God's New Year.

  Time's footsteps quickly die away,
    Soon emptied is his glass;
  We wait for an oncoming Day
    Which nevermore shall pass.

  Old hopes revive, new hopes are born,
    The coming months to cheer;
  And phantom-fears and griefs outworn
    Die with the dying year.

  Oh, all the years and all the days
    Our waiting hearts shall be
  Harps tremulous with His dear praise
    Whose is Eternity!

S. BARNABAS': _December 31, 1883_.




_THE VICTIM._

FOR THE FEAST OF THE CIRCUMCISION: NEW YEAR'S DAY.


  The sun methinks rose rosy-red
    On that great New Year's Day,
  When Blood was in the cradle shed
    Where Mary's Darling lay.

  The lark, uprising with the sun,
    Was silent on the wing;
  The nightingale, when day was done,
    Forgot her song to sing.

  A holy silence reigned around,
    And hushed was every voice,
  When in the crib the Cross was found,
    The Infant-Victim's choice.

  As moonbeam on a mountain-mere
    The Mother's face was white;
  Her eyes were stars, and every tear
    Gave lustre to their light.

  Methinks a blushing moon looked down
    Upon that manger-bed,
  And wove a mystic glory-crown
    Around the Sleeper's head.

  The silence issues in a song,
    It rises and it swells;
  E'en than the lark's more blithe and strong,
    Sweeter than Philomel's,
  His Church's anthem loud and long
    The Victim's triumph tells.




_THE DAYSMAN._


  In boyhood's sorrow-shadowed days,
    Which memory recalls to-day,
  In many moods and many ways,
    My yearning heart would pray.

  'T was holy ground where'er I set
    My feet, God's shrine was everywhere;
  But this I scarcely knew as yet--
    _Christ is His Father's Prayer_.[3]

  God ever seeks His children's bliss,
    Appeals to them; and, rightly heard,
  The music of creation is
    The echo of His Word.

  But when the child has learnt his part,
    The echo is an answer strong;
  A prayer up-springing from the heart
    That blossoms in a song.

  Christ is the Living Word of God,
    His Poem and His Prophecy;
  The homeward way His Feet have trod
    Mankind must travel by.

  And every man, God's child and priest,
    Is pledged to ministry divine,
  Who sees the Ruler of life's feast
    Turn water into wine;

  Who hears the Father's voice above,
    The Spirit's whispering within;
  Who knows the Messenger of love
    The Conqueror of sin.

  Responsive to God's call, our Prayer
    Art Thou, dear Lord, whene'er we pray;
  So always now, and everywhere,
    My heart keeps holiday.

ON THE DANUBE: _Feast of the Holy Name_, 1883.


FOOTNOTES:

[3] _See_ Note C, page 72.




_THE PHYSICIAN._


  Is life sad for lost love's sake,
    Falls a blight upon thy bliss,
  Smiles no more their sunshine make,
    Lips estranged withhold their kiss?
  For thy consolation take
    Some such song as this:--

  Shine on us, O Morning Star!
    Help our weeping eyes to see;
  Never may we deem things are
    What to us they seem to be;
  Rise, Thou Dayspring, and afar
    Bid the shadows flee!

  Jesu, Thou art swift to bless,
    Strong to comfort, skilled to heal;
  Failure is with Thee success,
    Woe the forerunner of weal;
  Every stroke is a caress,
    Every crust a meal.

  Master, Thou canst raise the dead
    From the grave, the bed, the bier,[4]
  Souls astray, forlorn, misled,
    Buffeted by doubt and fear,
  Cannot but be comforted
    When Thou drawest near.

  Sweeter than the Sunday-bells
    Banishing all week-day cares,
  Thine the gracious voice that tells
    What a Father's love prepares,
  Leading to salvation's wells
    Up God's altar-stairs.

  Lord, Thou art the Master-singer,
    And Thy song is a recall;
  Many on life's pathway linger,
    Many by life's wayside fall,
  But Thy Heart, the comfort-bringer,
    Is a Home for all!

TYROL: 1882.


FOOTNOTES:

[4] S. John xi. 43; S. Matt. ix. 25; S. Luke vii. 14.




_THE POET._


  The poet is the child of God,
    Who with anointed eye
  Discerns a sacrament of love
    In earth and sea and sky,
  And finds himself at love's behest
    Constrained to prophesy.

  Love is of loveliness the root,
    Love is of life the spring,
  Love is the sole interpreter
    Of every lovely thing:
  This is the burden of his song,
    Well may the poet sing!

  A joy-inspired song he sings
    Because far off he hears
  A whisper silencing the storm,
    A laughter through the tears,
  The music of eternity
    Beyond the dying years.

  His song is rapture, for he sees
    God's loveliness, and we,
  When with his insight we are blest,
    Shall share his ecstasy;
  Oh, come the day when all shall sing
    As blithe a song as he!

  Lord Christ, Thou art the King of Love,
    Thou art the Poet true;
  The men who would Thy vision share
    Must learn Thy works to do,
  All, all shall have the singing heart
    Whose feet Thy steps pursue!

PITZ ORTLER: 1882.




_THREE SISTERS._[5]


  Three fountains clear as crystal spring
    In one secluded garden-plot;
    In shade and shelter of one cot
  Three sister-doves are harbouring.

  Adown one pathway hand in hand
    Three Sister-Graces wend their way;
    I shall not soon forget the day
  I met with them in fairy land.

  They _dawned_, I know not how or whence:
    A halo circling round the head
    Of each, whereby transfigured
  They clomb the hill of frankincense.

  I know not whence or how, they _bloomed_:
    Each sweeter than the sweetest rose
    That in the haunted garden grows
  Where burns the bush still unconsumed.

  And one is like a rising sun
    When dewy Morn unveils her eyes;
    And one is as Minerva wise;
  And very lily-like is one.

  And all are dear. I seem to see
    The weaving of a threefold cord--
    To hear a softly whispered word,
  'Love makes a unity of three.'


FOOTNOTES:

[5] _See_ Note D, page 74.




_A CHRISTMAS PUZZLE._

(FOR GROWN-UP CHILDREN.)


  Children know the things I know not,
    Though they know not that they know;
  I should know not, should love grow not,
    That I know not it is so.
  Flowers feebly rooted blow not,
  Shallow waters overflow not,
    Love is doomed unless it grow.

  Fools who think to reap and sow not
    Growing love will overthrow;
  Churls who say 'We go' and go not
    Love's rebuke must undergo;
  All who love's insignia show not,
  Who on love themselves bestow not,
    Love, full grown, shall lay them low.




_FOUR EPIPHANIES._[6]


I.

  The Pilgrim-Kings their King have found,
    The Wise Men kneel at Wisdom's shrine,
  Their royal gifts His Crib surround,
    He gives them bread and wine.

  One Star has pointed to the Sun,
    That men may see and understand
  The witness borne by all to One,
    Who holds in His Right Hand,

  Like lamps that round an altar burn,
    All lights that shine, all worlds that be
  Crowned are the men whose hearts discern
    Their King's Epiphany.


II.

  The Child obedient sets His face
    To seek His Father's House of Prayer,
  With other children takes His place,
    And is a learner there.

  Two worlds there are; the child to each
    Belongs, God's prophet, born to bless;
  But not by action, nor by speech,
    Simply by winsomeness.

  For, like the Child of Bethlehem,
    Babes bring their blessing from afar,
  Enriching all who wait on them
    By being what they are.


III.

  A voice from heaven spake aloud,
    Heard clearly by the Bridegroom's friend
  When, shadowed by the glory-cloud,
    He saw the Dove descend.

  One Voice has heralded the Word,
    That listening men may truly know
  What mean all voices they have heard
    Above, around, below--

  Soft whisperings and laughters loud,
    The song of birds, the insects' hum,
  Storm-music of the thunder-cloud--
    And be no longer dumb.


IV.

  That jubilance of bridal mirth,
    First felt at Cana, has not ceased;
  Christ's Presence still regales the earth,
    Still glorifies the feast.

  The Ruler of the feast of life
    Still with a sacramental sign
  Confirms the love of man and wife,
    And makes the water wine.

  And His the glory still revealed
    When lovers plight and keep their vows;
  Himself the Bridegroom Who has sealed
    The Church to be His Spouse.


FOOTNOTES:

[6] _See_ Note E, page 77.




_THE CHILDREN'S EUCHARIST._


  The children's star-crowned Bethlehem,
    The children's 'house of bread,'
  Where Jesus' arms encircle them,
    With milk and honey fed:--
  Such is the Church, whose altar-gates
    Stand ever open, when
  The board is furnished where He waits
    To feast the hearts of men.

  A Babe He came one heart to bless
    (It is His cradle still),
  And evermore her blessedness
    Is theirs who do His will;
  A Child He trod the Temple-floor,
    By Mary Mother led;
  By children's voices evermore
    His praise is perfected.

  'Forbid them not,' He said of old:
    The words so stern and sweet
  Still make believing mothers bold
    To gather at His Feet,
  And bring their babes; their hearts discern
    (And oh, that others would!)
  How mother-like His Heart must yearn
    Who made their motherhood.

  A happy Home where children pray,
    With milk and honey fed,
  Whose altar-hearth burns bright alway,
    Whose board is richly spread:--
  Such is the Church; and sweet the song
    Her little children sing,
  Of all who round His Altar throng
    The dearest to our King.

BALLACHULISH: 1884.




_THE GOSPEL SONGS._[7]


I.

BENEDICTUS.

  Can priestly lips, long silenced, raise
    A strain so lofty and so strong,
  Making our matin hymn of praise
    As jubilant as evensong?

  Yes: not the lips alone, the eyes
    Of Zacharias were unsealed,
  To see and sing the mysteries
    To love and penitence revealed.

  With keen prevision of the seer
    He sings of a redemption wrought,
  Whereby, released from slavish fear,
    Men are to filial freedom brought.

  Three things immutable and sure,
    His promise, covenant, and oath,
  Reveal God's purpose, and secure
    Whate'er man needs for life and growth.

  The promise to the fathers made
    Was seen and known--th' Incarnate Word;
  The Cross His covenant displayed,
    His oath at Pentecost was heard.

  Well may this father's heart rejoice,
    And with prophetic rapture sing;
  His song a prelude to that 'Voice'[8]
    Predestined to proclaim the King.

  His joy a foretaste of that mirth
    Which shall the hearts of all possess,
  When o'er a recreated earth
    Christ's sceptre reigns in righteousness.

  Of light he sings for darkened eyes,
    For wandering feet the way of peace,
  Tells how the Dayspring shall arise,
    And shadows flee and sorrows cease.

  And still the Church's children raise
    That strain so lofty and so strong,
  Which makes their matin hymn of praise
    As jubilant as evensong.

LOCH LAGGAN: 1884.


II.

MAGNIFICAT.

  Earth's noise God's music supersedes,
    Sin's discord it excludes,
  It tells us of a Lamb that bleeds,
    And of a Dove that broods.

  It tells us of a Child Who brings
    The help that sets us free;
  The song His Maiden-Mother sings
    Of saved Humanity.

  The Mother's and the Sister's part
    She plays; she leads the choir
  Of those whose purity of heart
    Is passionate desire.

  Above the blood-encrimsoned sea,
    Dispelling doubt and fear
  With her celestial minstrelsy,
    Our Miriam doth cheer

  The men whose homeward-going hearts
    Are loyal to their King;
  When all from her have learnt their parts,
    Then shall creation sing!

  The sweetest of the Gospel songs,
    To all the Saints so dear,
  To every eventide belongs
    Throughout the changeful year.

  It sanctifies the vesper hour
    When summer smiles serene;
  It is a joy-constraining power
    When winter blasts are keen.

  'My soul doth magnify the Lord'--
    Ecstatic is the voice
  That sings of Paradise restored--
    'My spirit doth rejoice!'

PINZOLO: 1882.


III.

NUNC DIMITTIS.

  To cradle Mary's Child his heart
    An old man opens wide:
  Behold him in God's peace depart,
    And in God's peace abide.

  He sings the very Song of Peace,
    Responsive to the Word;
  His lullaby shall never cease
    To make its music heard.

  For all the children of the Bride,
    The subjects of the King,
  With each returning eventide
    Have learnt his song to sing.

  He sings of 'peace,' 'salvation,' 'light:'
    His lovely words we take
  For consolation night by night,
    Until God's morning break.

  Then, when our dazzled eyes grow dim,
    Breathed with our parting breath
  The old man's sweet, heart-soothing hymn
    Glad welcome gives to death.

  We too what Simeon saw may see--
    The Mother undefiled,
  Our hearts enfold as blissfully
    The Everlasting Child!

TYROL: 1882.


FOOTNOTES:

[7] _See_ Note F, page 78.

[8] S. John i. 23.




NOTES.


NOTE A.

_The Madonna di San Sisto._

Raffaelle's world-famous picture of the Mother and her Divine Child in
the Gallery at Dresden is in a measure known to almost all from prints
and photographs. As to the _colour_ of the picture, the significant
beauty of which none who have not seen the original can conceive, it
should be remembered that the parted curtains are green (the
earth-colour), and the Virgin Mother comes forth, as it were, from the
white bosom of a stooping heaven, whose far distances, dimly seen, fade
into a blue firmament peopled with angelic faces.

Many have felt this picture--at once so serene and so impassioned--to be
a _revelation_. As we yield ourselves to its fascination and search
further and further into its depths, we feel that Faber's words justify
themselves: 'Christian Art, rightly considered, is at once a theology
and a worship; a theology which has its own method of teaching, its own
ways of representation, its own devout discoveries, its own varying
opinions, all of which are beautiful so long as they are in
subordination to the mind of the Church.... Art is a revelation from
heaven, and a mighty power for God. It is a merciful disclosure to men
of His more hidden beauty. It brings out things in God which lie too
deep for words.' (_Bethlehem_, p. 240.)

It was a satisfaction to find my reading of this incomparable picture
powerfully endorsed by one who, more perhaps than any living writer, has
made good his claim to be regarded with the reverence that belongs to a
scribe instructed in the things of the spiritual kingdom, bringing forth
from his treasure things new and old. I quote the following passage from
Canon Westcott's weighty contribution to the discussion of a subject
second to none in interest and importance--'The Relation of Christianity
to Art:' 'In the _Madonna di San Sisto_ Raffaelle has rendered the idea
of Divine motherhood and Divine Sonship in intelligible forms. No one
can rest in the individual figures. The tremulous fulness of emotion in
the face of the Mother, the intense, far-reaching gaze of the Child,
constrain the beholder to look beyond. For him too the curtain is drawn
aside; he feels that there is a fellowship of earth with heaven and of
heaven with earth, and understands the meaning of the attendant Saints
who express the different aspects of this double communion.' (_Epistles
of S. John_, p. 358.)

I will only add some beautiful words of Mrs. Jameson, which also I had
not seen when my verses were written: 'I have seen my own ideal once,
and only once, attained: there, where Raffaelle--inspired if ever
painter was inspired--projected on the space before him that wonderful
creation which we style the _Madonna di San Sisto_; for there she
stands--the transfigured woman--at once completely human and completely
divine, an abstraction of power, purity, and love, poised on the
empurpled air, and requiring no other support; looking out with her
melancholy, loving mouth, her slightly dilated, sibylline eyes, quite
through the universe, to the end and consummation of all things; sad, as
if she beheld afar off the visionary sword that was to reach her heart
through Him, now resting as enthroned on that heart; yet already exalted
through the homage of the redeemed generations who were to salute her as
Blessed.' (_Legends of the Madonna_: Introduction, p. 44.)


NOTE B.

_Bethlehem Gate._

I extract the following from some unpublished notes on the pictures by
Rossetti exhibited at Burlington House two years ago: '"Bethlehem Gate"
is the name of a lovely little pictured parable. On the left we see the
massacre of innocents, representing the world, in whose cruel
habitations the same outrage is ever being enacted, since all sin is in
truth the sin of blood-guiltiness, bringing life into jeopardy. On the
right the Heavenly Dove is seen leading forth God's elect children, the
Holy Family, the infant Church, to the land of righteousness. The
Maiden-Mother, with the Divine Innocent enthroned on her bosom, attended
and protected by a backward-looking and a forward-looking angel, and
escorted by S. Joseph, passes the gate of the City of David. Egypt
beneath her feet becomes the holy land.[9] Thus with all fitting
ceremonial is the Church's pilgrimage through the world, through the
ages, inaugurated.'


NOTE C.

_The Daysman._

'The Word became Flesh and tabernacled among us'--that is the supreme
and august Verity which dominates all the thoughts of the children of
the Kingdom. Their eyes are fixed on the Life that the Scripture-record
contains rather than on the record itself.

To them the oracles of God are indeed _living_, because they discern
therein not certain words about Christ, but Christ the Word Himself;
reading them by the light of the great Tradition which lives and grows
with the life and growth of the Spirit-bearing Church--the consciousness
of the real Presence of Christ in her and in her Scriptures alike. It is
in truth no unwritten Tradition, for it is inscribed in spiritual
characters upon the fleshy tables of the heart by the Holy Ghost
Himself, the Finger of God. To His pupils all things are Divine _words_
variously embodied, and the Word made Flesh is the one all-comprehending
Mystery, the eternal, all-revealing, and all-sufficing Sacrament. That
Word is a Divine Person, Whose Manhood is a living, abiding,
ever-energising Mediatorial Agency. That Word, eternally uttered by the
Mouth of God, was in the Incarnation uttered (so to speak) in another
language, and made audible and intelligible to man. By this language,
common to God and man, the thought of God became man's thought, and the
thought of man God's thought. In Him, the Mediating Word, they are _at
one_; He _is_ the Atonement. And being the Word, He is the _Prayer_ both
of God and man, whose expression is the enduring evidence of that
Atonement, the ceaseless occupation and satisfaction of those who in Him
are atoned and united. 'A mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is
one,' is S. Paul's statement of the mystery; and of this characteristic
doctrine of Christianity the Psalmist had already caught a glimpse
when, in the exercise of a prophetical gift, he speaks of Christ as
_Prayer_.[10]

It is needless to add that the sanctuary of the Eucharist is the school
in which this truth is most eloquently taught and effectually learnt.


NOTE D.

_Three Sisters._

The following interpretation, which accompanied the poem on its first
appearance, is retained for the sake of those who then welcomed it:--

Those who sing songs to children no less than they who tell them stories
must be prepared for many questions, some of them difficult to answer.
The two questions which recur most frequently are (1) 'Is it true?' and
(2) 'What does it mean?'

Questioned as to my little poem, I reply to the first question without
hesitation,--'Yes, it is all true.' But the second question is more
difficult to deal with. If, however, an answer is insisted on, something
like this is what I must say:--

God's story has no end; it is more wonderful than anything wonderland
can show; lovelier than the loveliest thing said or sung of fairyland.
The Gospel and the Creed are a part of that story; and with this our
little poem is concerned. It speaks of God's garden--paradise
regained--a renewed earth, wherein a trinity in unity, observable in all
things, testifies of Him, a shadow cast from above.

Shall we take the verses in order?

Verse 1. Three fountains (which issue forth from beneath one
altar-throne) feed one river (which, strange to say, seen from below, is
four-fold), and by this river the whole earth, God's garden, is
encircled and fertilised. That garden contains the tree of life, wherein
three doves have one nest.

Verse 2. But the fuller revelation comes out of human nature itself,
when taken into fellowship with God. The elect lady, representative of
humanity, is from one point of view, looking at fundamental relations,
daughter, spouse, mother; from another, looking at essential
characteristics, faith, hope, and love. The place of meeting, that is
dawning consciousness, is the fairyland of phenomenal existence.

Verse 3. Out of this fairyland humanity is led forward and upward by the
path of sacrifice, until the summit of the cross-crowned mountain of
life is gained; and all heads are aureoled by a light which, like that
of the Transfiguration, dawns and deepens from within. This cannot be
till we have ceased to be self-centred, and have become Christ-centred.

Verse 4. All growth is very secret and mysterious, part of the mystery
of life. The development of humanity follows the order indicated in the
narrative of creation; light must come before vegetation, sunshine
before flowers. In the garden of the Incarnation all is recovered; the
wilderness blossoms as a rose, and the poor bush of the desert becomes a
garden-tree, a plant of renown, unconsumed because permanently enkindled
with the fire of a divine life.

Verse 5. Every flower is a little sun, and shines forth, owing its
beauty to an effort after conformity to the likeness of its cherisher,
not without the succour of gracious dews. Its sunshine ministers to
hope. And by faith the old-world homage rendered to wisdom (with which
it is really one) is justified and transfigured. And love, being one
with purity, looks at us out of the sweet white face of the lily.

Verse 6. All men, like these sister-graces, must join hands and hearts.
Thus shall be woven a threefold cord, divinely strong and unbreakable;
and the testimony, reiterated by the still small voice of a Divine
Whisperer, shall be accepted by all, because realised in all: 'Love
makes a unity of three;' and '_God is love_.'

'Is that what the poem means?' I think I hear my questioner ask. 'Yes,
that is a little of what it means--only a little.'


NOTE E.

_Four Epiphanies._

Nothing perhaps more clearly demonstrates the Divine instinct that
resides in the Church than the construction of her Calendar and the
arrangement of her year. Like the Creed, whose truths it teaches and
enforces, it grew up gradually as the outcome and embodiment of her
devotional life. The Epiphany, or Feast of Manifestation, was one of the
first observed of her days of solemn commemoration; and the day came to
be prolonged into a season embracing six Sundays. She would have her
children understand that in all that He did and said our Lord was
manifesting forth His glory, and justifying His great announcement--'I
am the Light of the world.'

The Four Epiphanies to which the poem refers belong to the Scriptures
appointed for the Day itself and the two following Sundays. The first
was made to the Wise Men of the East, representing the inspired wisdom
of the Gentile world; the second to the Doctors of the Temple,
representing the Bible-taught wisdom of the Jews; the third to the
Forerunner, the last and greatest of the Prophet-heralds of the
Incarnation; the fourth to the Bridegroom and Bride and the wedding
guests at Cana of Galilee, representing Humanity, of which the family is
the appointed and abiding type.

The Catholic Church by her methods, no less than by her Sacraments, her
Scriptures, and her Creeds, is ever maintaining her protest against the
limitations by which all merely human systems are disfigured. She is
ever bearing her impassioned witness to Him Who is 'the Light that
lighteth every man that cometh into the world.' This is the real
significance of the solemnities that accompany her Epiphany observance.


NOTE F.

_The Gospel Songs._

The Tree of Life is the real Christmas Tree. Its underwoven roots
support the cradle; its branches, overarching with many a blossom and
many a cluster, form the canopy of the Heavenly Babe, the Darling of God
and of man. 'The fruit thereof is for meat, the leaf thereof for
medicine;' mindful of which the holy Evangelists speak of the crib as a
'_manger_,' that is the _feeding place_. 'Lo! we heard of the same at
(Bethlehem) Ephrata, and found it in the Wood.'

The Gospel songs express the joy with which by the humble and simple and
pure-hearted this Plant of Renown is discovered; this House of Bread
visited. They come from the lips of a maiden who is a mother, of an
ancient who is a child, of a priest who is a prophet. When such
fountains of song are unsealed, the music belongs rather to heaven than
to earth.


FOOTNOTES:

[9] _See_ Isaiah xix. 19-25.

[10] Psalm cix. 4: 'I am prayer' is the literal translation.--KAY.


            LONDON: PRINTED BY
  SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
           AND PARLIAMENT STREET





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Christmas Faggot, by Alfred Gurney

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHRISTMAS FAGGOT ***

***** This file should be named 27851.txt or 27851.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/8/5/27851/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Louise Pattison and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
