The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Voyage of the Aurora, by Harry Collingwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Voyage of the Aurora

Author: Harry Collingwood

Release Date: January 27, 2009 [EBook #27906]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VOYAGE OF THE AURORA ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




The Voyage of the Aurora, by Harry Collingwood.



CHAPTER ONE.

INTRODUCES LUCY WALFORD.

Those who have ever had occasion to reside for any length of time in
Gosport are sure to be more or less acquainted with the little village
of Alverstoke; because it lies near at hand, and the road leading
thereto forms one of the most pleasant walks in the neighbourhood.

But it may be that there are those, into whose hands this book will
fall, who have never so much as heard the name of the place.  For their
benefit, then, it may be worth while to state that Alverstoke is
pleasantly situated at a distance of about one mile from the
above-mentioned town of Gosport, and within half a mile of the waters of
the Solent.

It is a very unimportant little place at the present day: it was even
more so in the year 17--, the year in which this veracious history
opens.  It was unimportant, that is to say, in a _general_ sense; the
public knew very little about it, and cared still less; but in a
_particular_ sense, and to the officers of His Majesty's Customs, it was
a very important place indeed, inasmuch as the inhabitants, animated by
a spirit of enterprise and a love of adventure not to be satisfied by
such very ordinary and humdrum pursuits as those of fishing and
market-gardening, had, almost to a man--to say nothing of the women and
children--added thereto the illegal but lucrative and exciting
occupation of smuggling; to the great loss and damage of the king's
revenues.

The village consisted, at that time, of a single short, narrow street
with a bend in the middle of it.  Nearly one half of the north side of
this street was occupied by the churchyard and church; the remaining
portion, as well as the opposite side of the way, being composed of
small low, two-story cottages with thatched roofs (and most of them
having little projecting dormer-windows), a couple of public-houses, and
a small grocery establishment.

This constituted the village proper; but a little aloof from it--being
in it but not of it, as it were--there were in all perhaps half a dozen
residences of a somewhat more pretentious kind.  There was the rectory,
for instance, on the opposite side of the road, eastward of the church,
built in the very centre of its extensive garden, and snugly surrounded
on all sides by high stone walls.  Then there was Stoke House, near the
rectory, standing well back from the road, embowered in trees, and with
a carriage-drive running straight up through its beautiful rose-garden
to the front door.  Nearer the beach, and on the opposite side of the
valley, was "Verbena Cottage," the abode of Lieutenant Bobus, in command
of the coast-guard; and still nearer the beach, some ten or a dozen
yards back from the road, enclosed within a neat paling, sheltered by
lofty trees, with a lovely flower-garden in front and an extensive fruit
and kitchen-garden in the rear, stood "Sea View," a small but well-built
house, in which resided the relict and daughter of the late "Cap'n"
Walford.

The late "Cap'n" Walford had been a wonderfully popular man in his day;
and his memory was greatly esteemed and revered by the villagers.
Manifesting, at an early age, a love of enterprise and excitement quite
extraordinary even in an Alverstoke man, he had seized the first
opportunity which offered to become the owner of a very fine
fast-sailing lugger, in which, during his thirty years of devotion to
maritime pursuits, he, by a rare combination of prudence and audacity,
gradually acquired the reputation of being a most successful smuggler--
and the snug little fortune of some ten thousand pounds.  The latter and
more desirable portion of his acquirements he carefully invested, as it
dribbled in bit by bit, in house-property in the neighbourhood; so that,
when this estimable man's career was cut short at the comparatively
early age of sixty years, by an unlucky cannon-shot fired from a revenue
cutter, his disconsolate relict found herself the possessor of a
comfortable income amounting to some five hundred pounds per annum,
together with "Sea View" and--last, but by no means least--a daughter,
fourteen years of age.  This melancholy event occurred four years before
the date at which this history opens; Lucy Walford was therefore about
eighteen years old when the first of that train of events happened which
it is herein proposed to record.

Mrs Walford was wont to assert, just about this time, that Lucy was the
very living picture of what she herself used to be when a girl.  If this
was indeed true, it was at once an evidence of that remarkable good
taste which the late "cap'n" was said to have possessed, and of the
extraordinary changes effected by the hand of Time, for no one could
ever have suspected such a resemblance without Mrs Walford's assurance.
The old lady was a sad and subdued personage, thin and angular of
figure and face, with prominent cheek-bones, eye-brows, and chin, dark
eyes, deeply sunk in their sockets, a broad forehead, ploughed with
innumerable wrinkles, a long sharp aquiline nose, a large thin-lipped
mouth, and a querulous temper.

Lucy, on the other hand, was of medium height, slight, graceful figure,
abounding in delicate curves, with small hands and feet, an exquisite
complexion, a face, the sweet piquant loveliness of which set all the
youth of Alverstoke--and Gosport too, for that matter--by the ears, a
wealth of long silky golden hair, which persisted in twisting itself
into a most distracting conglomeration of wavy curls, and a temper which
nothing--not even her mother's querulousness--could ruffle.

That Lucy should be fairly beset by suitors was only natural.  There was
not a single bold young smuggler of marriageable age in all the country
round about who did not cherish in a greater or lesser degree the fond
hope of one day making her his own, albeit most of them were--it is only
just to say--dimly cognisant of the fact that she was much too good for
the best of them.  It was probably in consequence of this feeling that
only one or two--the boldest of the bold of this dashing fraternity--
had, so far, mustered up the courage to approach the young lady with a
distinct proposal of marriage; and these, it is hardly necessary to say,
had been firmly, but as pleasantly as possible, sent to the right-about.
This class of lovers gave Lucy no trouble whatever; bold as they might
be in the pursuit of their lawless avocation, they were diffident to the
verge of absurdity in the presence of beauty, if associated with dignity
and refinement; they were painfully conscious of their uncouth bearing
and manners; and Lucy had little difficulty in keeping them at a proper
distance.

But if these admirers gave her no trouble, there were others--notably
two--who did; quite enough, in fact, to fully compensate for the ease
with which she was able to manage all the rest.  One of these was a
certain Lieutenant Walford, a cousin of Lucy's; the other being Captain
George Leicester, of the merchant schooner _Industry_.

Edward Walford was the only son of a half-brother of the late Captain
Walford.  He was an orphan, twenty-three years of age, and held a
commission in his Majesty's--foot, then quartered in Gosport.  He was
fairly well educated, tall, passably good-looking, of engaging manners,
but--those who knew him best said--treacherous, unscrupulous, and a
gamester.

George Leicester, on the other hand, whilst perhaps quite as handsome as
his rival, was simply a frank, honest, sturdy seaman, carrying his heart
upon his sleeve; thoroughly master of his profession, but diffident and
doubtful of himself in all other matters.

The trouble with these two was, that Walford could not be made to see
that his presence was distasteful to Lucy; whilst Leicester was
provokingly blind to the fact that the fair girl loved him with all her
pure, simple little heart.  She had not given her love to him unsought,
it must be understood--far from it; George Leicester had been one of the
earliest, as he was one of her most constant and devoted, admirers; he
was unremitting in his attentions to her whenever he was in port; but
the simple fellow was so doubtful as to his prospects of success that he
had never given Lucy the chance, which she would so gladly have
welcomed, to say "Yes" to the momentous question which was ever hovering
upon his lips, but had never yet been able to get beyond them.

It was on a certain brilliant June afternoon that Lucy, as was her
frequent custom, took a book in her hand and strolled down to the beach,
where, making a little nest for herself in the shingle, she sat down to
read or think, as the whim might take her.

The ardent rays of the sun, streaming down out of a cloudless sky,
gleamed and flashed and sparkled upon the waters of the Solent, which,
ruffled by a gentle westerly breeze, shone like a sheet of liquid gold.
On the further side of the strait, the Isle of Wight upreared its green
and wooded slopes in fair perspective; its northern shore, from
Nettlestone Point to Egypt, bounding the view.  On Lucy's right lay the
entrance to Southampton Water, with the further shore, about Stone Point
and the mouth of the Beaulieu River, indistinctly seen through the
quivering golden haze; whilst on the left, across the water, Southsea
Castle stood boldly forward upon its low projecting point, a watchful
sentinel over the magnificent anchorage of Spithead.  Inland from the
castle lay the little straggling town of Southsea; and beyond it again,
still higher up the estuary, appeared the spires and roofs of
Portsmouth, its harbour crowded with a perfect forest of masts.  Some
half a dozen men-o'-war lay at anchor at Spithead; and the waters of the
Solent were dotted with the sails of craft of all sizes, from the
stately frigate to the humble but enterprising bumboat.

As Lucy sat there on the beach, basking in the sun, and far too idle to
read, her listless gaze became fastened upon a trim, smart-looking
little schooner which, under all the canvas she could possibly spread,
was creeping slowly up from the westward before the light summer breeze.
The glance of indifference with which the fair girl at first regarded
the little craft, gradually changed to one of the greatest interest.
Lucy, it must be remembered, was a sailor's daughter; nearly all her
neighbours were interested almost solely in seafaring matters; the daily
conversation of those by whom she was surrounded abounded in nautical
technicalities; she had even made a trip upon one occasion in her
father's lugger (the only occasion, by the bye, on which the hold of the
said lugger was absolutely guiltless of contraband freight); and lastly,
were not the walls of her home adorned with portraits of craft of
various rigs passing Flushing or the Needles?  All of which
circumstances had combined to give Lucy a very fair knowledge of
nautical matters and "a sailor's eye."  She had not only learned the
distinguishing characteristics of different rigs, but had also acquired
the subtle power of recognising the individuality of different craft of
the same rig whenever there happened to be anything to excite her
interest in such craft.  So now she first recognised the fact that the
approaching vessel was a schooner, and, a little later on, when the
schooner had drawn somewhat nearer, she became conscious that the
schooner was well known to her.  Drawing a small telescope from her
pocket, she focussed it and pointed it at the vessel.  Yes; there could
be no doubt about it, it was the _Industry_; every little detail of
canvas and rigging proclaimed the schooner's identity; and then, as
though in order that there should be no possible room for doubt, and as
though George Leicester had seen and recognised the charming girlish
figure standing there on the beach (as possibly he had through his
powerful marine glass), a white fluttering object gleamed out over the
rail and, soaring aloft, streamed from the main-truck, a burgee with the
name _Industry_ worked upon it in red letters.  At the sight of this
Lucy rapidly closed her little telescope and returned it to her pocket
with a bright flush and a conscious, happy little laugh.

"Dear George," she murmured; "how glad I am that he is back all safe;
and how fervently I hope that he did not see me watching the schooner.
I wonder whether he will walk over this evening."

She then, uncomfortably conscious of the possibility that "dear George"
might at that very moment have her accurately focussed in the field of
his glass, sauntered along the beach with as much of an air of total
abstraction as she could conveniently assume on the spur of the moment,
and finally, after watching the schooner pass safely into Portsmouth
Harbour and there come to an anchor, returned home.

She found her mother suffering from a more than ordinarily severe attack
of "the miserables," as that lady was wont to term her low spirits.  It
was one of Mrs Walford's peculiarities to be depressed in spirits in
exact proportion to the brightness and exhilarating character of the
weather--but Lucy was completely proof against it all just now; the
sight she had so lately looked upon had sent a soft, dainty flush into
her cheeks, a light into her eyes, and a song to her lips, which her
mother's "miserables" were wholly powerless to drive away, and she went
about the house filling it with the melody of her low, sweet voice.

Tea was over; Mrs Walford was made comfortable in her wide arm-chair,
with a huge volume of sermons in her lap; and Lucy was trying to settle
down with composure to the execution of some trifle in the way of
needle-work, when the sharp click of the gate-latch was heard; there was
a crunching of feet upon the gravel walk, the front door was
unceremoniously opened, and Lieutenant Edward Walford walked in.

"How _do_, aunt?  Lucy, fair coz, I hope I see you in a state of perfect
salubrity?" was his nonchalant greeting.

Mrs Walford replied that "she was as well as could be expected,"--she
did not say under what adverse circumstances--and Lucy requested him not
to make himself ridiculous.  It was too bad, she decided; here she had
been looking forward to a delightful visit from George Leicester,
probably a whole evening spent in his society, and now this pestilent
cousin of hers must needs take it into his perverse head to walk over
from Gosport--to be found later on by "dear George" making fierce love
to her, the unfortunate Lucy;--which would be quite sufficient, she felt
sure, to choke the said George off for at least another voyage.  But
that should never be, she was quite resolved; she could not prevent her
cousin coming to the house, since her mother not only tolerated, but
rather encouraged his visits; but she could, and she _would_, prevent
his making love to her.

With this determination she sat down, and, resorting to the best means
she could think of for keeping her cousin at arm's length, produced her
writing-materials and proceeded to discharge a few of her epistolary
debts.

Being thus unmistakably shown that his presence was unwelcome to the
younger lady, he turned his attention to the elder one, talking to her
about the war--the then all-important and most interesting topic of the
moment--and giving her such scraps of news as had come to hand during
the day, but it was perfectly evident from the uneasy glances he shot at
his cousin and the nervous way in which he tugged at his long auburn
moustache, that his occupation was not to his liking.  At last,
abandoning all further effort to accomplish the almost impossible task
of amusing the old lady, he stepped to Lucy's side, and said in a low
whisper--

"Will you come into the garden with me for a few minutes, Lucy?  I have
something of the utmost importance to say to you, something which will
brook no delay, for my regiment is ordered off to the West Indies, and I
may not have another opportunity to see you."

Lucy knew as well as possible what the "something" was which her cousin
so anxiously desired to say to her; she was convinced that it was
nothing less than a proposal of marriage; and her first impulse was to
excuse herself.  But that, she decided, would hardly be kind on the eve
of his departure for foreign service; moreover, it might leave him in
possession of a feeling that there was some hope for him, or possibly,
after the many love-speeches he had made her, he might feel himself in
some sort bound not to marry any one else until he had had a distinct
refusal from her, and that must certainly be avoided; so she decided
that she would grant him the desired interview, give him his dismissal
as speedily and withal as kindly as possible, and get him out of the
house without delay--it was still early in the evening, and who knew but
that she might succeed in getting rid of her unwelcome suitor before the
welcome one put in an appearance?

So, laying aside her pen, she motioned him to follow her into the large
garden at the back of the house, where they would be perfectly secure
from observation, and herself led the way.

She conducted her cousin to a little summer-house at the lower end of
the garden, and, motioning him to a seat said--

"Now, Cousin Edward, what is this important communication which you have
to make?  Be as brief as possible, if you please, for I really cannot
spare you much time."

"I will," he said.  Then, pausing for a moment, and making an
unsuccessful attempt to gain possession of her hand, he remarked--

"I think you must have already guessed what it is that I have to say to
you, Lucy.  You cannot be ignorant of the feeling with which I regard
you; you must have discovered long ago that I love you, Lucy, deeply,
passionately, tenderly, as a man loves only once in his lifetime.  We
have not known each other _very_ long, it is true," he continued after a
slight pause, during which he had vainly looked into her downcast face
for some sign of encouragement, "but the time has been long enough for
me to learn that all my hopes of future happiness depend on you; and I
think it has also been long enough to enable you to judge whether you
can entrust your happiness to me or not.  I know I am by no means what I
ought to be,"--here he made another pause, hoping for some word or sign
of disclaimer, which, however, never came--"but I hope you will not
judge me too harshly.  I am an orphan, remember.  Robbed at an early age
of a mother's tender care and gentle training, I have been left pretty
much to the mercy of strangers, who allowed me to grow up to manhood
without an effort to check the development of those evil propensities
which we all alike inherit from our first parents; and then, too, I have
had the misfortune to be thrown--against my will, I honestly assure
you--into evil companionship.  But, in spite of all these disadvantages,
I flatter myself that I am by no means a bad sort of fellow; and if you
will only take me in hand, Lucy, I feel sure you could make a reformed
character of me.  And then, too, consider the society into which I could
introduce you.  Wearing his Majesty's uniform, as I do, I could--"

"Pray say no more, Edward, I beg," interrupted Lucy.  "I am grieved to
be obliged to disappoint you--though I do not think the disappointment
will be very great--but what you ask is quite impossible.  In the first
place I must frankly say that I do not love you; and in the second I
must with equal frankness say that, though I might love ever so much, I
would _never_ marry a man who needed that I should `take him in hand' to
make a reformed character of him.  You are my cousin, and, as such, I
shall always regard you with friendly interest; but I shall never be
able to entertain for you any warmer feeling."

Walford, pale to the lips with surprise and chagrin, looked
incredulously in the face of the fair girl by whose side he was seated.
He was completely staggered.  The idea of his being indifferent to his
cousin had never for a single instant occurred to him.  He had won for
himself the reputation of being quite a "lady-killer;" and now this
little country-bred girl had the impertinence to tell him coolly that
she did not love him; nay, more--to hint pretty strongly that she
regarded him with feelings not very far removed from contempt, because,
forsooth, he had lived a somewhat fast life.  Why, many of the girls he
had met had positively _admired_ him for his rakishness--he did not
pause to consider what manner of girls these were, though, by the bye.
It was monstrous, it was positively insulting.  Then, in addition to the
severe wound to his _amour-propre_, there was the disappointment of his
hopes of pecuniary aggrandisement; Lucy's fortune, modest though it was,
would have been of the utmost service to him.  It was true, he knew,
that she would not have a penny of her own until her mother died, but
that, he was firmly convinced, would not be a very long-postponed event;
the "old fool"--as he called Mrs Walford in his heart--would doubtless
be in her grave long enough before he returned from foreign service--
and, at all events, he was willing to risk that.  But then Lucy had said
she would not have him.  Surely she could not mean it; she was only
saying it to try him, or--stay--was it possible that she loved that
sailor-fellow Leicester?  He would find out.

"Are you _quite sure_, Lucy, that you will never be able to love me?" he
asked, infusing a very successful affectation of passionate entreaty
into the tones of his voice.  "Perhaps I have spoken too quickly; I have
taken you by surprise, I have allowed my impatience to outrun my
judgment; perhaps if I had waited a little longer--"

"It would have been just the same; I could never have loved you,"
interrupted Lucy.  "And now let us return to the house; this interview
has lasted quite long enough.  I am sincerely sorry if you are
disappointed, Edward, but I could never give you any other answer, so
please say no more about it."

"One word more," exclaimed Walford.  "Tell me--I have a right to know--
do you love any one else?"

"I really do not see that you _have_ a right to know anything about my
private affairs," answered Lucy with some hauteur, "but in order that
you may fully understand the hopelessness of your own case, I will
confess that--that there _is_--some one else."

"Ah!" ejaculated Walford between his set teeth, "I suspected as much.
And I can form a pretty shrewd guess as to who it is, too.  It is that
sneaking rascal Leicester, is it not?"

"How dare you, sir, speak to me of my friends in that manner!" exclaimed
Lucy, rising to her feet and stamping upon the ground in the excess of
her indignation.  "Go, sir, and never come near me again; I will never
speak another word to you!"

"You won't, eh?" was the sneering retort.  "All right.  I _will_ go; and
I'll not come near you again.  But I'll make you bitterly repent of your
treatment of me yet, or my name is not Edward Walford."

And rising to his feet, he walked rapidly up the garden, through the
house, and straight out at the front door, without so much as pausing to
bid his aunt good-bye.



CHAPTER TWO.

CAPTAIN LEICESTER HEARS BAD NEWS.

In the meantime, the _Industry_ having come to an anchor in Portsmouth
Harbour, Captain Leicester, waiting only to see the sails properly
furled, jumped into the boat and hurried away to his owner's residence.

Here he was detained for more than an hour, the individual he was
desirous of seeing happening to be absent, "but expected back
immediately," according to the statement of the solitary clerk who
occupied the little front room which did duty as an office.

The owner of the _Industry_ having at length turned up, her captain was
instructed to haul alongside the wharf forthwith, in readiness to begin
discharging her cargo the first thing next morning.  So George
Leicester, greatly to his disappointment, had to return on board once
more; and it was not until the clocks were striking seven that, the
schooner having been duly hauled alongside the wharf and securely moored
thereto, her commander felt himself at liberty to leave her and set out
upon a pilgrimage to Alverstoke.  But for the delay thus occasioned, the
events herein recorded would probably never have occurred, those of them
at least which chiefly concern Captain Leicester.

Let us take a good look at our hero as he stands for a moment in the
golden evening light on the planks of the wooden structure which,
supported by ricketty, worm-eaten piles, does duty as a wharf.  Like a
thorough seaman as he is, he is taking a last glance at the schooner
before he leaves her, to see that everything is thoroughly "ship-shape
and Bristol-fashion" on board her.  She is a small and somewhat
insignificant craft; but as George has sailed in her for the last four
years of his life--two years as mate and two more as master--he has
become attached to her, looking at her faults with a lenient eye, and
striving to conceal them as much as possible from others.  As he stands,
with his hands lightly crossed behind him, his legs a trifle apart, and
his eye wandering critically over the _Industry's_ hull and rigging, we
see him to be a man of about five feet eight inches in height, with a
well-knit figure, regular features, dark hair and eyes, the former
surmounted by a jaunty crimson worsted cap with a silk tassel on its
drooping end, and tied into a queue behind with a bow of very broad
black silk ribbon, short black whiskers on each side of his face, with a
clean-shaven upper lip and chin.  He is clad in a wide-skirted coat of
fine blue cloth, trimmed with large gilt buttons, and worn open to show
the kerseymere waistcoat beneath, the long flaps of which are confined
by a broad belt.  He wears a white silk kerchief round his throat, lace
ruffles at his wrists (in honour of his projected visit to his
lady-love), and his nether man is encased in knee-breeches, white
stockings, and shoes with large silver buckles.  There is a frank,
pleasant look in the keen dark eyes, and an expression of firmness about
the closed lips which makes most people feel, when they look at him,
that they would much rather have him for a friend than for an enemy.
Altogether, as far as _physique_ is concerned, he certainly has the
advantage of Lieutenant Walford.  As to the comparative moral qualities
of the two men, the reader will have abundant opportunity to judge for
him--or her--self.

Unfortunately, however, for his own and Lucy Walford's peace of mind,
George Leicester is not only unaware of this superiority on his own
part, but he strongly suspects it to be all on the other side.  He has
made Walford's acquaintance, having met him, perhaps, some half a dozen
times in all, at "Sea View," and, despite his simplicity, he has had no
difficulty in recognising in the lieutenant a would-be rival.  And this
is just where his own modesty and self-depreciation have played him a
scurvy trick.  He has noted Walford's easy, nonchalant bearing, and his
two or three flashy accomplishments; he has noticed, too, that the
lieutenant is not altogether devoid of good looks, and has jumped--all
too hastily, as we are aware--at the conclusion that, where a woman is
concerned, a plain, straightforward, honest sailor can have no chance
against a dashing soldier like the lieutenant.  At the same time, he has
by no means given up the chase, nor ever will, so he tells himself, as
long as Lucy is free.  Over and over again has he been upon the point of
speaking out and learning his fate, and over and over again has he
hesitated and closed his lips, deeming the occasion unpropitious, or
fearing to learn that which will make the remainder of his life a blank
to him.

But now he has resolved to delay no longer.  He has been screwing up his
courage to the sticking-place during the whole of the passage from
Waterford to Gosport, and when he stepped from the rail of the
_Industry_ on to the wharf, he was on his way to Alverstoke to learn his
fate.

Satisfied at last that everything was right on board the schooner,
Leicester turned away and directed his steps up High Street, and thence
out on to the Stoke Road.  Alverstoke church-clock struck eight just as
he came in sight of it; and the next moment he saw, far ahead of him, a
man dart round the corner and come swinging along the road towards him
at a tremendous pace.  Distant as the man was, Captain Leicester had no
difficulty in recognising in him his dreaded rival, Lieutenant Walford.
He guessed at once that the lieutenant had been visiting at "Sea View;"
but what struck him as strange was that Walford's appearance and bearing
was that of a man in a towering passion.  Almost immediately afterwards,
however, he decided that he must have been mistaken in supposing this,
for as Walford looked up and recognised him he stopped dead in the road
for a moment, and then hurried towards the skipper with outstretched
hand and a beaming face.

"My _dear_ Leicester, how are you?"  Walford exclaimed with effusion, as
he grasped the seaman's hand and wrung it heartily.  "How glad I am to
see you.  When did you arrive?"

"This afternoon only," was the answer.  "Have you been to `Sea View'
lately?  There is nothing wrong there, I hope?"

"Wrong, my dear fellow!  No.  Why do you ask?"

"Well, when you rounded the corner just now you were walking at such a
terrific pace, and looked so much as though you were greatly upset about
something, that I feared there had been an accident at `Sea View,' and
that--"

"That I was hurrying off for the nearest doctor, eh?  Well, you may set
your mind at rest, my dear boy; nothing _is_ the matter.  I have just
left Mrs Walford's, and both she and Lucy are in excellent health, I am
glad to say.  It is deuced kind of you, though, to take such a warm
interest in them, and I thank you for it with all my heart.  You are a
prime favourite there, I can tell you, my lad; I have been frightfully
jealous of you for a long time, but now I shall never be so any more.
Lucy--darling girl that she is--has had pity upon me at last, and has
condescended to set all my fears at rest; so you may congratulate me if
you like."

"Upon her having--accepted you as--as--her future husband?" gasped
Leicester, white to the very lips.

"Exactly; I _knew_ you would be glad to hear it, being an old friend of
hers," was the reply.  "But mum's the word for the present.  Our
regiment is ordered away to the West Indies at once, so Lucy wishes the
engagement to be kept secret until I can return home to claim her.
Well, I must be off; you are going to `Sea View,' I suppose?  Don't
mention our conversation there, please; I should not like Lucy to know
that I have already been prating of the engagement; if she feels
inclined to tell you of it herself, of course that is another thing."

"All right, I'll not say a word about it, you may rest assured,"
answered Leicester, as he suffered his hand to be clasped in farewell;
"in fact, I don't suppose I shall have an opportunity to mention it to
them; I am not going to call there to-night, and I may not have time to
call there at all, as I shall be very busy during the next few days.
I--I am--thinking of giving up the _Industry_ and going--somewhere--
abroad, myself."

"Are you?" ejaculated Walford with great heartiness.  "Well done; I am
glad to hear you say so.  A fellow with your pluck and sinews was never
intended to potter about in a trumpery little coaster.  Well, good-bye."

The two men separated; Walford to chuckle and exult over the complete
success of his suddenly planned ruse, and Leicester, with all hope and
brightness gone out of his face, to saunter despondently along the road
and back to Gosport, by way of Haslar Common, avoiding "Sea View"
altogether.

So Lucy was lost to him!  Well, after all, it was no more than he had
dreaded all along; he had been a fool, and worse than a fool, to suppose
that he, a plain, unpolished seaman, could possibly have a chance of
success when pitted against a fellow like Walford--curse him!  No--no,
not that, he did not mean that; why should he curse the man to whom Lucy
had given her young, fresh love?  Still it was very hard to bear--very
hard; he hoped the fellow would treat her well; if not, let him look to
himself.  But why should not Walford treat her well?  Who could do
otherwise?  Who was there in the whole wide world who could find it in
his heart to be anything but kind and loving and tender to her?  And
yet--Psha!  Who was he--George Leicester--that he should judge another
man?  True, he had heard some very queer stories about this same
Lieutenant Walford, but doubtless they were all fabrications; Lucy was
not the girl to love a man of whom such things could possibly be true.
And as to his (Leicester's) own feelings of distrust and dislike, why
they were after all only the natural outcome of his jealousy, and were
certainly not to be relied upon as indicating faultiness of character in
his successful rival.  Still, argue as he would, he had his doubts, and
he could not dispel them, and--well, it was a hard blow, coming so
suddenly, too; it was difficult to bear it patiently even _now_, and he
had a shrewd suspicion that it would be still more difficult to bear
by-and-by, when he fully realised the extent of his loss.

But it was no use fretting over it; the question was, "What was now to
be done?"  He could not possibly live on the old humdrum life any
longer.  He must have excitement and activity, plenty of both, to keep
his mind occupied, and to prevent his fretting over his disappointment.
"Yes, that was a happy inspiration which had led him to tell Walford he
intended giving up the _Industry_; that must be his first act.  And
after that?  Well, after that he would look about him, and if he could
pick up a tidy little vessel cheap; he would invest his savings in the
purchase of her, sail in his own employ, and try to stifle all vain
regrets by plunging into a more adventurous mode of existence."

So ran George Leicester's thoughts as he made his way back to the
_Industry_.

Meanwhile, Lucy, having given one lover his _conge_ waited with loving
impatience but in vain, for the appearance of the other.

On the following day, the master of the _Industry_ waited upon his
owner, a Mr Winter, and requested his discharge.  Mr Winter was both
surprised and chagrined at the news that he was to lose so well-tried
and faithful a servant as George; but, finding our hero inflexible in
his resolution, he could, of course, do nothing but accede to his
request, which he did at last with a very good grace.

"And now," said Mr Winter, when the accounts had all been gone through
and squared up, "since you are quite determined to go your own wilful
way, I suppose I must do what I can to help you.  You will go to London,
of course, to look out for this ship that you propose to purchase; and I
will give you a letter to a Mr Roberts, a ship-broker and a friend of
mine, who has an office in Great Saint Helen's.  He is pretty sure to
have or to know of something which will suit you; he is a thoroughly
straightforward, honourable man, will do his best to suit you, and will
charge you nothing; the seller is the man who will have to pay him his
commission."

George duly thanked Mr Winter for his kindness, received the letter,
and on the following morning crossed over to Portsmouth, and booked
himself to London on the "Highflyer" coach.

The next day found our hero at an early hour in Leadenhall Street,
seeking for the whereabouts of Great Saint Helen's.  A clerk, going in
that direction on his way to business, pointed out the place, and,
turning into the narrow court, George soon found the office of which he
was in search.

Mr Roberts was busy perusing a large pile of papers when his visitor
was shown in, and he begged to be excused for a moment whilst he
completed his task.  This was soon done, whereupon Mr Roberts rang two
distinct strokes upon a small hand-bell, and a clerk entered in
response.

"Here, Wilson," said the ship-broker, handing over the pile of papers,
"take these.  You will find from the notes I have jotted down upon this
sheet of paper what to do with them.  Now, sir," turning to George,
"what can I have the pleasure of doing for you?"

George briefly explained his business, and handed over Mr Winter's
letter of introduction, which Mr Roberts rapidly glanced through.  Then
the little bell was struck once, and another and much more
substantial-looking clerk made his appearance.

"Bring me List A, if you please," said Mr Roberts.

"List A," a large leather-bound volume, was brought in and laid upon the
table before the ship-broker, who at once opened it, and began to run
his fingers slowly down an index.  Then he rapidly turned up an entry in
the book itself, and read out--

"`_Challenger_--brig; 450 tons; softwood built, iron-fastened, sheathed
with zinc; nine years old; well found in sails, ground-tackle, and all
necessary stores, ready for sea.  Price 1800 pounds.'  How will that do?
She is really a very decent vessel of her kind, and exceedingly cheap
at the price."

"We might take a look at her," remarked George, "but her description
does not sound very inviting."

Another reference to the index, another turning up of an entry, and--

"Well, what do you think of this?  `_Lucy_--brigantine; 520 tons;
oak-built, coppered, and copper-fastened throughout; has only been to
sea twice; excellent sea-boat, very fast and weatherly; fully found in
every respect, and quite ready for sea.  Price 2500 pounds.'"

"That sounds very much better," answered Leicester, who, to tell the
truth, was almost as much taken with the name as anything else; "but I
don't particularly admire the rig."

"Umph!" ejaculated Mr Roberts, pursing up his lips and referring to the
index once more.  "Um, um, _Maid of the Mist_--_Lizzie_--_Highland
Lass_--_Enterprise_--ah! yes; perhaps this will do.  `_Enterprise_--
brig; seven years old, oak-built, iron-fastened, 350 tons register, will
carry 600 tons dead-weight; well found.  Price 2200 pounds.  Requires a
few trifling repairs amounting to possibly 500 pounds.'  How does that
strike you?"

"Not very favourably," was the reply.

"Well, let's try again," remarked the ship-broker.  "I _know_ I can suit
you."

Another reference to the index, then a sudden sharp closing of the book,
with the muttered ejaculation, "The very thing!  What a donkey I am not
to have thought of her before."

Then a single stroke on the bell, followed by the reappearance of the
substantial-looking clerk.

"Bring me in the inventory of the _Aurora_, if you please; that paper
that was left here by Mr Sutton yesterday."

The document was brought in, and Mr Roberts at once handed it over to
his client with the remark--

"There, my dear sir, just run your eye over that; if the _Aurora_ won't
suit you, _nothing_ will.  She is a capital little ship; I know her
well.  Her owner, poor fellow--who is captain of her also--had the
misfortune to lose his wife last voyage--washed overboard somehow in a
gale of wind--and it has so upset him that he has resolved to cut the
sea altogether and everything connected with it.  He is even willing to
sell at a great sacrifice, so as to get rid of the ship as soon as
possible.  Great bargain, captain; most extraordinary bargain; never get
another such a chance."

"That looks much more promising," said George, returning the paper.
"Where is she, and when can I see her?"

"London Docks--see her in an hour--I'll take you down on board at once,"
was the reply.

And merely stopping to change his coat, and give some instructions to
his clerks, Mr Roberts invited George to follow him; and, getting into
the street, they hailed the first hackney-coach which passed, and in a
few minutes were jolting along on their way to the London Docks.

Dismissing the coach at the dock gates, Mr Roberts inquired of the
gate-keeper where the _Aurora_ was to be found.

"Inside ship, fourth berth, north side," answered the man, pointing out
the direction they were to take.

They soon found the vessel, and George, standing on the edge of the dock
wall, saw before him a pretty little barque of some four hundred and odd
tons, copper-bottomed, with a flush deck fore and aft, a fine set of
spars, and such a shapely hull as set his eyes glistening.  He walked
away from her and knelt down so as to take a good look at her "run;"
then went ahead of her to see what her bows were like; and finally, very
much prepossessed in her favour already, went on board, accompanied by
Mr Roberts.

Here they were received by the ship-keeper, who at once led the way into
the cabin.  This proved to be an exceedingly snug and comfortable
apartment, not very large, yet roomy enough, and very tastefully fitted
up.  Abaft this they found the captain's cabin, a room some twelve feet
long, and the entire width of the ship, well lighted--there being both a
skylight and stern-ports--and fitted up in a style which gave
unmistakable evidence of the refined taste of the former captain's poor
drowned wife.  From the cabin they proceeded to the forecastle, and from
thence into the hold, George all the time peering about everywhere for
signs of weakness or bad workmanship, without finding any.  Having at
length satisfied himself as to the soundness of the hull, he went aloft
and gave to the spars and rigging a careful examination.  Here, too,
everything was perfectly satisfactory; and when he at length stepped
down out of the rigging on to the deck, he nodded approvingly to Mr
Roberts and said--

"All right; I'll take her."

"Glad to hear you say so, captain," was the cheery reply; "she is a
capital little craft, and I'm sure you'll like her.  Now--as it is
nearly two o'clock--what say you, will you come and take dinner with
me?"

Leicester acquiescing, they made the best of their way to the
eating-house which Mr Roberts patronised, and, while discussing the
meal, made arrangements for the completion of the purchase.

The meal ended, George wended his way back toward the dock, and, turning
into Nightingale Lane, established himself in tolerably comfortable
quarters in a boarding-house kept by a widow, whose husband had been
what she called a "sea-captain."

On the following day Captain Leicester paid over the full amount of the
purchase-money, receiving in return the ship's register properly
endorsed; and that same evening he found himself the undisputed owner of
the _Aurora_.

His next task was to secure a freight.  This he had no difficulty in
doing--in fact he had his choice of some half a dozen--and by noon he
had accepted a charter for the conveyance of a general cargo to
Kingston, Jamaica; to commence loading at once.  Having completed the
business, he hurried away to the shipping-office, and was fortunate
enough to secure the services of a very promising-looking mate, who
undertook to establish himself on board forthwith, so as to be on the
spot in readiness to receive the cargo as it came down to the ship.

George now found himself comparatively at leisure, and he had at one
time serious thoughts of running down to Gosport, were it only for a
day, just to see Lucy once more, and bid her good-bye.  Well would it
have been for both of them had he done so.  But on reconsidering the
matter, he arrived at the conclusion that no good could possibly come of
any such proceeding, whilst the sight of Lucy would only too certainly
increase the pangs of regret he already so keenly felt at his failure to
win her; so he eventually decided to remain where he was, and occupy
himself in watching the stowage of the cargo.



CHAPTER THREE.

A CAPTURE AND A RECAPTURE.

A fortnight from the day on which Captain Leicester signed the
charter-party saw the last package passed into the _Aurora's_ hold, and
on the following day she sailed for Plymouth, there to join a fleet of
merchant-ships which were to cross the Atlantic under convoy.

Thanks principally to the exertions of his chief mate, Mr Bowen, George
was fortunate enough to pick up a very good crew, comprising a second
mate--who acted also as boatswain--a carpenter, a steward, a black cook,
two able-seamen, four ordinary ditto, and two well-grown lads, who had
already been a voyage or two in a coaster.  This constituted a
complement of fourteen men, all told; just sufficient to handle the
barque comfortably.

They sailed from the Thames with the wind at about west, and had a
capital run as far as the South Foreland, the _Aurora_ showing herself
to be such a smart vessel under her canvas that her commander was
delighted with her.

At this point, however, the wind, which still held from the westward,
was dead against them, and it became a question whether they should
anchor in the Downs to await a favourable change, or continue on and
endeavour to beat a passage as far as Plymouth.  Prudence dictated the
adoption of the former course; it being well known that the Channel was
just then swarming with French privateers--powerful luggers for the most
part--the captains of which had an unpleasant habit of slipping out of
harbour as the evening came on, and stretching across toward the English
coast, on the lookout for our merchantmen, very often picking up a
valuable prize and getting back into port the next morning.  The
weather, too, happened just then to be highly favourable for the
operations of these gentry, the sky being overcast with frequent
showers, and no moon.

On the other hand, however, time was of the utmost importance; George
had only five days left him in which to reach Plymouth, if he was to
avail himself of the protection of convoy; so, after discussing the
question with Mr Bowen, and carefully weighing it in his own mind, he
finally decided to keep the ship moving, and to trust to fortune and a
good lookout.

The _Aurora_ accordingly proceeded, stretching over as far as
mid-channel, when she went about; and on drawing in with the land again
Leicester had the satisfaction of seeing that she would handsomely
weather Beachy Head, which she did, tacking close in under the land
about breakfast-time on the day following her departure from London.  At
2 p.m., being at the time rather nearer to the French than to the
English coast, George tacked again, in order to close the English shore
toward nightfall.

At 9 p.m., being abreast of Littlehampton, and about eight miles off the
shore, the _Aurora_ went about once more, and stood over towards France,
close-hauled on the starboard tack.

The weather had cleared somewhat, the sun breaking through the clouds as
the afternoon wore on, and flooding the whole western sky with splendour
as he sank to rest.  One by one, as the golden glory of the west faded
into sober grey, the stars shone out, peeping shyly down upon the world
from the softly dappled sky, and there was every prospect of its being a
fine night in the Channel.  George accordingly gave instructions for the
ship to continue on the same tack until midnight, when she was to be
hove about once more.  Then, cautioning the second mate--who was in
charge of the deck--to maintain a strict lookout and to call him in the
event of a change of weather or the appearance of a suspicious-looking
sail in their neighbourhood, he went below to snatch an hour or two of
sleep, having had none so far from the moment of the vessel's sailing.

Flinging off his clothes, he threw himself into his swinging cot, and
instantly sank into a sound and dreamless slumber; to be awakened again
with a start, and almost instantly, as it seemed to him, by the flapping
of the ship's canvas in the wind.

Starting up into a sitting posture, he heard the voice of the chief mate
on deck giving the necessary orders for tacking ship.

"Hillo!" he thought, "what is the meaning of this?  Nothing wrong, I
hope.  No, that cannot be, or they would surely have called me.  Perhaps
it is a change of wind; I hope it is.  Well, being awake, I may as well
slip on deck and satisfy myself as to the meaning of it."

He accordingly sprang out of his cot, and began to dress himself; the
sounds on deck having meanwhile ceased, save for the monotonous tread
overhead of the officer of the watch, and the occasional clank of the
wheel-chains.  The ship was heeling over to starboard, showing that she
was on the port tack, and the rushing sound of the water along her sides
seemed to indicate that she was moving pretty rapidly through it.

As he opened his state-room door to pass into the main cabin, a heavy
step was heard descending the companion-ladder, and the next moment the
second mate appeared at its foot, in the act of turning into his own
state-room.

"Well, Mr Cross," said the skipper, "what is the news from the deck?
You have tacked ship, it seems; is there a change of wind?"

"No, sir," answered Cross; "the wind still holds steady at about west,
though it seems a little inclined to back half a point or so to the
south'ard, and it's clouded over again and gone very dark.  We tacked at
midnight, sir, according to your orders."

"Midnight!" ejaculated George; "you surely do not mean to say it is
midnight already, Cross?"

"About a quarter after it, sir," answered the second mate with a smile.
"You've slept sound, sir, I expect; and time has travelled fast with
you."

"I must have slept sound indeed," answered the skipper; "to me it seemed
that I had hardly fallen asleep when I was awakened by the flapping of
the canvas.  Well, I'll not keep you from your bunk; I shall go on deck
and take a look round before I turn in again.  Good-night."

"Good-night, sir," was the reply; and the second mate opened the door of
his berth and passed in, whilst George sprang lightly up the
companion-ladder and stepped out on deck.

It was indeed, as the second mate had said, very dark; so much so that
the skipper, having just left the cabin, where a lamp was dimly burning,
was unable to see anything for a moment or two.  Then, as his eyes grew
accustomed to the darkness, he caught first a glimpse of the man at the
wheel, his form faintly illuminated by the binnacle light, then the
figure of the mate, just turning near the taffrail to walk forward, and
finally the dark, shadowy pile of canvas towering away aloft until it
melted into the general obscurity.

"It has gone very dark again, Mr Bowen," remarked the skipper, as the
mate, becoming aware of George's presence on deck, joined him.

"It _is_ dark, sir," answered the mate, "almost too dark to be poking
about here in the Channel without lights."

"It is rather risky, I admit," returned George; "still, I do not think
it is so dangerous as showing our lights; that would simply be hanging
out an invitation to those prowling French privateers to pounce down on
us.  How is her head?"--to the man at the wheel, George and the mate
having by this time strolled aft together.

"No'th, half west, sir," was the reply.

"Come, that is not so bad," remarked George.  "We shall fetch Plymouth
yet in good time to join the convoy if all be--"

"A sail broad on the weather bow!" broke in the lookout forward, with
startling abruptness.

Both George and the mate instantly directed their gaze in the direction
indicated by the lookout; and presently a shapeless something like a
blacker patch against the black background of the darkness loomed into
view, about one point before the beam, showing by this rapid change in
the respective positions of the two ships how near was the stranger.

"Why!" exclaimed Leicester, "he is coming right down for us; he will be
into us.  Port, port hard; up with your helm smartly, my lad," to the
man at the wheel.  "Ship ahoy!  Port your helm; can you not see us?"

"Ay, ay; oh, yesh," was the response from the other vessel; and as it
came floating down upon the wind the stranger took a broad sheer to
port, showing herself to be a large lugger, and shot very neatly
alongside the _Aurora_, the grappling-irons being cleverly hove into the
barque's fore and main-rigging, as the two vessels touched.

At the same moment some five-and-twenty Frenchmen, armed with cutlass
and pistol, scrambled alertly in over the _Aurora's_ bulwarks, the
leader singling out George, notwithstanding the darkness, and
exclaiming, as he promptly presented a pistol at his head--

"Vat cheep dis is, eh?"

"The _Aurora_, of London," was the answer, "Tres bien!  My cheep, the
_Belle Marie_, est un corsaire Francais, un--vat you call--privateere,
et vous etes mes prisonniers.  It is ze fortune of war, messieurs; my
turn to-night--yours to-morrow, perhaps--ha, ha!  Now, my dear sares, as
there not moosh time is, permettez moi," and he flung open the
companion-doors, motioning significantly to George and the mate to go
below.

Poor George glanced swiftly round the deck, only to see that it was in
complete possession of the Frenchmen, one of whom was already at the
wheel.  So, turning to Mr Bowen, and murmuring, "There is no help for
it, I suppose," he signed to the mate to lead the way, and then
followed, dejectedly, the doors being smartly slammed-to after them, and
the next moment they heard the sound of some heavy body being dragged up
to and banged against the companion entrance, thus precluding the
possibility of their stealing on deck again, and effecting a counter
surprise.

The whole thing had been done so rapidly that it was not until he found
the ship being once more hove about, with her head pointing toward the
French coast, that Captain Leicester fully realised his situation.  In
less than ten minutes his ship had been taken from him, and himself
confined in his own cabin, a prisoner.  Had he not been on deck at the
time of the occurrence, he would certainly have considered it an
avoidable misfortune, to be accounted for only by the most gross
carelessness; but as it was, he was fully able to understand that it was
entirely due to the extreme darkness of the night, and the circumstance
of the lugger and the barque stumbling over each other, as it were.  But
that made matters no better for him; he had lost his ship--his all--and
now there loomed before him the immediate prospect of a dreary
confinement--for many years perhaps--in a French prison.  The thought
goaded him almost to madness, and he sprang impatiently to his feet, and
began to pace moodily to and fro over the narrow limits of the cabin
floor.

Meanwhile the second mate--who had started out of his berth at the first
shock of contact between the two vessels, and had made a rush for the
deck, only to be confronted and driven back by a Frenchman with a drawn
cutlass--was seated on the lockers alongside Mr Bowen, listening to
that individual's gloomy recital of the details of the capture.

The low murmur of the two men's voices annoyed George in his then
irritable frame of mind, and, to avoid it, he retired into his own
state-room.  The night being close and sultry, all the stern-ports were
open, and as he entered the cabin the sound of a hail from to leeward
came floating in through the ports.  It was answered from the deck, and,
kneeling upon the sofa-locker and thrusting his body well out of the
port, the skipper became aware that the lugger was parting company, and
that the hail he had heard was the voice of the French captain shouting
his parting instructions to the officer he had left in charge of the
prize.  Looking away to leeward, in the direction from which the sounds
had come, he was just able to distinguish the dark outline of the
lugger, as she bore up and pursued her _way once more to_ the eastward.
After this a considerable amount of excited jabbering took place on
deck, the word "Cherbourg" being so often repeated that George had no
doubt it was to that port that the barque was to be taken; but in about
half an hour all this died away, and perfect silence reigned on board
once more.

From the moment that the lugger parted company a confused idea as to the
possibility of retaking the barque had been gradually attaining definite
shape in George's mind.  It was rather a desperate attempt to make, it
is true, with himself and the two mates shut up there in the cabin aft,
while the crew were doubtless confined in the forecastle, and with no
possibility of effecting a junction with them.  Still, if Bowen and
Cross were willing to run the risk of assisting him, it might be worth
while to try it.

Thinking thus, he drew his head inside the stern-port, and made his way
back into the main cabin, where he found the two mates, with their arms
crossed upon their chests, and their heads bowed upon their breasts,
asleep.

Giving them a gentle shake apiece, to arouse them, he sat down beside
them and asked them bluntly if they felt disposed to run a little risk
in an attempt to retake the barque, and so avoid a French prison.

"You may reckon on me for one, sir, if you've hit upon anything likely
in the shape of a plan," heartily answered the chief mate; "and Cross
here, I know, won't hold back either, unless I'm greatly mistaken in
him."

"Never fear," said Cross; "if you give the word, sir, and the ship is to
be retook, we'll have her.  But how do you propose to do it?--it'll have
to be a surprise, I s'pose?"

"Listen," said George.  "What I propose is this.  The stern-ports are
all open; and I believe that, by assisting each other, we may manage to
creep out through them on to the main-brace boom-iron, and thence make
our way along the ship's side, _outside_ the bulwarks, forward, when, by
watching our opportunity, we may possibly manage to overpower the guard
on the forecastle, throw off the hatch, and release our own lads, and
then we must just make a fight for it.  We may perhaps--we three--manage
to take along with us a cutlass and a brace of pistols each; but the men
must do the best they can with hand-spikes, belaying-pins, and, in
short, anything they can lay their hands upon."

"A very promising plan indeed, sir," answered the chief mate.  "The next
question is, when are we to set about it?"

"The sooner the better," answered George; "so go at once, please, for
your pistols; load them carefully; take a cutlass each from the rack;
and then we will proceed to business."

In a very _few_ minutes the trio were ready.  Going softly into George's
state-room, they paused for a minute or two to listen for any sounds
which might furnish them with a clue to the condition of affairs on
deck; but nothing was to be heard, save the occasional clank of the
wheel-chains, and the low humming of a song by the helmsman.

"It is all curiously quiet on deck," whispered George to his two
companions; "I can't quite make it out; it undoubtedly means one of two
things, however--either they are keeping a very strict and careful
watch, or none at all; we shall soon see which.  Now, Cross, stand by to
give me a hoist, if I seem to require it; I will go first, and as soon
as I am fairly out of the way, Mr Bowen can follow."

Kicking off his boots and stockings, the skipper thereupon, without
further ado, mounted the lockers, and passing his body cautiously out of
the weathermost stern-port, held on by the edge of the port with one
hand, whilst he reached out and felt for the brace-iron with the other.
This he soon found, and grasping it firmly with his right hand, began to
work himself cautiously towards it.  The task he had set himself proved,
however, to be much more difficult than he had expected; the rake of the
ship's stern so greatly interfering with his freedom of motion that at
first he feared he would be obliged to abandon the attempt altogether,
as he foresaw that, the moment he released his hold upon the edge of the
port, he must infallibly swing off backwards, and, unless he could
manage to retain his grasp of the iron, drop overboard.  So he slipped
in through the port again, to explain this difficulty to the mates, and
to caution them to be careful when it came to their turn, and then
resumed his attempt.

Once more securing a firm grasp upon the brace-iron, he watched the roll
of the ship, and, seizing the first favourable opportunity, boldly swung
himself off into the air, where he hung suspended by one arm, with his
feet almost touching the water.  In another moment he had both hands
upon the iron, and, giving himself a vigorous upward swing, he was soon
able to throw his feet over the tautly-strained main-brace.  To scramble
up and place himself astride the brace-block was now an easy task, and,
settling himself firmly there, he prepared to assist the chief mate,
when he should make his appearance.

He had not long to wait.  Hardly was he comfortably established in his
comparatively safe position, when a hand appeared from behind the
quarter-piece in search of the iron.  George promptly seized and guided
it to the object of its search, then firmly grasped the wrist with one
hand, keeping the other ready to render further assistance.

"Look out, sir, I'm coming," he heard the chief mate mutter, and then,
with a tremendous swing, Mr Bowen's body came into view.  Quick as
thought George leaned over and caught the disengaged hand, placed it too
upon the iron, and then, rising to his feet and exerting his strength to
the utmost, he proceeded to drag his chief mate up alongside himself.

"Now," he whispered, as soon as he had got him there, "I shall begin to
work my way forward at once, so as to be out of your way; but you had
better stay and lend Cross a hand.  I shall wait for you both in the
fore-chains."

So saying, he stepped off the brace-iron, planting his feet firmly on
the broad beading which ran along the top edge of the sheer-strake, and
leaning his body against the bulwarks, whilst he grasped the outer edge
of the rail to steady himself, he speedily and easily reached the
mizzen-chains.

Here, availing himself of the partial shelter and cover afforded by the
lanyards and dead-eyes of the rigging, he cautiously raised his head
above the level of the bulwarks, to survey the state of the deck
inboard.  The first object which met his view was the figure of the
helmsman, rendered visible by the light of the binnacle-lamps as they
beamed dimly out upon him and feebly lighted up his figure.  He was
leaning negligently against the wheel, with one arm thrown carelessly
over it, and his eyes were vacantly fixed upon the cloudy heavens above
him, with his thoughts evidently far away.  Not another soul was
visible, either forward or aft; but George thought he could make out the
indistinct outline of something resembling a human figure seated on the
bench to windward of the cabin companion.  He continued so long his
earnest gaze upon this object that he was quite startled to find his
first and second mates beside him; and he came at last to the conclusion
that, if it were indeed a human figure at all, it must be that of the
prize-master--sound asleep.

Turning his glances from this object forward, he saw that the
galley-door to windward was shut, whilst on the lee-side it was open,
the reflection of a light inside shining pretty strongly upon the lee
bulwarks and showing the shadows of men evidently in the act of eating
and drinking.

"Do you see that?" whispered George to his two companions.  "Nothing
could possibly be more favourable to our plans.  We will work our way
forward as far as the main-rigging, when, I think, we may venture to
slip over the bulwarks, and in on deck.  Then we must creep very
cautiously forward, find out the whereabouts of the watchman, or
lookout, or whatever he is, and overpower him, if possible, without
raising an alarm.  That done, we will set free our own lads, and I have
no fear whatever as to the result."

The three adventurers then moved noiselessly forward until they came to
the main-rigging, when they slipped in on deck, and, crouching low in
the deep shadow of the weather bulwarks, crept along until they were
within a dozen feet of the fore-scuttle.  Here they paused, and began to
peer anxiously about for the man they expected to find on watch on the
forecastle.

"There he is, just forward of the cat-head," whispered the second mate;
and hastily snatching a heavy iron belaying-pin from the rail, he stole,
crouching and noiseless as a cat, upon his unconscious enemy.  Six
seconds later a dull heavy blow was heard, followed by a faint groan,
the dark object near the cat-head vanished, and Cross, returning to the
skipper's side, whispered--

"_He's_ all right; knocked the senses clean out of him, and then laid
him quietly out on deck.  I reckon he won't come to hisself again for
the next half-hour.  Now, what's the next move, cap'n?"

"The next thing," answered George, "is to open the fore-scuttle, and
quietly get our own lads on deck.  I am surprised that they have not
attempted to steal up of their own accord before this."

On going to the forecastle hatch, however, they soon discovered the
reason why the men were content to remain so quietly below, a large
mooring hawser having been coiled down on the top of the hatch, thus
effectually preventing the imprisoned men from raising it.

"We shall never be able to move this without giving the alarm," said
George.  "We must contrive somehow to shut those fellows up in the
galley, and keep them there."

"That is easily done," whispered the chief mate.  "`Cookey' has a lot of
firewood stowed away in the eyes of the long-boat; we must get hold of a
piece, cut half a dozen wedges from it, and one of us must then slide-to
the door on the lee-side, and wedge it tight with three of the wedges,
whilst another of us at the same time wedges up the door to windward."

He then glided away to the long-boat, and soon returned with a small
piece of wood in his hand.

"Here we are," he whispered; "now we'll soon have them boxed up so tight
that they won't get out until we open the doors for 'em."

Whilst speaking he had produced his knife from his pocket, and,
notwithstanding the intense darkness, soon hacked out the half-dozen
wedges, which, though very roughly shaped, were still good enough for
the purpose.

"Now, sir," said he in a low tone to George, "you take these three, let
Cross go with you and slide-to the lee-door with a slam, and then you
slip in the wedges and jam them tight home, while I will do the same to
wind'ard, as soon as I hear Cross close the lee-door."

George took the wedges, and, accompanied by Cross crept noiselessly up
to the galley-door to leeward, Mr Bowen meanwhile making his way to the
corresponding door on the weather side.  There was a loud slam, a moment
of silence, then a tremendous outcry, accompanied by the sound of heavy
battering from inside the galley, and the three adventurers met again at
the forecastle hatch.

"Now, then," cried George, "we haven't a moment to lose, so let us
capsize the hawser bodily.  Are you ready?  Then, one--two--three,
Heave!"

By exerting their whole strength to the utmost the heavy hawser was
rolled off the hatch, and the hatch itself raised, just as two figures
came rushing forward from the quarterdeck with loud and angry outcries.

"Tumble up, my lads!" shouted George down the scuttle; "tumble up
smartly, and help us to retake the ship."

"Ay, ay, sir," was the eager answer from below, and then the skipper,
drawing his cutlass and pistol, turned to meet the prize-master and the
helmsman, who had both hurried forward to learn the meaning of the
disturbance in the galley.

"Surrender, or you are a dead man!" exclaimed George, thrusting the
muzzle of his pistol into the face of the as yet only half-awake
prize-master.

"Oui, oui, m'sieu; oh, yais, I surrendaire," exclaimed the poor fellow,
as he felt the firm pressure of the cold pistol-barrel against his
forehead; and hastily unbuckling his cutlass, he thrust it into George's
hand.

The chief mate, in the meantime, had incontinently felled the other man
to the deck with a single blow from his fist, and had then left Cross to
secure him with a rope's end.  The barque's crew had meanwhile made
their way on deck, and were now clustered about their officers, anxious
to know what they were to do, whilst the _Aurora_, left to herself, had
shot up into the wind's eye, and was now lying stationary, with all her
square canvas aback, and the rest of her sails fluttering loudly in the
wind.

"One hand to the wheel, and jam it hard up," commanded George; "the rest
of you to your stations.  Mr Bowen and Mr Cross, you will mount guard
over the galley-doors, if you please, until we have got the ship round.
Raise tacks and sheets, round with the main-yard, and flatten in
forward.  Well, there, with the main-braces.  Now swing your fore-yard,
board the fore and main-tacks, and haul over the head-sheets.  Right
your helm, my lad; give her a spoke or two, if _you find_ she wants it,
as she gathers way, and then keep her `full and by.'  Now, lads, never
mind about coiling up just now; you can do that after we have attended
to the prisoners; come forward and open the weather galley-door, and as
the Frenchmen pass out, seize them and lash their hands and heels
together."

These orders were promptly executed, the discomfited Frenchmen being
permitted to pass out of the galley only one at a time.  Cross's burly
form, drawn cutlass and conspicuously displayed pistol, supported by the
appearance of the barque's crew in his immediate background, proving an
effectual deterrent to any attempt on the part of the privateersmen to
make a rush for freedom, and in something like a couple of hours from
the time of her capture, the _Aurora_, was once more in the undisputed
possession of her rightful owner.



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE DEPARTURE OF THE CONVOY.

About daybreak the wind veered round and blew a fine, fresh, steady
breeze from the northward, enabling the barque to lay her course with
flowing sheets; and sunset found her safely anchored in Plymouth Sound,
one of a fleet of nearly two hundred merchantmen, which had assembled
there for the purpose of being convoyed across the Atlantic.

The convoy was to sail on the following day but one; the men-o'-war
which constituted their escort were already in the Sound, along with
several other ships of the royal navy; and as the cable smoked out
through the _Aurora's_ hawse-pipe that evening, when she dropped her
anchor, George fondly hoped his troubles were at an end.

But he was mistaken.

As soon as the canvas was furled, Captain Leicester manned a boat, and,
proceeding on board the admiral's ship reported the circumstance of the
capture and recapture of his vessel, requesting at the same time to be
relieved as soon as possible of the custody of his prisoners.  This was
speedily arranged.  By the admiral's orders an armed boat's crew was at
once despatched to the _Aurora_, the prisoners were released from their
bonds, passed into the man-o'-war's boat, and in little more than an
hour from their arrival in the Sound safely lodged on board a
prison-hulk.

So far, so good.  But George had yet to learn that there was one
inconvenient result generally attendant upon a request to a man-o'-war
for assistance.  The boat, after conveying the Frenchmen to the
prison-hulk, duly returned to the admiral's ship; but, instead of the
crew at once passing out of her, they were ordered to remain where they
were, the lieutenant in charge alone going on deck and holding a short
conference with the captain, after which he re-entered the boat, and she
proceeded once more alongside the _Aurora_.

George saw her coming, and wondered what could possibly be her errand.
He was not left long in doubt.

"I am very sorry to trouble you," remarked the lieutenant, as he
encountered George at the gangway, whither the latter had repaired to
meet him, "but I must ask you to kindly muster your men."

George knew only too well then what this visit boded, but he was quite
helpless; so, putting the best face he could upon the matter, he
answered as cheerfully as he could, and directed that all hands should
be summoned on deck.

"I hope, however," he remarked to the officer, "that you will not
deprive me of any of my crew.  I have shipped only just sufficient men
to handle her, and I assure you that even with the fine weather we have
had in our trip down Channel I have found that we have not a hand too
many for the efficient management of the ship."

"Ah, yes," answered the lieutenant with a laugh; "all you
merchant-skippers tell the same story; but we shall see--we shall see.
They must be exceptionally good men, however, or you would never have
succeeded in recovering possession of your ship.  Ah! here they are, and
a fine smart crew they look, too.  Upon my word I must congratulate you,
Mr--a--um--a, upon your good luck in securing so many fine fellows;
why, they look capable of taking care of a ship twice your size.  I
really _must_ relieve you of one or two of them; it would be nothing
short of treason to his most gracious Majesty to allow you to keep them
all, when the navy is in such urgent want of men."

The crew were by this time assembled on deck, and a very disconcerted
and disgusted-looking set of men they were; they had submitted to weeks
of voluntary imprisonment in crimps' houses for the sole purpose of
escaping impressment into the navy, and now, when their voyage had
actually begun, here was a man-o'-war's boat alongside, to force them
into the service they regarded with so great an abhorrence.  No wonder
that they looked and felt disgusted.

The men were drawn up in line along the deck, in single file, and the
lieutenant sauntered leisurely along the line, critically examining each
man as he came to him, but without, as George had anticipated, ordering
any of them into the boat alongside.  At length he reached the last
individual in the line, one of the lads, and Leicester was beginning to
breathe freely once more, hoping that he was, after all, not to be
robbed of any of his crew, when the officer returned to the head of the
line, and, touching the second mate lightly on the chest with his
finger, said--

"You were evidently born to become a man-o'-war's man, my fine fellow;
get your traps together and pass them and yourself into the boat
alongside as soon as you have received your wages."

"Excuse me," said George, "I really must ask you not to take that man;
he is my second mate."

"Your second mate!" exclaimed the officer with well-feigned
astonishment.  "You surely do not mean to say you carry a second mate on
board such a cock-boat as this?"

"Certainly I do," retorted George somewhat tartly; "why not, pray?"

"Simply, my good man, because such an individual is wholly unnecessary.
You can take charge of one watch, yourself, you know, and your mate will
of course command the other, so that you can have no possible use for a
second mate.  Why, a smart, active young fellow like you ought to be
ashamed of such an act of laziness as the carrying of a second mate.
Pay the man his wages, if you please, and let him pass into the boat."

"I owe him no wages," answered George; "on the contrary, he--and every
other man of the crew, for that matter--has drawn a month's advance, and
owes me three weeks' service yet before we shall be square.  Who is to
reimburse me for that loss?"

"I am sorry to say I am quite unable to answer that question," was the
reply; "but, giving it--mind you, strictly as my private opinion--I am
afraid you will have to suffer the loss.  For my part I have never been
able to understand why you masters of merchantmen _will_ persist in so
risky a policy as the payment of a month's wages in advance, when you
can never tell what may occur to prevent the men from working out their
time.  But this is not business; I must bear a hand and finish my work,
or I shall get severely rapped over the knuckles."

Then, turning once more to the men, he ordered the carpenter to get his
things ready, and go into the boat.

"No," said George, by this time thoroughly exasperated, "_that_ I will
_not_ permit.  This man is the ship's carpenter, and I forbid you, sir,
to impress him at your peril."

"You _forbid_, eh?" said the lieutenant, turning angrily upon George.
"Take care what you are saying, my fine fellow, or I may perhaps find
ways and means of impressing _you_ before you sail."

Then, suddenly realising that he had allowed his temper to outrun his
discretion, he added in a conciliatory tone--

"Well, since you say that this man is the carpenter, I will spare him;
but you should have explained that fact to me at first; and as to
impressing _you_, why, I daresay you know the old joke about impressing
a ship-master, and will understand I was only jesting; you are a capital
fellow, and have behaved very well over this business, so I will let you
off as easily as I can.  But of course I must do my duty and take
another man or two from you; if I did not, some of the other ships would
be sending on board you and leaving you really short-handed."

With that he picked out with unerring eye the two able-seamen, and then,
turning to George with a great show of generous forbearance, announced
that he would leave him all the rest, though he could hardly reconcile
it to his conscience to _go away_ with only three men out of so strong
and smart a crew as that belonging to the _Aurora_.

Cross was by this time with his chest on deck; the other two impressed
men soon followed, and the disconsolate trio passed down the ship's side
in moody silence, unmoved alike by the commiserating looks of their late
shipmates or the jocular and more than half-ironical congratulations of
the man-o'-war's men in the boat upon their entry into so promising a
service as that of the British navy.

On the departure of the boat, George held a short consultation with Mr
Bowen, the result of which was a very wise determination to "grin and
bear it," rather than risk fresh annoyance by an effort--which he very
strongly suspected would be utterly useless--to obtain redress and the
restitution of his men.  This determination come to, the carpenter was
summoned aft, and installed into the duties and the berth of the
unfortunate Cross; George thus finding his crew reduced to three men,
the officers included, and one lad in each watch, the cook and steward
of course being "idlers," and their services in the working of the ship
only to be demanded on occasions of exceptional urgency.

On the day but one following that of the impressment of the _Aurora's_
men, a gun was fired at sunrise by the commodore, blue-peter was hoisted
at the fore-royal-mastheads, and the fore-topsails were loosed on board
the ships of the convoying squadron, and the still morning air
immediately began to resound with the songs of seamen and the clanking
of windlass-pawls, as the fleet of merchantmen constituting the convoy
began to get under weigh.  There was a considerable amount of emulation
displayed among the merchant-skippers--those of them, at least, whose
ships or crews had any pretensions to smartness, and in half an hour a
good many of the craft were under weigh and standing out to sea with a
light air of wind from the eastward.  The old _Tremendous_, 74, led the
van, closely followed by the _Torpid_, 50; while the frigates
_Andromeda_ and _Vixen_, each of 32 guns, assisted by the _Dasher_,
_Grampus_, _Throstle_, and _Mallard_, 10-gun-brigs, cruised round and
round the laggards, making signals, firing guns, and generally creating
a great deal of fuss, noise, and excitement.  The leading portion of the
fleet was hove-to, hull-down, at sea, before the last craft in the
convoy had succeeded in getting her anchor and making a start; but by
noon the whole of the fleet was fairly in the Channel, when the
_Tremendous_ made the signal to fill, and away they all went, bowling
along to the southward and westward, the dull sailers under every rag
they could spread to the wind--now settled into a fine steady
royal-breeze from east-south-east, while the smarter craft were
compelled to show only such a spread of canvas as would enable the
dullards to keep pace with them.  The _Tremendous_ and _Torpid_, under
double-reefed topsails, led the way about two miles apart; the frigates
were posted, one to windward and one to leeward of the merchant-fleet,
and the brigs brought up the rear, it being their duty to whip-in the
stragglers, urge on the slow-coaches, and keep a sharp lookout for
prowling privateers.

The English coast was still faintly visible, like a light grey cloud, on
the horizon astern, when a strange sail was sighted on the port beam,
steering west, a course which brought her gradually nearer to the
convoy.  She was brig-rigged, and she continued to approach until she
had reached a point some six miles from the fleet; when she suddenly
hauled her wind, and, without showing any colours, stood away to the
southward and eastward, close-hauled, under a heavy press of canvas.
There had been a considerable amount of signalling going on between the
various men-o'-war from the moment of her first appearance, and now
there was still more; but it soon ceased; the last string of flags
displayed by the _Tremendous_ was acknowledged by the _Andromeda_, the
weathermost frigate, and the excitement appeared to be at an end.

"I'm afraid that means trouble for some of us, unless the men-o'-war
keep a good sharp lookout," observed Mr Bowen to George, jerking his
thumb over his shoulder in the direction of the rapidly receding brig,
as the two men walked the deck together, criticising the appearance and
sailing powers of the various craft in company.

"Ah, indeed?" remarked George.  "I see you have come to the same
conclusion as myself with regard to the stranger, which is that she is a
French privateer."

"Just that, sir, and nothing else," was the reply.  "She is French all
over; no need for her to show her colours; her rig speaks her
nationality plain enough for a blind man to read it.  She's been on the
watch for this fleet for the last week or more, you may depend on it,
and now she has gone back to report the news to her consorts that the
West India convoy has sailed.  Mark my words, sir; we shall all have to
keep a good sharp lookout, or a few of us will be snapped up yet, in
spite of the men-o'-war, before we sight the next land."

"Well," said George, "we must take care that the _Aurora_ is not one of
the few, that is all.  Luckily, we are not exactly the dullest sailer in
the fleet; and we must manage to keep well in the body of it.  It is the
outsiders that will run the greatest risk."

For the next three or four days an unusual amount of vigilance was
observable on board the men-o'-war, especially the frigates and
gun-brigs, all of which kept well in the offing during the day,
evidently on the lookout for prowling picaroons, and closing in again
upon the convoy at night; but nothing was seen to keep alive suspicion;
no ships of any description were encountered, save a couple of English
frigates, each of which replied to the private signal and exchanged
numbers with the _Tremendous_; and on the evening of the tenth day out
the lofty, precipitous cliffs of the Azores were sighted and passed.

Another week sped away without the occurrence of any incident worthy of
record; the wind continued fair and steady; and the convoy, though its
rate of travelling was rather slow, made very good progress.

On the afternoon of the eighteenth day out from Plymouth, the fleet
being at the time in latitude 32 degrees North, longitude 44 degrees 30
minutes West, or about half-way to Jamaica, the wind fell light; the
sky, which had hitherto been clear, became overcast, heavy masses of
dark, thunderous cloud slowly gathering in the south-western quarter and
gradually spreading athwart the sky until the whole of the visible
heavens were obscured.  The barometer dropped slightly, indicating, in
conjunction with the aspect of the sky, a probable change of wind and a
consequent interruption to their hitherto highly satisfactory progress.

As evening fell, flashes of sheet-lightning were occasionally to be seen
along the southern horizon; and Captain Leicester, anticipating a
thunder-storm and a probable heavy downfall of rain, made preparations
for the refilling of his water-casks.

But, though the atmosphere appeared to be heavily charged with
electricity, the thunder held off, and when night closed down upon the
convoy, the moon being then in her third quarter and rising late, it
became as dark as a wolf's mouth.

Lights were of course displayed on board each ship; and the convoy
having become somewhat scattered in consequence of the failure of the
breeze, the effect was very singular and striking.

This being George's first voyage across the Atlantic, he was naturally a
little anxious; and on the night in question he resolved to remain on
deck until the weather should have assumed some more decided aspect.
There was fortunately still a gentle breeze from about east-south-east
fanning the convoy along at a speed of some two knots in the hour, just
giving the ships steerage-way; and they were consequently able to keep
out of each other's way, and thus avoid collision, always a great
element of danger when a large number of craft happen to be sailing in
company.

About two bells in the middle watch, George being seated at the time
near the companion, smoking a meditative pipe, and thinking somewhat
ruefully about Lucy Walford, the carpenter, who was in charge of the
deck, approached him and said--

"Unless I am greatly mistaken, sir, here's a large craft without any
lights creeping up on our larboard quarter."

"Indeed," said George, rousing himself and stepping aft to the taffrail
with the carpenter; "whereabouts is she?"

The carpenter looked intently astern for a moment, then stretched out
his arm, saying--

"There, sir--ah! now you can see her, she is just about to shut out the
first of those four lights that you can see all close together.  There!
now she has shut it out."

"I see her!" said George.  "Whatever does the fellow mean by being
without lights on such a pitch-dark night as this; it would serve him
right to report him to the commodore in the morning.  He has a smart
vessel under his feet, though; see how she is overhauling us.  Why, it
must surely be one of the gun-brigs, judging from her spread of canvas
and her lofty spars.  But what can she be doing here, in the very middle
of the fleet, and without lights, too?"

The stranger was by this time little more than a couple of cables'
lengths from the _Aurora_, drawing up to her fast, and apparently
intending to pass her very closely.  George glanced anxiously at his
stern light, thinking it might possibly have gone out, but no, it was
burning brightly and must be distinctly visible to those on board the
other craft.

Gradually the dark, mysterious fabric drew closer and still closer up on
the port quarter of the _Aurora_, not the faintest glimmer of light
being visible from stem to stern, and not a sound of any kind to be
heard on board her.

George began to feel a trifle nervous as he watched the silent, stealthy
approach of the stranger; and fetching his speaking-trumpet from the
beckets in the companion-way, where it always hung in company with the
telescope, he stepped aft to the taffrail and hailed--

"Ship ahoy!"

"Hillo!" was the response, in a tone of voice pitched so low that,
though it was distinctly audible to those on board the _Aurora_, it
would not penetrate the sluggish atmosphere to any great distance.

"What ship is that?" inquired George.

"His Britannic Majesty's brig--" (name unintelligible).  "What ship is
that?"

"The _Aurora_, of London.  Why are you out of your station, and without
lights, sir?  Is there anything wrong?"

"Yes," was the reply, "but don't hail any more; there are enemies at
hand.  I will sheer alongside you presently, and tell you what to do."

"Enemies at hand, eh!" muttered George.  "What can it mean, I wonder?
And if there _are_ enemies, by which, I suppose, they mean Frenchmen, in
our neighbourhood, those man-o'-war fellows must have eyes like owls to
be able to see them in the dark.  Just step down into the cabin, if you
please, Mr Ritson, and give the mate a call; I don't half like this."

In little more than a minute Mr Bowen was on deck and listening to
George's statement of what had already passed, and of his uneasiness.
George had just finished speaking, when there was a sound as of a
falling handspike, or something of the kind, on board the stranger,
followed by a loud ejaculation of--

"_Sacr-r-r-r-re nom de_--"

The remainder of the exclamation was promptly suppressed, but it was
enough; George's suspicions were now fully aroused, and he whispered to
the two men standing by him--

"She is French, beyond a doubt; they intended to surprise us, and very
nearly they did it, too.  But we will not be caught quite so easily this
time.  Ritson, go forward, rouse the men, and tell them to creep aft
under the shelter of the bulwarks; let not one of them show so much as a
hair of his head above the rail; and tell them to look lively.  And you,
Mr Bowen, be good enough to go below and bring up a cutlass apiece for
all hands."



CHAPTER FIVE.

"CHOPPEE FOR CHANGEE--A BLACK DOG FOR A BLUE MONKEY."

By the time that the _Aurora's_ crew were on deck, crouching behind the
bulwarks aft on the port side, armed, and instructed by George as to
what he required of them, the strange sail was within a dozen fathoms of
the _Aurora's_ port quarter.

She could now be seen with tolerable distinctness, the outline of the
hull and of the lofty canvas showing black as ebony against the dark
background of sea and sky; and any doubts which Captain Leicester might
have still entertained concerning her, were completely set at rest as he
glanced at the cut of her canvas.  It was French all over.

Foot by foot the brig--for such she was--crept up to the _Aurora_, until
her bows were in a line with the barque's stern and not more than twenty
feet distant.  George stood by the main-rigging, watching her, cutlass
in hand, calm and determined, his plans already formed for action in the
event of his suspicions proving correct.

In the ordinary course of things the two craft were now quite near
enough to each other for any communication, however confidential in its
nature, to be made without the possibility of its being overheard; but,
though George could see that a figure stood on the brig's rail by the
main-rigging, not a word was uttered.

Keeping his gaze steadfastly fixed upon the brig, Captain Leicester saw
that her helm had suddenly been ported, for she was sheering strongly in
toward his own vessel.

"Brig ahoy!" he hailed.  "What is it you have to say to me?  Do not come
too close, sir, or you will be into us."

"Never fear," answered in perfect English the dark figure on board the
brig, "we will not carry away so much as a rope-yarn belonging to you.
But I must be on board you before I can venture to give you your
instructions."

"Oh! very well," said George.  "If you intend boarding us, you had
better do so by way of our fore-rigging, or you may get a nasty fall; we
are very much littered up here abaft with spars and so on."

"Ah, thank you very much; I will take your advice," was the reply.

George saw the man motion with his arm, and the brig's course was
altered sufficiently to put her alongside with her gangway even with the
_Aurora's_ fore-mast.  Another second or two, and the ships gently
jarred together, the brig's quarter dropping alongside the barque at the
same moment.

"_Enfans, allons-nous-en_!" exclaimed the voice of the stranger forward,
followed by the sound of a leap on to the barque's deck, and a scramble
among the spars which littered it there.

"Now is your time, lads; jump for your lives!" exclaimed George in a
low, excited tone; and, setting his men the example, he forthwith sprang
from his own ship's bulwarks to those of the brig; and dashing at the
helmsman, cut him down with his cutlass before the fellow could recover
sufficiently from his astonishment to utter a cry.  Then, without a
moment's pause, he seized the wheel and exerting all his strength, sent
it with a single twirl spinning hard over to starboard, where he lashed
it.

The shock of collision, slight as it was, caused the two vessels to
recoil from each other, and they were barely alongside when they
separated again; George's manipulation of the brig's wheel, and a
similar manipulation of the _Aurora's_ helm at the last moment before
the touching of the two vessels, greatly expediting the separation.  By
the time, therefore, that George had looked about him, and satisfied
himself that the whole of his crew were safely with him on the brig's
deck, the two vessels were a dozen feet apart and increasing their
distance every second; their bows diverging from each other at almost a
right angle.

The Frenchmen, on boarding the _Aurora_, divided into two parties, one
of which rushed forward to secure the crew, while the other made a
similar rush aft, for the purpose of overpowering the officers and
helmsman.  In their astonishment and perplexity at finding the decks
deserted, they paused for a moment irresolutely, then hurriedly searched
the cabin and forecastle, only to find that the ship was utterly
deserted.  Then, for the first time, a glimmering of the truth presented
itself to the mind of the French leader, and his suspicions were
instantly confirmed; for Captain Leicester, having at that moment
rallied his crew, led them forward, and, finding that, as he had
expected, the Frenchmen had boarded the _Aurora_ with all their
available strength, leaving only some five-and-twenty men on board the
brig to handle her, he, after a short, sharp tussle, drove these men
below and secured complete possession of the brig.

The party on board the _Aurora_ distinctly heard the sounds of the
conflict, and waited in breathless expectancy for its termination.  They
had not long to wait; in little over a couple of minutes Captain
Leicester's voice was heard giving the order to shift the helm--the brig
having in the meantime gone round until she was head to wind with her
canvas flat aback--and to trim over the head-sheets.  Then a chorus of
curses, both loud and deep, from the deck of the _Aurora_, proclaimed
the chagrin of the Frenchmen on board her at the--to them--extraordinary
and unforeseen result of the adventure.

But their captain was a man of indomitable pluck, energy, and readiness
of resource, and by no means given to a tame and immediate acceptance of
defeat.  He realised the situation in a moment, and, determining to make
the best of a bad bargain, promptly ordered sail to be crowded upon the
_Aurora_, in the hope of effecting his escape.  The night being dark,
however, and his men new to the ship, the work went on but slowly; and
by the time that the topgallantsails were sheeted home, his own brig was
once more alongside, with two red lights hoisted to her gaff-end (the
alarm-signal), her ports open, guns run out, and the men standing by
them ready to open fire.

As she drew up abreast the _Aurora_, George hailed--

"Barque ahoy!  Let fly your sheets and halliards at once, and surrender,
or I will fire into you!"

"All right," was the reply from the French captain; "you have won the
game, monsieur, so I will not attempt to rob you of the credit of
victory.  You managed the affair exceedingly well, _mon ami_, and have
taught me a lesson I shall remember for the rest of my life.  You may
come on board and take possession as soon as you like."

He then gave the necessary orders in French to his crew; the halliards
and sheets were let fly on board the _Aurora_, George reducing sail at
the same time in the brig, and the two vessels, losing way, began
gradually to drop into the rear portion of the convoy.

Captain Leicester did not, however, accept the French captain's
invitation to go on board and take possession once more of his own ship;
that proceeding would have been just a trifle too risky.  He had the
game in his own hands, and intended to keep it there; so he quietly
waited until one of the men-o'-war should come alongside, as he knew
would soon be the case, in response to his signal.

In a short time another brig was seen approaching under a perfect cloud
of sail, an unmistakably English gun-brig this time, however.  Sweeping
up on the port quarter of George's prize, an officer sprang into the
main-rigging, and hailed--

"Brig ahoy!  What brig is that?"

"The _Jeune Virginie_, French privateer," answered George.  "She
managed, somehow, to slip in among the fleet unobserved in the darkness,
and threw a heavy boarding-party in on the deck of my vessel--the
_Aurora_ I suspected her designs just in time, however, and as her crew
boarded me, I boarded her, and succeeded in taking possession; the two
ships separating immediately and thus preventing the return of the
French to their own craft."

"Ah, I see," remarked the officer.  "You effected an exchange of
ships--`choppee for changee--a black dog for a blue monkey,' eh?  And
now you want us to get your own ship back for you?"

"Not exactly," answered George with a laugh; "I have already forced her
to surrender; that is the craft--the barque immediately under my lee.
But I shall feel obliged if you will take charge of the prisoners, and
lend me sufficient men to navigate my prize into port."

"Um; well, I really do not quite know about that.  I will man your prize
for you to-night; but you must see the commodore about the matter in the
morning; if he will authorise me to lend you a prize-crew, of course I
shall be very happy.  By the way, where did the Frenchman come from?"

"When I saw the craft first, she was about a couple of cables' lengths
directly astern of us," answered Leicester.

"She was, eh!" remarked the officer.  "Well, there will be a pretty row
to-morrow about her being allowed to slip in undetected.  I will send a
boat on board your own ship at once, to remove the prisoners; and, that
done, I will tell off a crew to man your prize for you."

This was accordingly done, and an hour after the arrival of the
_Throstle_ upon the scene, George and his crew were once more
comfortably established on board their own ship.

On the following morning the affair was officially reported to the
commodore, who put himself into a tremendous passion about it, declaring
that such an occurrence reflected indelible disgrace upon the whole
British navy, and that he would bring to court-martial every one of the
officers belonging to the convoying ships;--which, however, seeing that
at bottom he was a fine, good-hearted old fellow, he never did.  And
after abusing everybody else, he sent for George, complimented him upon
his gallantry publicly on the quarterdeck of the _Tremendous_, offered
to obtain a commission for him (an offer which our hero was foolish
enough to decline), and gave his hearty consent to the proposed
borrowing of a prize-crew.

But the affair did not by any means end here; for on the following
night, which was almost as dark as the preceding one, three ships
belonging to the merchant-fleet under convoy gave an unusual and
altogether extraordinary amount of trouble to the captains of the
gun-brigs by their persistent straggling; and, suspicion being at length
aroused, they were all found to be in the hands of French prize-crews,
having been surprised and captured by the _Jeune Virginie_ immediately
prior to her unsuccessful attempt upon the _Aurora_.  Had they been only
a little less anxious to effect their escape, they might, as the event
proved, have accomplished it without the slightest difficulty.

About 2 p.m. on the day following the recapture of these three vessels,
the weather being at the time stark calm, with an overcast sky, the
signal to "shorten sail and prepare for bad weather," was exhibited on
board the commodore's ship--the old _Tremendous_.  It was very difficult
to make out the signal, the flags hanging from the masthead in such
close, motionless folds that it was almost impossible to identify them;
so, after a long and anxious scrutiny of them through his telescope,
George, thinking he must surely have misinterpreted the message, dived
below to take a look at his barometer.  A single glance at it was
sufficient to show him that he was not mistaken, the mercury having
fallen a full inch in little more than two hours.

When he returned to the deck again, which he did immediately, the
various ships were lying with their heads all round the compass, the
merchantmen showing no signs that they understood the signal; but on
board the men-o'-war the crews were seen to be very busy reefing
topsails; the topgallant and royal-masts and yards being already sent
down on deck.

Captain Leicester lost no time in following their example, as far as he
was able.  To send down on deck any of his top-hamper, with his limited
crew, was of course quite out of the question, but he called all hands,
and, hurrying them aloft, set them to work, first to furl all the light
upper canvas, and then to close-reef both topsails.  This done, he
ordered them to furl the main and fore courses, which were already
clewed up.

Part of the crew were already on the main-yard, and the remainder,
having completed the reefing of the fore-topsail, had descended from
aloft forward and were on their way up the main-rigging to assist in the
stowing of the main-sail, when a heavy black, threatening-looking
cloud-bank, which lay stretched along the western horizon, was seen to
suddenly burst open, revealing a broad copper-tinted rent, which widened
with alarming rapidity.

George's quick eye detected the change in an instant, and knowing what
it meant, and that there was no time to lose, hailed the crew with a
loud shout of--

"Now then, my lads, look alive aloft there, and toss up that main-sail
smartly.  If you are quick about it, you may yet get the gaskets round
it before the gale strikes us; if you are not, we shall lose the sail,
and very probably some of you, too."

The men answered with a cheery "Ay, ay, sir," and set to work with a
will, Leicester and the chief mate springing aft to the wheel at the
same moment.

In the meantime the broad yellow rent in the clouds to the westward had
spread very considerably, the vapour overhead had gathered way, and was
scudding rapidly across the sky in an easterly direction, and already,
upon the western horizon, a long, rapidly advancing line of white
foaming water gave unmistakable indications of the close proximity of
the hurricane.  The old _Tremendous_ now did what she could to hurry up
the laggards, by firing rapid signal-guns; and the crews of the several
ships, waking up at last, were seen swarming aloft, when it was too
late, to shorten sail.

The _Aurora_ was lying with her head pointed to the southward, with her
starboard broadside presented square to the wind, when the gale first
struck her.  Her skipper, anxious to save his canvas, if possible, kept
his men aloft as long as he dared, urging and encouraging them with his
voice to exert themselves to their utmost; but when he saw the old
_Tremendous_ bow under the first stroke of the blast as though she meant
to "turn the turtle" altogether, he thought it was high time to look to
the safety of his crew.

"Make fast, and come down at once, lads," he shouted; "down with you,
for your lives; the canvas must take care of itself now."

Startled by the anxious sharpness of the hail, the men hurriedly knotted
the gaskets, just as they were, and scuttled in off the yard like so
many frightened squirrels.

They were all in the main-rigging when the hurricane burst upon the
ship.  With a terrific, unearthly streaming roar it rushed upon her, and
the barque, as if conscious of her utter inability to withstand its
tremendous strength, instantly went over on her beam-ends, with her
lower yard-arms dipping into the water.  The men in the lee-rigging were
almost completely sheltered by the hull of the ship, and they had
therefore but little difficulty in holding on.  But they were obliged to
remain where they were, the lower portion of the shrouds being buried
some eight feet deep in water, thus precluding the possibility of the
men descending to the deck; whilst to go aloft again and endeavour to
descend to windward, was as much as their lives were worth.  They had a
practical illustration of this in the fact that two of the men in the
weather shrouds were actually torn from their hold, and dashed with such
violence against the main-top that one man had his arm, and the other,
three of his ribs broken.

Captain Leicester, on seeing the near approach of the hurricane, had,
after hailing his men to come down from aloft, lashed the wheel
hard-a-starboard, and then, accompanied by Mr Bowen, he hurried away to
the foot of the main-mast, where they cast off the starboard fore-braces
and hauled in upon the larboard until they had braced the topsail as
sharp up as it was possible for two men to get it.  The result of this
manoeuvre was that, when the gale struck the _Aurora_, her main-topsail,
which was a-shiver, was blown clean out of the bolt-ropes in an instant,
as also was the foresail and the partially-stowed main-sail; whilst the
fore-topsail was strongly filled at once, and being luckily a new sail,
and standing the strain upon it bravely, it quickly began to drag the
ship through the water.  As soon as she gathered way, her bows began to
pay off, and presently she recovered her upright position with a jerk
which snapped both her topgallant-masts close off by the caps.

The wheel was now righted, and away the _Aurora_ went, scudding dead
before it, under her close-reefed fore-topsail only.  The crew now made
the best of their way down on deck, the head-yards were squared, and an
effort was made to clear away the wreck, two of the men volunteering
for, and succeeding in, the dangerous task of going aloft to cut away
the fore and main-topgallant rigging.

George now had time to look about him a little, and observe the state of
affairs prevailing outside his own ship.  On all sides were to be seen
ships--men-o'-war as well as merchantmen--scudding, like his own, before
the irresistible fury of the gale.  Nearly every ship had suffered
damage of some sort, either to sails, spars, or rigging; and out of them
all, very few had come better out of the first buffet than the _Aurora_.
Here was to be seen a craft with topgallant-masts and jib-boom gone,
and her canvas hanging from her yards in long tattered streamers; there
another with nothing standing above her lower mastheads; here a barque
with her main-yard carried away; there a stately ship with her
mizzenmast and all attached still towing astern, and the _crew_ busy
cutting away at the rigging which held the shattered spar; here another
fine ship, totally dismasted; and there, now far astern, more than one
dark object lying low in the water, and but imperfectly seen through the
flying spindrift, which George Leicester knew only too well were the
hulls of ships which had capsized, and whose crews would be left to
perish miserably, since no human power could possibly save them in an
hour like that.

It soon became evident to the crew of the _Aurora_, that though they had
so far escaped with comparatively slight damage, they could certainly
not regard their ship as by any means free from peril so long as they
remained in the company of the rest of the fleet.  So many ships
scudding together almost helplessly before the fury of the gale could
not but prove a very great source of danger to each other, now that it
was no longer possible to regulate their rate of sailing; and George
soon found himself confronted with a new anxiety, that of being in
danger of a collision.  The sea was rising with extraordinary rapidity,
and the various craft soon began to steer wildly, sheering so rankly,
first to one side and then to the other, that many of them threatened to
broach-to altogether.

The _Aurora_ was a very smart little vessel under her canvas, as she now
proved by keeping pace with two large ships, one of which lay on her
port-bow, and the other on her starboard beam.  So even was the rate of
sailing of the three that neither of them, anxious as each was to
accomplish the feat, could draw away from the others; and the strength
of the gale was such that it was equally impossible for them either to
make or to reduce sail.  There they remained, therefore, maintaining
exactly the same relative position to each other, now sheering
uncontrollably inwards, so that each man held his breath and braced
himself for the shock which seemed inevitable, and which, under such
circumstances, must result in the total destruction of both ships; and,
anon, surging as wildly off in opposite directions.

To add still further to Captain Leicester's embarrassments, the trio of
ships were rapidly overhauling a fourth, which was wallowing along dead
ahead of the _Aurora_.  She was a large craft, apparently of about eight
hundred tons measurement; her three topmasts were carried away close off
by the caps; the wreckage was all lying inboard, cumbering up her decks;
her courses and staysails were blown to ribbons; and she was steering so
badly that it was difficult to say _where_ she was going, except that
her general direction was to leeward.  George saw that, should he
overtake this vessel before getting clear of the two which already
hampered him so seriously, a catastrophe was inevitable, and he speedily
made up his mind that the _Aurora's_ speed _must_ be sufficiently
reduced to allow of her dropping astern and into the wake of one or the
other of his present consorts.  The only means by which, under the
circumstances, this could be accomplished was by sacrificing the
fore-topsail; and he accordingly called for a volunteer to assist him in
the task.  Mr Bowen and the carpenter both proffered their services,
and, selecting the latter, and requesting the chief mate to take charge
of the deck and superintend the conning of the ship, George went
forward, followed by the carpenter, and led the way aloft.  Now that
they were scudding before it, the strength of the wind was no longer
felt to its full extent; it was still powerful enough, however, to make
the journey aloft full of peril, and the two adventurers were compelled
to make frequent pauses on their way, in order to avoid being blown out
of the rigging.  At length, however, they reached the yard, and,
producing their knives, began to work their way outwards from the mast,
one toward each yard-arm, cutting the seizings as they came to them.
Their task was soon accomplished; for when half the seizings were cut,
the wind saved them all further trouble by carrying away the remainder;
the sail gave one terrific flap--which sprung the fore-yard--and then,
tearing out of its bolt-ropes, went soaring away ahead of them, like a
flake of cloud.

Thus relieved, the _Aurora's_ speed sensibly diminished and by the time
that George was once more down on deck, they were able, by watching
their opportunity, to sheer in under the stern of the ship which had
before lain upon their port-bow, and thus place the _Aurora_
comparatively out of harm's way.

They were only just in time.  The ship ahead was overtaken, and, in
sheering into her new position, the _Aurora_ was compelled to shave
close past the stranger's stern.  Glancing up at her as they shot past,
with a feeling of deep gratitude at their escape, George saw a little
crowd of passengers huddled together upon her poop, like frightened
sheep.  They were all looking at the _Aurora_, evidently fully aware of
the danger from which they had so narrowly escaped; and among them
George suddenly recognised a face which he had more than half hoped he
would never see again--the face of his successful rival, as he believed
him to be, Lieutenant Walford.

George waved his hand in recognition, the salutation was half
reluctantly returned, and then the two craft separated; but not before
George had had time to read the name painted on her stern--the _Princess
Royal_, of London.



CHAPTER SIX.

THE MUTINY ON BOARD THE "PRINCESS ROYAL."

It now becomes necessary that we should for a short time forsake the
_Aurora_, and follow the fortunes of the _Princess Royal_.

At the moment of our making the acquaintance of this vessel a very
unsatisfactory state of affairs happened to prevail on board her.  She
was, as we have already seen, a large ship, as ships went at that time,
being of 870 tons register, and capable of carrying close upon 1200 tons
dead-weight.  She had saloon accommodation for forty passengers, and
carried an armament of twelve 9-pounders upon her main-deck, the
intention of her owners being that she should fight her own way, if
necessary, to and fro across the ocean, and so be independent of convoy.

But on her present voyage this plan had to be abandoned, the activity of
the press-gangs, and the consequent scarcity of seamen being such that
she cleared out of the port of London with only thirty men in her
forecastle; a crew wholly inadequate to successfully defend a ship of
her size in the extremely likely event of her encountering an adversary.
She was therefore compelled, like many others, to avail herself of the
protection of convoy.

Upon her arrival at Plymouth, she, like the _Aurora_, received a visit
from a man-o'-war's boat, which carried off four of her best men,
reducing her number of seamen to twenty-six.  It will thus be seen that,
when she finally sailed out of English waters, she was very
short-handed.

Now, as Jack is to this day, so he ever has been--an inveterate
grumbler; he _will_ find _something_ to growl about.  It is not to be
wondered at, therefore, that, with such good cause, there should be
constant dissatisfaction in the _Princess Royal's_ forecastle.

But though Jack _is_, and always has been, such a grumbler, and though
probably nothing on earth will ever cure him of this habit--for habit
only it is--yet, even where there is good and sufficient cause for
discontent, a little judicious management, forbearance, and sympathy
will prevent the mischief from going any further.

Unfortunately, however, for the _Princess Royal_ and all connected with
her, the measures adopted by those in authority on board her for the
suppression of this quickly-discovered spirit of discontent were the
extreme opposite of judicious.  The master--as is sometimes the case
with masters of very fine ships--was haughty and overbearing, possessed
of a highly-exaggerated opinion of his own importance, turning a deaf
ear to all the complaints of his crew, and treating them with an
impatience and superciliousness of manner which made him heartily
detested.  The chief mate, an arrant sycophant, taking his cue from his
superior officer imitated him to the utmost extent of his ability, with
a like result; while the second mate was a blustering bully, whose great
pride and boast it was that he could always make one man do the work of
two.  Hence, from the very commencement of the voyage, the quarterdeck
and the forecastle, instead of pulling together and making an united
effort to overcome the difficulties of their position, rapidly grew to
regard each other with mutual feelings of enmity and distrust.

Matters had consequently, as might be expected, been steadily growing
from bad to worse, from the first moment of sailing; and on the day
before the gale a very unpleasant incident had occurred on board.

It arose in this way.  On the second mate's watch being called, one of
the men remained in his hammock, sending word by one of his shipmates to
the officer of the watch that he was ill and unfit for duty.  The second
mate, instead of reporting the circumstance to the master, and having it
inquired into, as was the proper course, jumped at once to the
conclusion that the man was merely feigning sickness, in order to avoid
the performance of his proper share of work; and, taking the matter into
his own hands, he proceeded to the forecastle, armed with a "colt," and,
dragging the unhappy seaman out of his hammock, drove him on deck,
abusing him roundly the while in no measured terms, and setting him to
work to grease the main-mast, from the truck downward.

The poor fellow, who was really ill, procured a pot of grease and
started up the rigging, but, finding himself wholly unequal to the task
of going aloft, descended again, and proceeding aft to the poop went up
to the captain, who happened to be standing conversing with some of the
passengers, and requested to be released from duty, repeating his plea
of illness.  The second mate had, however, in the meantime mentioned the
matter to the captain, putting his own construction upon it; the request
was therefore harshly and hastily refused, the refusal being accompanied
by the assertion that the pleader was a mean, skulking, mutinous rascal,
not worth his salt.

Lieutenant Walford happened to be one of the passengers standing near at
the moment, and, as the dissatisfied seaman turned away, Walford turned
to the captain and said--

"We in the army have a very short and simple method of dealing with
fellows like that--we flog them; and, I assure you, it proves a
never-failing cure."

The sick man heard this remark, so did the man at the wheel, and from
that moment Walford was a marked man.

The captain turned round sharply.

"Do you?" said he.  "Then by Jove I'll see if it will prove equally
efficacious here.  Mr Thomson, have that man seized up to a grating,
and give him two dozen; I'll be bound he'll be well enough to go aloft
after that; if he isn't, he shall have another couple of dozen."

Thomson, the second mate, at once sprang upon the man, and, seizing him
by the collar, ordered the boatswain to call all hands.

This was done.  The men were drawn up in the waist of the ship on the
lee-side, the sick seaman was seized up at the lee gangway, and in the
presence of all on board (except the ladies, who retired to the saloon
in indignation and disgust) the unhappy man received his two dozen.

But here a further widening of the breach between the officers and the
crew of the ship took place.  The individual appointed to administer the
flogging was the boatswain's mate, a great brawny Cornishman, named
Talbot.  This individual, when all was ready, bared his muscular right
arm to the shoulder, and, grasping the cat firmly, measured his distance
accurately with his eye; then stood waiting the command to begin.  The
captain, the mates, Walford, and one or two more of the on-lookers
smiled their satisfaction as they witnessed these elaborate preparations
for the infliction of a severe flogging; and the captain, willing to
prolong the man's suffering as much as possible, allowed a long pause to
ensue before giving the word.

At length he nodded to Talbot, who at once took a step back, and, giving
the tails of the cat a mighty flourish in the air, brought them down
upon the man's naked shoulders so gently that an audible laugh broke
spontaneously from the entire crew at the ludicrous sight.  The captain
turned livid with fury.

"You!" he gasped; "what do you mean by that, you lubber?  Lay it on,
sir; lay it on hot and heavy, or by Jove I'll have _you_ seized up, and
will give you five dozen myself."

"Ay, ay, sir," was the imperturbable reply; and the second stroke was
administered with even more threatening preliminaries than the first,
but with, if possible, even less effect.

"Put that fellow in irons at once!" shouted the captain, "and let him
have no food except bread and water until further orders.  You hear,
steward?  If he has anything more, I will make you responsible for it.
I will teach him--and everybody else--that when I give an order, I will
have it obeyed.  Now, Rogers," to the boatswain, "take the cat, and give
that skulking rascal at the grating the two dozen he so richly
deserves."

The boatswain stepped forward, and, without removing his jacket or
making any other preparation, sullenly took the cat in his hand.  The
chief mate meanwhile went off for a pair of handcuffs, and, returning,
slipped them on the wrists of the rebellious boatswain's mate.

The second mate, who was still looking on, noticing the behaviour of the
boatswain, and the ill-concealed triumph of the crew at Talbot's
conduct, now turned to the captain and said--

"Let _me_ play bo'sun's mate for once sir; I'll be bound I'll give the
sneaking lubber his proper 'lowance; he'll never get it from any of his
shipmates, I can see."

"Very well, do so," said the captain; "let him have it hot and strong;
it will show those mutinous scoundrels that we have it in our power to
punish them yet."

The second mate waited for no more, but, whipping off his coat and
rolling up his shirt-sleeves, snatched the cat out of Rogers' hand, and
began at once to administer the punishment.

His first stroke drew blood and forced a shriek of anguish from the
quivering lips of his victim, a sound which extorted a laugh of fiendish
glee from the captain.  A second, third, fourth, and fifth lash followed
in slow, deliberate succession, stripping off shreds of skin, and
lacerating the back of the sufferer until it presented a sickening
sight.  At the sixth stroke the shrieks ceased, and the man's head
dropped upon his breast.

At this sight the second mate seemed somewhat startled, and looked up
inquiringly at the captain.

"Go on," said the latter, with an encouraging nod of the head; "go on
and finish the dose; he's only shamming.  Put a little more strength
into your blows, man; I'll be bound you can fetch another howl or two
out of him yet, if you feel inclined."

Thus incited, the second mate actually proceeded with and completed his
fiendish task, at the end of which the perspiration poured in a stream
down his face, so great had been his exertions.

But not another cry could he wring from his victim, in spite of all his
efforts--the poor fellow was insensible, and in that condition was cast
off from the grating, and taken below to his hammock.  There was no
doctor on board, so the unfortunate seaman was left to the clumsy though
well-meant ministrations of his shipmates, who did the best they could
for him, the captain refusing to supply salve, lint, or in fact anything
else with which to dress his wounds.

At dinner that evening the captain was urged by some of the passengers
to represent to the commodore of the convoying squadron the
insubordinate condition of the crew, and to request his assistance.
This, however, he positively refused to do, roundly asserting his
ability to command his own ship; but, as a matter of fact, the only
reason for his reluctance to take this step arose out of the conviction
that an inquiry would certainly follow as to the causes of the
insubordination, from which inquiry, as he was very well aware, he and
his officers could hope for nothing but a complete revelation of their
own culpability.

At the moment that this course was being urged upon the captain in the
saloon, the incident of the flogging, and, indeed, the whole question of
their treatment by their officers, was being discussed on the forecastle
by the men; and, singular to relate, although Talbot was believed by his
officers to be at that instant in irons below, if either of them had
walked forward just then, they would have found him snugly seated on
deck, free, on the fore-side of the windlass, taking an active part in
the discussion.  By the time that eight bells had struck, they had fully
made up their minds as to their course of action, and the assembly
quietly dispersed.

The next day was that on which the gale burst upon the fleet.

On the signal being made by the _Tremendous_ to "Shorten sail and
prepare for bad weather," the _Princess Royal_ was one of the first to
manifest signs of obedience.  She was at the time under every stitch of
canvas she could spread, not because she was a sluggish sailer, for she
was the reverse of that, but because, there being a flat calm, it
mattered not how much or how little canvas was set, it could make no
possible difference in the movements or position of the vessel; and the
captain, seeing here a fine opportunity to impose upon his crew--"by way
of punishment," as he put it to himself and his officers--a great deal
of unnecessary work, ordered all sail, even to the studding-sails, to be
set, for the purpose, as he averred, of giving them an airing.

The first thing to be done in the way of shortening sail, therefore, was
to take in the studding-sails, which the crew, not being then aware of
the danger which threatened the ship, proceeded to do in a very
leisurely and deliberate fashion.  Their next task was to haul down the
smaller staysails, then to clew up and furl royals and topgallantsails.
They were all aloft, in the act of stowing these sails, when the
hurricane burst upon them.  They fortunately saw its approach in time to
save themselves, and, leaving the canvas drooping loose from the yards,
hurriedly descended to the deck by way of the backstays, and were
scarcely there when, with the first furious rush of the wind, the three
topmasts went, one after the other in quick succession, the wreckage
falling on deck and lumbering it fore and aft.

The crew regarded the mishap with stolid satisfaction.  The delay which
it would occasion in the prosecution of the voyage was nothing to them;
the ship was stripped of everything above her lower mastheads, leaving
so much the less canvas for her crew to handle, and that was all they
cared about at the moment.  A little later on in the day they saw that
if the gale lasted--of which there was every prospect--the loss of her
spars would result in her separation from the remainder of the fleet,
and as they remarked upon this to each other, the men smiled grimly, and
exchanged certain short pithy remarks which, had they been heard by the
occupants of the saloon, would have produced a feeling of grave
uneasiness.

The crew were, of course, at once set to work to clear away the wreck,
and this they forthwith proceeded to do, for their own sakes, however,
rather than out of respect to the captain's orders, the heavy spars
dashing about the deck with the roll of the ship in a manner which made
it positively dangerous to be there at all.

By nightfall the rest of the fleet had passed out of sight to the
eastward, scattered like chaff before the angry breath of the hurricane,
and the _Princess Royal_ was left to fight out her battle alone.  By
dint of almost superhuman exertions, the shattered spars had been
secured, the main-sail cut away from the yard, and such other
dispositions made as would allow of her being kept dead before the wind,
and out of the trough of the sea during the coming night; and when the
captain took his seat at the head of the saloon-table at dinner that
evening, he was full of boastful exultation over the prompt obedience of
his crew, frequently congratulating his passengers upon their being on
board a ship in charge of such capable officers as himself and his
mates.  Of course he did not actually say this in so many words, but the
burden of his remarks amounted to it, and nothing less.

The second mate had the middle watch on that eventful night, and just
after he had struck four bells, and the wheel had been relieved, he was
inexpressibly scandalised by hearing above the howling of the gale loud
sounds of singing and jocularity on the forecastle.

Such sounds were of so very unusual a character on board the _Princess
Royal_ that, coupled with the circumstance of their being uttered in the
middle watch of all times in the world, he was at first so astonished as
to be quite unable to believe his own ears.  Very soon, however, they
were repeated, one of the men actually breaking into a rollicking song,
the burden of which was an invocation to "Let us all be jolly, boys,"
under every conceivable combination of circumstances.

"Jolly!  The scoundrels!  How dare they so much as think of such a thing
at a time when they were living under the ban of their officers' severe
displeasure?  And the ship a perfect wreck aloft, too!"  It was simply
monstrous; the second mate's righteous anger blazed up into full fury at
once, and, advancing to the break of the poop, he roared out in
stentorian tones--

"Silence, there, for'ard!  What do you mean, you unmannerly swabs, by
disturbing the ship fore and aft with your infernal howling at this time
of night?"

Either the "unmannerly swabs" had not heard him, or they were so utterly
lost to all sense of the respect due to their officer as to pay no
attention to his polite adjuration, for the song was continued, with
some attempt at a chorus.

The second mate was not in the habit of speaking twice to those under
him, and he did not attempt to do so now.  Drawing his knotted "colt"
out of his pocket, he descended the poop-ladder, and hurried forward as
fast as the heavy rolling of the ship would permit, determined to teach
the "howling thieves" a lesson they would not readily forget.

Meanwhile, though he was blissfully ignorant of the fact, sharp eyes had
been watching his motions for some time; and his foot was scarcely on
the top step of the poop-ladder when Jim Martin, the owner of a pair of
the aforesaid sharp eyes, exclaimed--

"Hurrah, my bullies!  Keep it up; here he comes.  The shark has bolted
the bait without so much as smelling at it."

The group of men clustered on the forecastle made a slight restless
movement, as men sometimes will when they are conscious of the approach
of a great crisis in their lives, and the voice of the singer quavered
the merest trifle.  Another moment, and the second mate was among them,
his eyes flashing with anger and his colt uplifted to strike.

"What the deuce?"

Before he could utter another word, his legs were cut from under him by
the sweeping blow of a handspike, and he fell with a crash to the deck,
the back of his head striking so violently on the planking as to
momentarily stun him.  In an instant a belaying-pin was thrust between
his teeth and secured there with a lashing of spun-yarn; and then,
before he had sufficiently recovered to realise his position, he was
turned over on his face, his arms drawn behind him, and his wrists and
ankles firmly lashed together.

"Very neatly managed," remarked Talbot approvingly, as his gaze rested
on the prostrate figure on the deck.  "Now, mates, what's the next move?
Come, Ned," to the boatswain, "you're to be our new skipper, you know;
give us your orders, cap'n, and we'll be `yours obejently.'"

"Well, then, if you're all agreed upon that, shipmates, my first order
is for one of you--you Tom--to go aft into the saloon and knock at the
`old man's' door [Note 1], and ask him to come on deck at once, as Mr
Thomson have met with a haccident.  Two more of you'll wait for him
outside the door, and when he steps out 'pon deck sarve him the same as
you've sarved our respected friend here.  Then do the same with Mr
Nicholls (the chief mate)."

These orders were so skilfully executed, that in a quarter of an hour
the mutineers had the captain and his two _aides_ prisoners--bound and
helpless in their hands, without the slightest alarm having been given
to the other occupants of the saloon.  The larboard watch was then
called; and from their first eager questions when aroused it became
evident that the seizure of the ship was a carefully planned affair, of
which all in the forecastle were fully cognisant.

The seamen having paraded on deck, and been, with the aid of a lantern,
carefully inspected by the boatswain to ascertain that there were no
recreant spirits among them now that the crisis had arrived, each man--
excepting a half-dozen left in charge of the deck--was provided with a
short length of well-stretched ratline, carrying which, they proceeded
in a body to the saloon, and, entering the state-rooms, surprised in
their sleep and secured without difficulty the whole of the male
passengers, pinioned them firmly, and then, after depriving them of such
weapons as they happened to possess, locked them up in their own cabins.
The ladies were only disturbed so far as was necessary to make them
acquainted with the fact that the ship had changed hands, and that, if
they had only the good sense to acquiesce in the arrangement, they would
be perfectly unmolested.  The cook and stewards were also called, and,
having been left in ignorance of the proposed mutiny lest they should
inadvertently let the secret slip, addressed in somewhat similar terms;
whereupon they at once declared their readiness to throw in their lot
with the mutineers, and were forthwith sworn in.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The master of a merchant-ship is frequently spoken of by his
crew as "the old man," whether his years happen to be few or many.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

LIEUTENANT WALFORD FINDS HIMSELF IN AN EXCEEDINGLY UNPLEASANT POSITION.

On the morning following the seizure of the _Princess Royal_ by her
misguided crew, the day broke tardily, revealing to the mutineers a
wild, threatening sky, a high and increasing sea, the curling
foam-crests of which raced after the ship menacingly, and an unbroken
horizon all round.  Not a solitary sail of any description was visible;
they were alone, at the mercy of the towering mountain-surges, and of
the gale which howled deafeningly past them.  The sight which on that
morning presented itself from the poop of the crippled ship was one to
make the stoutest heart quail, to impress the onlooker with an
overpowering sense of his own insignificance compared with Him who holds
the ocean in the hollow of His hand, and of the blasphemous arrogance of
those who would presume to take upon themselves one of the functions of
the Almighty, and, in the blindness of their anger, attempt to mete out
to their fellow-men that justice which it is His alone to repay.

Yet no such idea presented itself to the mutineers; or, if it did, each
man was careful to conceal it from all the rest.  They had been
systematically down-trodden and ill-treated from the commencement of the
voyage; their lives had been made a burden to them; and now--having at
last been provoked into the throwing off of their yoke of insupportable
bondage--they thirsted for revenge upon the authors of their miseries.

As might be expected, the whole internal economy of the ship was upset
from the moment that she fell into the hands of the mutineers.  Their
first act, on the morning in question, was to transfer the male
passengers from the cabin to the forecastle, and to remove their own
belongings aft into the state-rooms thus rendered vacant.  The ladies,
of whom, fortunately, there were only half a dozen on board, were
permitted for the present to retain possession of their state-rooms,
being given to understand, however, that it was only upon the express
condition that they were to make no attempt whatever to meddle with the
arrangements of the mutineers, nor to communicate in any way with the
male passengers confined in the forecastle.

These arrangements completed, Rogers ordered the steward to prepare and
serve to the mutineers in the saloon the best breakfast that the
resources of the ship would allow; the passengers in the forecastle to
be served with such a meal as ordinarily fell to the lot of the seamen;
while the deposed captain and the two mates were to be left entirely
without food of any kind.  These orders were carried out to the letter;
the unfortunate ladies being compelled to take their seats as usual at
the breakfast table, and share the meal of the mutineers.

This being over, the table was cleared; spirits and tobacco were called
for, and Rogers, from his seat at the head of the saloon-table, gave
orders that the captain and the two mates should be brought aft, and put
upon their trial before a court of the whole crew.

"There's one more as I votes we try at the same time, and that's the
sodger-officer as got poor Dicky Rudd his flogging," observed one of the
men.

"Very well," assented Rogers, "bring him along, too, mates; I intended
to take him by hisself, but it don't matter; bring the whole four of
'em."

In a few minutes Captain Arnold, Nicholls the chief mate, and Thomson
the second mate, with Lieutenant Walford, were ushered into the saloon,
handcuffed, and guarded by eight armed mutineers.

"The prisoners is before the court," announced Talbot, in a loud voice,
anxious to make the proceedings partake as much of the character of a
ceremonial as possible.

The four men were then ordered to range themselves in line at the foot
of the table, an order which, after a little hesitation, they sullenly
obeyed.

Meanwhile, the mutineers, having been served with tobacco and brandy,
had lighted their pipes and provided themselves, each man, with a stiff
rummer of grog.  A cursory observer would possibly have thought the
scene grotesque; but the four men ranged at the foot of the table
speedily detected in the countenances of their self-constituted judges,
an expression of stern determination which caused their hearts to sink
and their cheeks to blanch with sudden fear.

A low-toned consultation now ensued between Rogers and those nearest
him, in which Talbot was summoned to take part.  At its conclusion the
latter withdrew a little apart, and Rogers, turning to the captain,
said--

"Robert Arnold, yours is the first case.  Who is the prosecutor?"

"I am," answered Talbot, "on behalf of the whole crew."

"Very good," acquiesced Rogers.  "Benjamin Talbot, state y'ur case."

Upon this, Talbot stepped up to the cabin-table and said--

"On behalf of the whole crew of this here ship--the _Princess Royal_--I
charges Robert Arnold, late skipper of the same, with havin' treated all
hands before the mast in a most onjustifiable manner.  As you're fully
aweer, shipmates, we was short-handed when we left London; and at
Plymouth the men-o'-war robbed us of four of our best hands, makin' us
more short-handed still.  Very well.  Now what's the dooty of a skipper
to his crew under such sarcumstances as this here?  Why, I say his dooty
is to make things as easy as possible for 'em.  Instead o' which this
here Robert Arnold, the prisoner as we're tryin', he goes and expects us
to do as much work, and to do it as smartly, as if the ship was fully
manned.  And because we couldn't do it--as it stands to reason we
couldn't--he goes and makes _extra_ work for us by way of punishment; he
robs us of our a'ternoon watch below; he stops our grog; he tyrannises
over us in every imaginable way; he treats us like dogs and not like
men, abusin' and bullyin' us, and goin' out of his way to hurt our
feelin's; he refuses to listen to our just complaints; he encourages the
first and second mates to sarve out to us the same sort of treatment as
he gives us hisself, instead of takin' our part and treatin' us with
justice; and he does all this not once in a way only, but from the very
commencement of the v'yage.  And, lastly, he orders a sick man to be
flogged; laughs at the poor chap's sufferin's; and refuses to sarve out
the necessaries to dress his wounds a'terwards.  That, shipmates, is the
charge I brings against Robert Arnold."

"You hears the charge agin the prisoner, shipmates all?" observed
Rogers, glancing round the table.  "Ben Talbot brings this here charge
in the name of all hands; so, if there's any of yer as disagrees with
what he've said, just stand up like men and say so."

A profound silence followed, no man making the slightest sign or token
of dissent.  "Very well," resumed Rogers; "nobody don't seem to have
anything to say agin the charge.  Now, you that _agrees_ with Talbot,
and thinks as he've stated the case fairly, hold up y'ur hands."

Every hand was at once and unhesitatingly raised at arm's length.

"Unanermous," pronounced Rogers.  "Now, Robert Arnold, you've heard
what's been charged agin yer, and you've seen that all hands of us
agrees that the charge is just.  What have yer got to say in y'ur
defence?"

"Nothing," answered the captain; "except that I utterly disclaim your
right to sit in judgment upon me or to criticise my actions in any
manner whatsoever.  Your conduct is in the last degree illegal and
unjustifiable.  You are a pack of mutinous scoundrels; and I warn you
that a terrible punishment will surely overtake you if you persist in
your defiance of my authority.  If, however, you will return to your
duty and deliver up to us, your duly appointed officers, the ringleaders
in this disgraceful mutiny, I will undertake to overlook this most
serious offence, so far as the rest of you are concerned."

"You hear what the prisoner says, shipmates," observed Rogers calmly.
"Do you consider as he've made good his defence?  Is it your opinion as
he've justified hisself?  Them as thinks he have, hold up their hands.
Them as thinks he haven't, stand up."

The self-constituted judges with one accord rose to their feet.

"That'll do; you may sit down agin," remarked Rogers.  "The prisoner is
found _guilty_.  The next question to be settled is the matter of
punishment.  Now, there's a many ways of punishing a man, some on 'em
more severe than others.  The most severest as I knows is _death_; death
by hangin' from the yard-arm.  Them as thinks the prisoner Arnold
deservin' of this punishment, hold up their hands."

Two or three hands were hesitatingly raised, and, after a slight pause,
lowered again.

"Do I understand as _everybody_ thinks hangin' too severe?" inquired
Rogers, glancing slowly round the table.  "I do,"--as no hands were
shown.  "Well then, let's try something else.  Perhaps, shipmates, some
of yer's got a hidee as you'd like to put afore the court?  If so, let's
hear what it is."

"I thinks as it would be no more nor he desarves if we was to treat him
for the rest of the v'yage as he've treated us from the beginnin' of it.
He'd know then what it's like, and if he lives long enough to get the
command of another ship, maybe he'll then know better how to treat his
crew," observed one of the men.

"Not at all a bad idee," commented Rogers.  "You've heard what Phil
says; what d'ye think on't?"

"I thinks it's a capical notion," remarked one.

"I'm agreeable," intimated another.

"Ay; let's see how he likes that sort of thing hisself," remarked a
third.

And so on; all hands intimating their concurrence in the suggestion.

"Wery good," remarked Rogers, when all had spoken.  Then, turning to the
captain, he said--

"Robert Arnold, the sentence of this here court is that you'm to be
turned for'ard and conwerted into a `hordinary seaman,' to do a
hordinary seaman's dooties, and to receive just exactly the same
treatment as you've sarved out to the hands since this here ship sailed
from Hold England, namely, more kicks than ha'pence.  And the Lord have
mercy on yer miserable carcase!"

He paused for a moment on concluding this--in his opinion--impressive
address, and then ordered that Arnold should be removed to the
forecastle, and the chief mate brought forward.

This was done, and as Nicholls, the chief mate, stepped forward in
answer to his name, his ashy pale face, his trepidation of manner, and
his imperfect articulation all showed him to be labouring under a very
agony of fear.

The charge against him was also preferred by Talbot in pretty much the
same language as was used by that individual in his charge against the
captain; the accusation in the present case, however, being to the
effect that Nicholls, occupying as he did the influential post of chief
mate, had, instead of using his influence with the captain to make
matters as agreeable as possible for the men, countenanced, aided,
abetted, and encouraged his superior in the adoption of a harsh and
tyrannical course of conduct.  Upon this charge he was found guilty; and
his sentence was similar to that of the captain's, with the addition
that he was to receive at the gangway twenty-five lashes, well laid on.

Thomson, the second mate, was now called forward; and the yell of
fiendish delight which greeted him as the bully staggered up to the
cabin-table, fairly caused his teeth to chatter with affright.

The charge against him was made by Talbot, who plunged eagerly into his
task with a manifest gusto which had been well suppressed in the
previous cases.  The indictment was very similar to that preferred
against Nicholls; but, in addition to all that the latter had been
charged with, Talbot rapidly enumerated a long list of wanton cruelties
and petty tyrannies which had sprung spontaneously and unprompted as it
were from the second mate's own evil nature.  At the conclusion of
Talbot's address the men, without waiting for Rogers to formally charge
them, sprang eagerly to their feet and clamorously declared the prisoner
guilty.

The question of punishment was then referred to by Rogers; and the
moment that he ceased to speak, the shout of "Death!  Death!  Hanging
from the yard-arm," rang through the cabin.  "And let him have five
dozen at the gangway before he's strung up, just by way of payin' off
Dicky Rudd's debt with interest," added a voice.  The suggestion was
carried by acclamation; and the miserable man was informed that the
sentence against him would be carried into effect at the conclusion of
the trial of the fourth prisoner, Lieutenant Walford, who was now
commanded to stand forward.

Walford stepped up to the cabin-table with an assumption of firmness
which was completely belied by the ghastly pallor of his countenance and
the convulsive twitching of his white lips.  Grasping the table with
both hands, he said in a voice which he in vain attempted to render
steady--

"Before you proceed any further in this matter I wish to remind you that
I am merely a _passenger_ on board this ship, and that I have nothing
whatever to do with any quarrel which may exist between you and your
officers.  I have heard the charges which you have preferred against
them, and I am wholly at a loss to understand in what way you associate
me with them; you can scarcely suppose, I imagine, that the passengers
would regard themselves as called upon to interfere in the management or
discipline of the ship; for my own part, I have always considered you
quite able to manage your own affairs, and quite capable of putting a
stop to any injustice to which you might be subjected; you never
appealed to me for help, and you therefore ought not to be surprised if
I have held aloof."

He paused here for a moment and glanced anxiously round the table to
note the effect of his address, and seeing, by the stern expression on
the faces of the men seated at the table, that he had wholly failed to
make a favourable impression, he hastily proceeded to add--

"Furthermore, let me remind you that I am an officer and a gentleman,
the wearer of his Most Gracious Majesty's uniform, and in virtue of that
fact I may claim--I _do_ claim--to be in some sort his Majesty's
representative, on board this ship.  Any violence or indignity offered
to me, therefore, is tantamount to offering the same to the king
himself; and, as you are all fully aware, to offer indignity or violence
to the king's person is high treason, a crime punishable with death.  I
hope, therefore, that you will pause and consider well the consequences
of any hasty action which your present temporary assumption of power
might betray you into, and that, before it is too late, and before you
have too deeply inculpated yourselves, you will see the advisability of
restoring to me my freedom."

If he expected this appeal to be of any benefit to him he was sorely
disappointed, for the gloomy, repellent expression on the faces of his
judges, was only deepened by his ill-advised address.

A moment or two of complete silence followed the utterance of his
closing words; and then Rogers, looking him straight in the face, said--

"Well, pris'ner, have yer quite finished?"

"Surely I have said sufficient to demonstrate to you the impolicy, as
well as the injustice, of making me suffer for the faults of others?"
exclaimed Walford.

"Glad you think so," replied Rogers, with a sardonic grin.  "Howsoever,"
he continued, "you may keep y'ur mind easy about one thing; we ain't
goin' to make yer `suffer for the faults of others,' as you calls it;
you'll only be made to suffer for faults of y'ur own; and bad enough
you'll find that, I reckon.  Now, Ben, what's the charge agin this one?"

"I charges him," answered Talbot, "with havin' wilfully spoke the words
what got poor Dicky Rudd two dozen lashes at the gangway, when the poor
feller was 'most too sick to stand upright.  If he hadn't spoke as
likely as not the skipper had never ha' thought of it, and, so far as
that goes, I believes that all hands of us is agreed that he wouldn't.
Therefore I charges this here pris'ner with bein' the man what acshully
got poor Dicky his floggin'."

"You hears, pris'ner, what the crew has against yer; what have yer got
to say to it?" interrogated Rogers.

Walford had evidently either forgotten all about his ill-advised
suggestion, or had believed the crew to be ignorant of it: he seemed to
have thought that the utmost extent of the mutineers' complaint against
him would be that he had not interfered in their behalf.  When therefore
he heard the charge against him, and realised the fact that he was
wholly in their power, and utterly at their mercy, his courage--which at
the best of times was only of a very flimsy and unreliable character--
utterly gave way; he involuntarily turned his eyes for a moment upon the
miserable second mate; recalled the fact that the wretched man had been
doomed to a speedy and degrading death by the same individuals who were
now sitting in judgment upon him; and a shameful panic took possession
of him.  An uncontrollable shivering fit seized his frame, he was
obliged to clench his teeth together, to prevent them from chattering
audibly; he glanced wildly round him as if seeking for some means of
escape; and, after two or three ineffectual efforts to speak, he managed
to gasp out brokenly through his clenched teeth and quivering lips--

"I--I--I give you--my--my sacred word of honour, gen-gentlemen, that I
was o-only in--jest.  I nev-never believed for a--a moment that
Cap-t-tain Arnold would t-take my remark seriously, or I as-sure you I
would n-n-ever have uttered it.  And besides, I re-real-ly believed that
your--friend R-R-udd was--was only sh-h--er--ah--I beg your pardon
gentlemen, I sc-scarcely know what I am saying, but--oh, gentlemen I
don't be hard upon me--have mercy upon me, for God's sake!  Spare my
life, and you may do with me what you will."

He ceased, from sheer physical inability to utter another word, and,
sinking upon his knees, stretched forth his quaking hands in a mute
appeal for mercy.

This disgraceful exhibition of cowardice was _almost_ successful in
winning for Walford an ignominious release.  The mutineers were so
unutterably disgusted that, for a moment, their impulse was to kick him
out of the cabin like a craven hound and henceforward ignore his
existence.  But this impulse lasted only for a moment; they recalled to
mind the insolent arrogance with which this same cowering creature had
treated them when he deemed himself secure from retaliation; and they
determined that, while his miserable life was not worth the taking, he
should still receive so salutary a lesson as should effectually deter
him from any repetition of the offence for the remainder of his life.

"Well, shipmates," exclaimed Rogers, breaking the painful silence which
had followed Walford's shameful appeal, "what d'ye think?  Is the
pris'ner guilty or not guilty?"

"_Guilty_!" was the unanimous declaration of the assembly.

"Guilty?  In course he is.  And what's the punishment to be?  Death?"

"Oh, no!  Not death--not death, gentlemen.  For the love of God, spare
my life; I am not fit to die; I am not indeed.  You see how young a man
I am; why, I have never yet thought about dying.  Mercy! mercy!"
shrieked the miserable wretch as he grovelled on his knees before them,
and sought to clasp the knees of the man nearest him--an attempt which
was repulsed with an oath, a look of unutterable loathing, a kick, and a
brutal blow on the mouth.

"Come, lads, speak up," urged Rogers, wholly unmoved by the
interruption, "say what the punishment's to be, and let's have done with
it.  I'm sick of this here, I am."

"Well," said Talbot, stepping forward, "I wotes that the prisoner be
first made to go and axe poor Dicky's pardon.  If he can't get it, why,
let's string him up at the yard-arm to balance t'other one.  But if
Dicky likes to forgi'e him, well, we'll spare his life and redooce his
punishment to two dozen at the gangway--same as he got for Rudd--and
make him do Rudd's dooty 'til the poor chap's better; arter which the
prisoner can be set to do all the dirty work o' the ship.  How's that,
shipmates?"

"Ay, ay, Ben; that'll do, bo', that'll do fust-rate.  And he may thank
his lucky stars at bein' let off so precious easy," was Rogers' reply;
in which the remainder of the men laughingly acquiesced.

"Then you'd better step this way at once, young feller," remarked Talbot
to the miserable Walford, "and see what you can do with poor Dicky.  If
he won't forgive yer, mind, it's all up with yer."

So saying he opened the door of the state-room in which Rudd was lying,
thrust his victim into the apartment, and closed the door upon him.

The state-room into which Walford was thus unceremoniously ushered was
divided from the saloon by a bulkhead with a door in it, the upper panel
of which was fitted with sloping slats like those of the Venetian
window-blinds of the present day; it was perfectly easy, therefore, for
an occupant of the state-room to hear all that passed in the saloon, and
_vice versa_.  As a matter of fact, Rudd, who was lying in his berth,
broad awake, _had_ heard every word uttered during the course of the
trial, and shrewdly suspecting that his shipmates were more anxious to
thoroughly frighten than to actually hurt their fourth prisoner, and
having, moreover, a trifling personal grudge against the man who had
secured for him his flogging, he determined to have a little amusement
at Walford's expense before according to him the pardon which he knew
his shipmates expected of him.  When, therefore, Walford staggered up to
the side of the berth, and began eagerly and incoherently to stammer
forth the most abject apologies and the wildest prayers for forgiveness,
Rudd simply growled forth an oath and impatiently flung himself over in
the berth with his back to the petitioner.  This had the intended effect
of causing Walford's apologies and prayers to be reiterated with
increased eagerness and incoherence, to the hearty amusement of the men
in the saloon.

At length Talbot opened the state-room door, and, thrusting in his head,
said roughly--

"Here, come out of that, mister; you've worried poor Dicky quite long
enough.  If he won't forgive yer, why, he _won't_, and that settles it.
You've had a fair chance to see what you could do with him, and you've
failed; we decided to give yer a quarter of a hour, and the time's up;
so out you comes; d'ye hear?"

The next moment Walford was seized by the collar, and was being dragged
roughly enough out of the state-room, when Rudd, pretending to relent,
called out--

"There, take him away, Ben; but don't be too hard on him; I forgives him
just this once, and I hopes he won't never do it again."

Walford, upon hearing these words, which seemed to him a reprieve from
the very jaws of death, broke away from Talbot's grasp, and, rushing
back to the side of the berth, seized Rudd's hand, kissed it wildly, and
burst into an uncontrollable passion of tears, in the midst of which he
was hustled unceremoniously out on deck.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

A DOUBLE TRAGEDY.

A moment or two in the open air sufficed to settle in some measure
Walford's disordered faculties and to restore to him his reason, of
which he had been pretty nearly bereft by the terror of the preceding
half-hour.

He found himself in the midst of the--by this time--more than
half-intoxicated seamen, none of whom appeared to be paying much
attention to him, for they were all talking loudly together, discussing
and arranging the details of the punishment of those whom they chose to
regard as the two chief offenders.

The men were all greatly excited by the potations in which they had
freely indulged during the mockery of a trial in the saloon, and their
differences of opinion on some points were so strong that at one moment
the proceedings seemed more than likely to be diversified by a pitched
battle.  Rogers, however, whose head seemed capable of resisting the
effects of almost any amount of liquor, interposed between the
belligerents, and by a determined exercise of his newly-acquired
authority, and by most frightful threats of the chastisement which he
personally would inflict on the first man who ventured to disobey him,
succeeded at length in restoring some semblance of order.  This
achieved, he ordered a grating to be rigged in the larboard gangway, and
that, when this was done, the chief mate should be seized thereto.

His orders were speedily carried out; and when the man Nicholls,
stripped to the waist, was firmly lashed to the grating in readiness to
receive his punishment, Rogers ordered that the second mate should be
brought to him.

The miserable Thomson was thereupon led before him, and a more wretched
spectacle than this man presented it would be difficult to find.  His
old blustering, bullying, overbearing manner had completely deserted
him; the fear of death was upon him; and he shivered like a man in an
ague-fit.

"You Thomson," said Rogers, addressing him in a calm matter-of-fact tone
of voice, as if what he was about to say had reference only to some
trifling everyday affair, "you was present at the trial of that man
Nicholls as stands seized up to yonder grating, and you knows the
punishment as it was decided for to give him.  It was five and twenty
lashes, well laid on; you hears that, _well laid on_.  Wery good.  Now,
this here same man Nicholls, it seems to me, is in a sort o' way to
blame for getting _you_ into your trouble.  If he'd been a proper sort
of man, understandin' that he owed a dooty to the _crew_ as well as to
the owners of the ship, instead of encouraging you in your goin's-on
agin us, he'd have took you o' one side, and he'd ha' said to you, `Look
here, Thomson, my good feller, you mustn't be too hard upon them poor
sailor-men for'ard; you knows as they don't muster a full-handed crew,
and so it don't stand to reason as they can do so much as if they _was_
full-handed; they're a decent enough willin' lot of men, and we mustn't
axe too much from 'em.  Just keep that in mind, and make things as easy
as you can for 'em.'  If he'd been a proper sort of man, I say, he'd
have said some'at of that sort to you, now wouldn't he?  And you'd have
listened to him, and then you wouldn't have been in this here precious
scrape as you're in now, would you?"

"You're right, Rogers; I should not," eagerly exclaimed Thomson, his
eyes lighting up with a gleam of fresh hope, as he thought he detected
in the boatswain's speech some signs of relenting.  "If Mr Nicholls had
only put the matter to me as you have just now put it, I should never
have given a single man of you the slightest reason for complaint
against me.  But he never did anything of the kind; on the contrary,
both he and Captain Arnold encouraged me to believe you an idle,
worthless lot of scamps, and to treat you as such.  And that is the
plain, simple truth, I swear it."

"Wery good," commented Rogers.  "Then, you see, Thomson, you and us
thinks alike, namely, that Nicholls in a kind of a sort of a way led you
into this here miserable scrape.  That bein' the case, we thinks it'll
be only fair if _you_ gives him the twenty-five lashes--_well laid on_--
that the court have condemned him to receive."

Thomson looked eagerly into the face of the boatswain, hoping that in
this proposal he saw a commutation of his death-sentence.  Rogers
returned the gaze with a look of grim satisfaction, which the second
mate mistook for a half-drunken leer of benevolence; and, anxious above
all things to propitiate this man, who undoubtedly held the power of
life and death in his hands, he excitedly exclaimed--

"I'll do it!  Give me the cat, and you shall have _no_ cause to complain
of the way in which I will execute your sentence."

"All right; that's a bargain," agreed Rogers.  Then, turning to the rest
of the mutineers, he ordered them to fetch all hands on deck to witness
punishment, "All hands exceptin' the ladies, I mean; they'd be shocked
at the sight, pretty dears, and we must take care as they don't see nor
hear nothin' as'd shock 'em, sweet, delicate creeturs," he added with a
contemptuous laugh, which was echoed by his comrades as they staggered
forward to drag the male passengers on deck.

In a few minutes these were all mustered, Walford contriving, seemingly
without attracting attention, to mingle with them and take up an
unobtrusive position, from which he intended, if possible, to quietly
effect a retreat at the first convenient opportunity.

When all was at length ready, the scene which presented itself was a
sufficiently curious one.

The chief object of the picture was, of course, the figure of the
unhappy chief mate, who, naked to the waist, stood firmly lashed to the
grating, with arms and legs wide spread in the orthodox attitude of a
man about to be flogged.  Opposite him, and some four or five feet
distant, stood Thomson, his coat and vest laid aside, his shirt-sleeves
rolled above his elbows, and the cat in his hand, with the knotted tails
prone upon the deck.  Around these two figures, in a compact ring, stood
the gentlemen passengers and the captain of the ship, a group of
unwilling spectators of the outrage about to be inflicted; whilst
outside them again, and completely hemming them in beyond all
possibility of escape, crowded the half-drunken mutineers, armed to the
teeth, and bandying brutal and obscene jests back and forth.  Then there
was the huge bulk of the disabled ship, surging madly forward like a
hunted creature dizzy and reeling with terror, her spacious decks
knee-deep in the water which was incessantly pouring in over her
bulwarks as she rolled gunwale-under; and for a background the
mountainous seas careering swiftly past, with their lofty crests
towering high and menacingly all round the ship, and the leaden-hued,
stormy sky.

The deep and painful silence which prevailed was broken by Rogers' harsh
voice remarking--

"Now, Thomson, you knows your dooty, which is to give the pris'ner on
the gratin' five and twenty lashes, _well laid on_.  So go ahead, my
man, and let's see if you can't make him yell a bit louder than you did
poor Dicky Rudd."

Thomson glanced at the speaker and nodded.  The hope which he
entertained of an eventual escape from death had thrown him into a state
of terrible excitement, bordering almost upon madness; his ghastly
pallor had vanished, and was now superseded by a deep purplish tinge,
resulting from the violent rush of blood to the head; the veins upon his
forehead stood out like cords, his eyes glowed like those of a wild
animal, and his jaws were flecked with foam streaked with blood, which
trickled from a wound in his lower lip, where in his terrible excitement
he had unconsciously bitten it through.

This frenzied creature nodded his comprehension of Rogers' command, and,
gathering himself up like an animal about to make a spring, he drew the
tails of the cat slowly through his closed left hand, measured his
distance carefully, and, making a quick bound forward, brought the nine
knotted lashes down upon the mate's naked shoulders with a demoniac
strength which seemed to literally bury them in the quivering flesh.
The mate responded to this with a sharp yell, which was greeted by the
mutineers with mocking laughter, Rogers remarking to Thomson that, "That
was pretty well; but, you know, you can do a deal better'n that."  The
second stroke--but why go further with the description of the sickening
scene?  Let it suffice to say that when the inanimate body of the mate
was cast loose from the grating, it bore the appearance of having been
mangled by the teeth and claws of some savage beast rather than by a
human being.

"So far, so good," observed Rogers.  "That ends act the first.  Now,
Thomson, it's your turn, you know.  Strip, my boy, without makin' any
bones about it; and let's see if you can take y'ur punishment any
better'n your superior hossifer."

The man spoke in a rallying tone of such geniality that Thomson grew
more sanguine than ever as to the remission of the more serious part of
his sentence, and, with a ghastly grin in response to Rogers'
patronising smile, he began to slowly strip.  He even, after drawing his
shirt over his head, summoned the courage to walk up to the grating,
and, leaning his body upon it, to spontaneously stretch out his arms and
legs to the proper position.

When the wretched man was securely "spread-eagled" on the grating,
Talbot and another man were ordered to step forward and administer the
flogging, which they did, relieving each other at the completion of
every dozen lashes, until the entire fifty had been inflicted.  The
punishment was terribly severe; but the intense excitement under which
the second mate laboured enabled him to retain his consciousness
throughout, and even to stand without assistance on being cast loose.  A
stiff "reviver" of grog was administered to him by Rogers' order, and he
was then told to dress himself.

The critical moment was now at hand when the miserable Thomson's state
of torturing suspense was to cease, when he would know for certain
whether these men were actually relentless, or whether, having already
wreaked an ample vengeance upon him, they would be content to ignore the
remainder of his sentence; which, after all, he was more than
half-inclined to believe was nothing but a cruel hoax, arranged
beforehand for the purpose of giving him a good fright.

Hopeful as he was, however, upon this score, he could not help feeling
terribly anxious; and it was with the utmost difficulty that he
controlled his quaking nerves sufficiently to replace his clothing
without assistance.  During the time that he was thus engaged, the
circle which hemmed him in was maintained unbroken; the mutineers
watching his motions with strong interest, and indulging freely in
jocular comments and jeering encouragement as he winced and shrank at
the chafe of his clothing on his lacerated back and shoulders.

At length he stood once more before them, fully clothed, his eyes
glowing like carbuncles, his visage blanched, and his whole frame
quivering with pain and the tensity of excitement and suspense.

"Wery good, Thomson; wery good indeed," remarked Rogers approvingly;
"you've showed a great deal more pluck than any of us have ever give you
credit for--so far.  If you only behaves as well for the next ten
minutes, we shall feel quite a respec' for y'ur mem'ry.  Now, shipmates,
and pris'ners all, for'ard we goes, to carry out the second part of the
sentence."

At the word, two of the mutineers stepped forward, and, placing
themselves one on each side of the second mate, linked their arms in his
and led him forward, halting him just beneath the fore-yard; the
remainder of the crowd following in a body and forming in a circle round
him as before.  Then, at Rogers' command, one of the mutineers separated
himself from the main body, and in the course of a minute or two was
seen leisurely ascending the fore-rigging with a tail-block in one hand
and the end of a coil of light line in the other.

Thomson glanced upward at this man, and like a lightning-stroke the
conviction flashed upon him that his doom _was_ indeed sealed--that the
death-sentence passed upon him was no grim and ghastly piece of
jocularity, no hoax practised upon him to test his courage, but that it
was spoken in cruel and bitter earnest.  For a second or two his heart
stood still, his head swam, his sight failed him, and a feeling of
horrible nausea oppressed him.  He realised at last that he was about to
die; that, standing there on that reeling deck as he did in the full
strength and prime of lusty manhood, with all his energies mental and
physical at their best, the sands of his life had so nearly run out that
the few last grains were even now falling in the hour-glass of his fate.
Then, in a single instant, the whole of his past life rose up before
him, with every thought, word, and deed clearly and sharply reproduced.
And, as it did so, the present world and all its concerns, its petty
aspirations, ambitions, hopes, and strivings, dwindled away into the
most contemptible insignificance; his mental vision cleared; he saw how
full had been his life of great and noble possibilities--as are the
lives of all of us, would we but allow ourselves to see that it is so--
and he saw, too, how completely he had missed his mark; how very far his
own evil passions had led him astray from the narrow and seldom-trodden
path which, faithfully followed, leads to that highest possible
attainment of humanity--True Goodness.

Ah! how bitterly he repented him then of all his lost, or rather his
cast-away, opportunities.  From his earliest youth he had chosen to
follow evil rather than good; he had turned persistently away from the
right; and now there was neither time nor opportunity left him for
reparation.  The utter blankness and uselessness of his life stood
revealed to him as one long, unbroken, unanswerable accusation; and, in
his mad despair, he suddenly dashed aside the two men who held him in
their custody, sprang with a single bound to the rail, and, placing his
hands upon the top of the topgallant-bulwark, vaulted clear over it
before a single hand could be outstretched to restrain him, and with a
yell which evermore rang in the ears of those who heard it, threw up his
hands and vanished for ever into the dark and terrible depths of his
ocean-grave.

The little crowd of spectators stood for a few moments silent and almost
stupefied at this sudden and tragic disappearance of the second mate
from their midst.  The occurrence was so totally unexpected that it in a
measure sobered the mutineers, who regarded each other with some such
expression as that of a group of school-boys terrified at the sudden
occurrence of some disaster, the result of their own mischievous acts,
and each anxious to shift the blame and responsibility from his own
shoulders to those of the others.

The first to recover his self-possession was Rogers, who exclaimed with
an obviously forced laugh--

"Well, curse me if that ain't a good un!  What, in the name of all
that's foolish, made the man do that?  He might ha' _knowed_ as we was
only goin' to frighten him a bit.  You'll bear me out, shipmates, that
we was all agreed to go no further than the frightenin' of him a bit,
and meant to let him off arter we'd made fast the rope, and let him
stand with it round his neck a minute or two.  Now, ain't them there the
facts o' the case?"

"Ay, ay, Ned; you're right, bo'; that's just exactly how't was," was the
reply.

"Nevertheless," answered Captain Arnold sternly, "you are as much
murderers, every one of you, as if you had hanged the man--as you seemed
about to do--or had taken him up and flung him over the side with your
own hands.  You _drove_ him to his death; his blood is upon your hands;
and you will individually be called upon to answer for your accursed
deed, if not in this world, certainly in the next."

The men cowered like whipped hounds before the captain's denunciation,
which they knew in their inmost souls to be just; for an instant they
stood appalled before the awful conviction that they were indeed
_murderers_, none the less guilty because their crime was unintentional;
and, but for the swift intervention of Rogers, they would there and
then, in their horror and remorse, have yielded up possession of the
ship, and returned to their duty.  But the boatswain, taking in at a
glance the critical state of affairs, and fully realising his own
perilous position as the ring-leader in the mutiny, rallied his men by
exclaiming--

"There now, belay all that, you Arnold; we wants none of _your_
preachin', and, what's more, we won't have it.  And, shipmates, don't
you take no notice of what he says; we never _meant_ to take the second
mate's life; we'd ha' stopped him from drownin' hisself if we could; and
so it's just all gammon to talk about our bein' his--his--murderers.
Now march the pris'ners down into the fo'c's'le again; clap the bilboes
on 'em; shut down the scuttle upon 'em; and then come aft into the
cabin, all hands, and we'll `freshen the nip.'"

This proposal to "freshen the nip"--or take another glass or two of
grog--was eagerly welcomed by the mutineers, who felt that they _must_
have something to dispel those qualms of conscience which so greatly
disturbed them; and in another quarter of an hour they were all--with
the exception of two men at the wheel and one on the poop, who was
supposed to be acting as lookout--once more assembled round the
saloon-table, busily endeavouring to drown their sense of guilt in a
flood of liquor.

The ladies--who had long before effected a retreat to their own
state-rooms, where they had locked themselves in--were for some time
allowed to remain unmolested; but when the libations in which the
mutineers liberally indulged had at last achieved their desired effect,
and the spirits of the men began to rise, one of the most reckless of
them proposed that the ladies should be invited to grace the revel with
their presence.  The proposal was received with acclamation, and the
unhappy women were forthwith ordered into the saloon.  The poor
terrified creatures at first made no response, hoping that if no notice
were taken of them the intoxicated mutineers would forget all about
them, and leave them in peace.  But this hope was of short duration, for
the mutineers, drinking deep and rapidly, soon grew excited, and,
finding their repeated demands of no avail, staggered to their feet,
and, breaking open the state-room doors, dragged forth their victims,
compelling them to seat themselves at the same table and partake with
them of the liquor with which it was bountifully supplied.  The scene
which followed is simply too shameful for detailed description.  The
men, inflamed by drink and rendered reckless by a feeling which none of
them could entirely shake off--that they had already offended past all
forgiveness--speedily grew more and more outrageous in their behaviour,
until the orgie became one of such unbridled licence that one of the
ladies--the young and lovely wife of one of the passengers imprisoned in
the forecastle--in her desperation drew a pistol from the belt of the
man nearest her, and, quickly cocking it, placed the muzzle to her
breast, pulled the trigger, and sank upon the saloon floor a corpse,
shot through the heart.

This second fatality, more sudden if possible than the first, brought
the unholy revel to an abrupt conclusion; the mutineers, thoroughly
horrified at the occurrence, notwithstanding their drunken condition,
staggering to their feet with one accord, and making the best of their
way out on deck, where they sought to sober themselves by plunging their
heads into buckets of water.

Having to some extent succeeded in this endeavour, they next bethought
themselves of the desirability of putting the ship to rights.  It was
still blowing very heavily, and the sea was higher than ever--
dangerously so indeed, as the ship had more than once narrowly escaped
being pooped--but the sky looked a trifle less wild than before, and the
glass was rising.  Rogers therefore determined, as a first step, to get
up a new foresail, bend, and set it.  The sail-room was accordingly
opened, and then, in pursuance of their resolution to do as little work
as possible themselves, the prisoners in the forecastle were brought up
on deck, and ordered, first to rouse out the sail, and then to go aloft
and bend it.  This the unfortunate passengers, aided and directed by the
captain, at length accomplished, though it was at the imminent risk of
their lives, the violent motion of the ship momentarily threatening to
send them--unaccustomed as they were to such work--whirling off the yard
into the sea.  The sail being bent, it was loosed and set, close-reefed;
after which the disabled ship not only steered more easily, but also
became more steady; all further danger, too, of being pooped was at an
end.

The spare spars were next cast adrift, and preparations made for getting
new topmasts on end as soon as the weather should moderate sufficiently;
and thus passed that eventful day.

Walford was soon found to be so exceedingly timid when aloft, that he
was not only of no use there, he was absolutely a clog and hindrance to
the efforts of the others; he was accordingly relegated to the
ignominious post of cook's mate, in which an abundance of the dirtiest
work was carefully provided for him.

On the second day after his assumption of his new duties, this
unfortunate individual, while engaged in the task of getting up coals
from the fore-peak, was unlucky enough to capsize the lamp which he was
using, and so set the ship on fire.  Instead of giving the alarm
instantly, as he ought to have done, he rushed on deck with the
intention of getting some buckets of water, and endeavouring to
extinguish the fire unaided.  No sooner, however, did he make his
appearance than he was hustled peremptorily off by the cook upon another
errand; and when he returned, a quarter of an hour later, the forecastle
was all ablaze, and the smoke just beginning to curl up through the
scuttle.

Then indeed he shouted "Fire!" with all his might, and at the terrible
cry all hands rushed forward, to find the alarm only too true.

In the first mad hurry and confusion, no one seemed to think of
inquiring how the fire had originated; and Walford was beginning to
congratulate himself that, whatever happened, his complicity would not
be suspected, when Talbot, happening to run up against him, stopped
abruptly, and exclaimed--

"Ha! you lubber, I saw _you_ creeping up and down the forecastle ladder
just now, as gingerly as a cat walking upon hot bricks--you ought to
know something about this job--and by Jove you do, too; I can see it by
the blink of your eyes--so out with it, you long-shore lantern-jawed son
of a baked monkey."

To this elegant adjuration Walford began to stammer out an exculpatory
explanation, which, however, was abruptly nipped in the bud by the
boatswain's mate exclaiming--

"There, belay all that and coil up the slack of your jawing-tackle;
there's no time to talk now; tail on there and try to make yourself
useful.  But look out, my lad if this fire gets the upper hand of us;
curse me, if we don't leave you to roast in it."

A vigorous attack upon the fire was speedily organised, Rogers and
Talbot each taking command of a separate party, which they were careful
so to arrange that there should be no possibility of their prisoners
concerting together in a successful attempt to retake the ship.  So far,
however, as the passengers were concerned, they appeared to be far too
anxious to subdue the flames to have time for any other thought or
consideration.

All through the ensuing night this curiously-constituted party laboured
in their efforts to get the upper hand of the fire; but it had been
allowed to obtain too firm a hold upon the ship before the alarm was
given; much of the cargo was of a highly combustible nature, and though,
by the zeal and energy with which all hands worked, they succeeded to
some extent in retarding the progress of the flames, when day at length
broke, it became apparent to all that the ship was doomed.

When at last they were compelled, from sheer exhaustion, to desist for a
time from their long-continued and fatiguing efforts, the fact--which
had hitherto escaped their notice--became apparent that, happily, the
gale had blown itself out; the wind had already dropped considerably,
and the sea, though it was still very high, no longer broke in its
former dangerous and menacing fashion.

Upon seeing this, Rogers at once came to the determination not to waste
any further labour in the useless endeavour to save the ship, but to
devote all his energies to the getting of the boats safely into the
water.  The mutineers were by this time perfectly sober once more, and
having shaken off with their intoxication the recklessness which it had
engendered, they felt keenly anxious to escape the responsibility of any
further waste of human life.

But, as usual in such cases, their own escape, not only from the danger
of being burnt with the ship, but also from the punishment due to their
misdeeds, was of paramount importance with them.  Before commencing,
therefore, upon the difficult task of launching the boats, Rogers
informed his unfortunate prisoners that he was willing to give them a
couple of boats, with all necessary provisions and water, if they would
individually take a solemn oath never to reveal any of the circumstances
connected with the mutiny, nor to say or do anything which would place
the mutineers within the power of the law.  If they would do this, they
might have the boats; if not, he informed them that they would be left
on board the burning ship, and that the mutineers would take such
measures as would effectually preclude any possibility of escape.  Under
the circumstances the prisoners had no alternative but to comply, which
they did, and the launching of the boats was then vigorously proceeded
with.

This task, after an immense amount of difficulty, and two or three
exceedingly narrow escapes from the accident of having the boats stove
or swamped, was at length satisfactorily accomplished; after which no
time was lost in provisioning and manning them.

As soon as the boats were ready to receive them, the ladies were
summoned from the saloon to take their places therein.  The poor
creatures could hardly be persuaded, in their terror and distraction, to
leave even such inefficient protection as the saloon afforded them, so
great was their horror and repugnance at the idea of being brought once
more, even though it might be for ever so short a time, into the
presence and propinquity of the mutineers.  And when at length they
emerged from the saloon, and, standing upon the wet and slippery deck,
glanced first aloft at the splintered spars, the tattered remains of the
sails, and the ends and bights of rope streaming in the wind, then at
the great tongues of flame and clouds of smoke which enwrapped the
forepart of the ship, and, lastly, over the side at the boats tossing
like egg-shells upon the mountainous seas which swept hissing past,
their courage entirely failed them; and it was not until Rogers, growing
impatient at the delay, strode up to them and gave them the choice of
going instantly and without further ado over the side and into the
boats, or of being left behind altogether, that they could be persuaded
to essay the dangerous adventure.

At length, however, by the exercise of great care and circumspection on
the part of all concerned, the trans-shipment of the ladies was safely
effected, and then the gentlemen were ordered to go.  The husband of the
unhappy lady who had been so cruelly driven to suicide had been for some
time eagerly looking about for his wife, and, not seeing her, he at last
made inquiry of the other ladies as to her whereabouts.  His grief, when
the dreadful news of her death was gradually broken to him with all that
gentleness of which a woman's tender, loving heart alone is capable, was
something pitiful to witness; he rushed into the saloon, and entering
the state-room in which the poor lady's inanimate body had been
reverently deposited by her companions in misfortune, flung himself upon
his knees by the side of the berth, and uttered alternately the wildest
prayers that heaven would pardon her act of desperation, and the
bitterest curses upon the heads of those who had driven her to it.  It
was with the utmost difficulty that he was at last persuaded by Captain
Arnold to bid an eternal farewell to the beloved remains, and to join
the rest of the party in the boats allotted to them.

On hearing the order given for the gentlemen to pass down into the
boats, Walford mingled with the group and pressed quietly forward to the
gangway, having a vivid remembrance of Talbot's terrible threat, and not
caring to remind him of it by a too obtrusive exhibition of his anxiety
to escape.  But in consequence of the still heavy run of the sea,
several of the mutineers--both Rogers and Talbot being among them--were
assisting at the transfer; and when Walford's turn came to pass down
over the side, he was summarily ordered back by the boatswain's mate,
who gruffly exclaimed, as his eye fell upon the quaking lieutenant--

"Here, you! stand back, will yer?  Your turn ain't come yet."

Walford at once fell back, in a state of most painful trepidation, but
still hopeful that he would be allowed to go with the rest.  When all
the passengers but himself, however, had passed down the side, the order
was given for them to cast off, which they at once did, ignorant or
forgetful of the fact that one of their number still remained behind.
Walford was about to rush to the gangway, and hail the fast receding
boat, when the ever-watchful Talbot caught him by the collar, and flung
him from him with an "Ah! would yer," and a kick which sent the
unfortunate officer sprawling upon the deck.

It was now the turn of the mutineers to take to the boats, and it was
not long before they stood in the gangway, each with the bag containing
his few belongings in his hand, waiting to be passed in turn down over
the side.  Rogers rapidly ran his eye over them, satisfied himself that
everybody was present, and then began to call out their names in the
order in which they were to leave the ship.  When one boat had received
its complement and shoved off, Walford once more pressed forward, half
wild with anxiety now, and begged in piteous terms that he might not be
left on board, as now seemed to be the actual determination of the
mutineers.  Upon this Talbot lost all patience with him, and, seizing
him once more by the collar, thrust him before him into the saloon,
exclaiming as he did so--

"Now look here, you meddlesome young jackanapes, there's been enough
blood spilt on board this ship already--chiefly in consekence of your
havin' shoved in your oar where it weren't wanted, and advisin' the
skipper to flog a sick man--and I don't want to have to shed any more,
you understand?  Wery well, then; you stay in here until that there
clock have marked off a good half-hour; arter that you may come out and
do the best you can for yourself; there's plenty o' spars knockin' about
the decks here, which you can lash together, and make a tip-top raft out
of 'em, upon which you can go for a cruise on your own account; but if
you shows your ugly head outside this here cabin before the half-hour's
out, damn me if I won't lash your neck and heels together, and heave you
into the middle of the fire there for'ard.  Comprenny?"

So saying, he coolly shifted the key from the inside to the outside of
the saloon-door, slammed the latter, turned the key, and then the
wretched Walford heard the heavy tramp of his footsteps upon the deck
rapidly growing fainter and more faint as he walked away.



CHAPTER NINE.

DRIVEN TO MADNESS.

As the key turned in the lock, Walford sank down in a state of
semi-stupefaction upon one of the saloon sofas, listening like one in a
dream to the distant sound of the men's voices and the occasional tramp
of feet, as the mutineers passed, one by one, down the ship's side into
the boats.  A few minutes more and these sounds ceased.  He lifted up
his head, listening eagerly; but he could hear nothing, save the dismal
creaking of the bulkheads, the moaning of the wind, the monotonous
_swish, swish_ of the water washing across the deck outside with the
roll of the ship, and the dull hum and crackling of the flames as they
slowly ate their destructive way further and further into the heart of
the doomed craft.

"Were they actually gone?" he asked himself.  "Was it possible that he
was left alone, absolutely _alone_ on that burning wreck, thousands of
miles from the nearest land, drifting he knew not whither at the mercy
of wind and wave, with no hope of rescue and with the certainty that in
a day or two at most the fabric which bore him would be so completely
enveloped in the flames kindled by his own clumsiness that it would no
longer be tenable, and the only alternative open to him would be that of
perishing in the fire or flinging himself into the sea, there to battle
despairingly for an extra hour or two of life?"  He could not believe
it, he _would_ not believe it possible that men could be found so
inhuman as to leave a fellow-mortal in so desperate a strait; they were
only trying him, as they had tried that poor fellow Thomson; and if he
would but have patience to wait until the stipulated half-hour had
passed, he would find them still there, waiting to receive him into the
boat.  He laughed aloud, as he thought what a fool he had been to allow
himself to be terrified even for a moment, but the laugh was so utterly
the reverse of mirthful, so harsh and ghastly, that he stopped abruptly,
startled by the hideous strangeness of the sounds.  Then he rose and
crept on tip-toe towards the saloon-door, and, on reaching it, crouched
down and applied first his eye and then his ear to the key-hole.  The
key had been removed from the lock and the shield had fallen down over
the opening outside, so that he was unable to see anything; neither
could he detect any sounds indicative of the presence of others on
board.  Once or twice indeed he _thought_ he caught the sound of
whispered voices just outside the door, but he could not be sure about
the matter; and in an agony of uncertainty he crept back to the sofa to
watch the lagging minute-hand of the clock, and wait for the expiration
of the half-hour.

Oh! what a weary time was that for the lonely watcher, as he sat there
with his hands tightly locked together, his frame quivering with anxiety
and apprehension, and his eyes fixed upon that inexorable minute-hand,
which would not hasten its movement, though his life might be dependent
on it.  What if the men should grow weary of waiting?  A thousand
horrible fancies crowded in upon him, until in his distraction he
groaned aloud.  The suspense became unendurable; and in his anguish he
started up to burst open the saloon-door and learn the worst at once,
but (remembering Talbot's threat, and more than half-believing him to be
capable of carrying it into execution) turned back again and fell to
pacing rapidly to and fro the whole length of the saloon instead.

At last! at last! the half-hour of penance was over, and he was free
once more.  He dashed at the locked saloon-door, and, frantically
hammering upon it with his clenched firsts until his knuckles streamed
with blood, shouted eagerly--

"Talbot!  Talbot! the half-hour is up; so open the door, please, and let
me out, there's a good fellow."

Then he applied his ear to the key-hole, listening eagerly for the first
sound of approaching footsteps.

Five seconds--ten seconds--twenty--thirty--a minute; why did they not
come?  Was it possible that they had not heard him?  He applied his
mouth to the joint between the door and its jamb, and again shouted,
"Talbot!  _Talbot_!  _Talbot_!" until his voice cracked with the strain
he put upon it.  Still no answer, no sound save the wail of the wind,
the wash of the water, and the creaking of the ship's timbers.  "Good
God! were they really gone?  _Was_ he, after all, actually left there to
die alone?"  He seized the handle of the door and tugged at it,
fiercely, desperately, with the strength of a madman; but the stout lock
stood firm, defying his utmost efforts.  Then he suddenly remembered
that the captain's cabin was situated on the other side of the ship,
with one door opening into the saloon and the other out on deck.  With a
single bound and a wild cry he crossed the saloon, and laying his hand
upon the handle of the door of the captain's cabin, turned it; the door
swang open.  Another bound and he was at the outer door; was it locked?
No; a twist of the handle, and he stepped out on deck, with the water
surging and splashing over his feet.  But what cared he then for such a
trifle; he was not even conscious of it.  Swiftly his gaze swept round
the decks: they were empty.  In an instant he was at the gangway and
peering over the side.  No boats there; nothing but the empty tackles of
the quarter-boats alternately swinging in the air and trailing in the
water with the roll of the ship.  "_Where_ were the boats?  Ha! towing
astern, of course, it would simply mean destruction to them if they
attempted to remain alongside in so heavy a sea."  In frantic haste he
scrambled up the poop-ladder and rushed aft.

_The boats were gone_!

"Then it was an absolute fact that he was left there alone and
powerless, doomed to watch with a horrible fascination the steady
relentless approach of the Grim Enemy in his most terrible form, and to
suffer the while in imaginative anticipation all the agonies of a
thousand fiery deaths.  Oh, God! it was too much.  Mercy! mercy!"  And
with a demoniac yell he stood clutching and tugging at his hair with
both hands, his teeth clenched, his eyes fixed and almost bursting from
their sockets, foam bubbling from his lips--_a raving madman_!

This terrible state of distraction endured for nearly an hour, and then
a species of numbness seized upon his faculties, his anxiety vanished,
and he found his thoughts straying away and fixing themselves upon the
veriest trivialities, conjuring up again before his mental vision acts
and words which had never recurred to him since the day on which they
had been done or said, mischievous practical jokes played off upon some
unlucky school-fellow, mess-room jests and tattle, and a thousand other
absurdities, at which he laughed aloud.  Then disconnected words and
phrases rushed helter-skelter through his seething brain, having no
meaning, yet causing him the keenest annoyance, because he believed he
had heard them before, and was anxious to connect them with the
circumstances of their utterance.  There was one in particular which
especially tormented him.  "Go for a cruise on your own account; go for
a cruise on your own account," his brain reiterated with merciless
pertinacity.  What did it mean?  Where had he heard those words before,
and who had uttered them?  He felt absolutely certain that at some time
or other he had heard that phrase spoken, and that it had some intimate
connection with himself, that it somehow concerned him vitally.  "There
was something else, too, said at the same time--something about--about--
what was it?  Something about--ah! yes--spars and a raft--`spars--raft--
go for a cruise on your own account.'  What could it mean?"  Finally a
gleam of reason returned to his clouded mind, and he realised dimly that
it was of the utmost importance that he should construct a raft and "go
for a cruise on his own account."

Having at last grasped this idea, he rose from the seat upon which he
had flung himself, and upon which he seemed to himself to have been
sitting as long as ever he could remember, and proceeded to carry it
out.  Sauntering leisurely off the poop, he descended to the waist of
the ship, repeating eagerly over and over again the words "spars--raft,"
lest he should forget them.  There were several spare spars of various
sizes, ranging from topmasts down to studding-sail booms, lashed to the
deck on each side of the main-hatchway, and these he deliberately set to
work to cast adrift.  With considerable difficulty he at length
succeeded in accomplishing this task, the result being that the spars
were set rolling athwart the deck with the roll of the ship.  Nothing
daunted by this, however, he dashed recklessly in among them, and
escaping, heaven knows how, from the incessant danger of fractured
limbs, managed to drag out, one after the other, and launch overboard
several of the lighter spars.  Having commenced the work, he now toiled
persistently on, allowing himself neither pause nor rest until he had
disposed of every spar which his unaided strength would allow him to
move.  Then, panting, breathless, and reeking with perspiration, he
walked to the side and peered over.  The spars were nowhere to be seen;
in his madness it had never occurred to him to secure them with ropes,
and they had consequently drifted astern, and were of course tossing,
some of them miles away, in the wake of the ship.

Somehow the loss of the spars caused him no distress; indeed, as a
matter of fact, he had again forgotten all about the raft, and had
continued to labour on, merely because it had not occurred to him to
stop.  Now that he had stopped, however, he began to be conscious not
only of fatigue, but also of hunger, for he had tasted no food for
nearly twenty-four hours, and had been working hard all through the
night; so he made his way by instinct into the saloon and thence to the
steward's pantry, where he found an abundance of food, which he attacked
ravenously.  He then, after satisfying his hunger, bent his steps in the
direction of his own state-room, and, entering, flung himself upon the
bed, and soon sank into an uneasy and restless sleep.

Meanwhile the wind had been steadily dropping, the sea going down at the
same time, and when, just before sunset, the glorious orb burst through
and dispersed the curtain of storm-tattered clouds which had for so long
a time overspread the sky, his golden rays fell upon the _Princess
Royal_, now no longer rolling gunwale-under, but swinging with a slow
stately motion over the long swell, and still drifting lazily to the
eastward; her bows heading now this way, now that; her fore-mast burned
through and towing over the side; and the flames in complete possession
of her as far aft as the main-mast.

Walford's sleep, if such it could be called, lasted all through the
night and until just before the dawn.  Then the overpowering heat and
smoke, the loud crackling roar of the flames, and the fierce ruddy light
streaming into the saloon and through the open state-room door aroused
him.  Sitting up in his berth, he looked around him in a bewildered way,
passing his hand impatiently over his brow repeatedly, as if striving to
recall distinctly the remembrance of something vaguely haunting his
memory, but ever eluding his mental grasp.  Glancing vacantly around
him, the red glare of the flames fascinated his gaze, and he turned to
watch the leaping, flickering flashes of light as they came and went
with the sway and roll of the ship.

"Red," he began to mutter, "red as blood.  Blood?  Who said that I had
been the cause of bloodshed?  Who dares to say that it is my hand which
has splashed those walls--that floor--with such hideous stains?  Ha! see
how they leap and dance, rise and fall; the place is full of them.
Horrible! horrible!  Are they there to taunt me, to reproach me, to
accuse me?  I say I did _not_ do it; I am not to blame.  How could I
know that--that--what was it?  Let me think.  `His blood is upon your
hands.'  Whose hands?  Not mine, I swear; I could not do it; I have not
the nerve, the courage for it.  `His blood is upon your hands.'  Who
said that?  It was not said to _me_.  But stay--_was_ I to blame--_was_
it my fault?  Ugh! what a terrible thing it was to see him standing
there with the rope round his neck, to know that they were going to take
away his life for a fault which perhaps he would never have committed
but for _me_, and to feel that I had not the courage to intercede in his
behalf; to stand there quaking with fear whilst _he_ was driven to his
death.  No, no; _I_ did not drive him to it; it was they; and I had no
control over them--but--but--ah!  I never tried to save him.  Yes, yes,
I am coming.  Is that you, Thomson?  Are you calling _me_?"

He sprang out of his berth, and, making his way through the captain's
cabin, passed out on deck.  The first faint rays of the approaching dawn
were lighting up the eastern horizon; but he saw them not; they were
effectually hidden from his sight by the dazzling brightness of the
flames and the dense clouds of smoke which went rolling heavily to
leeward before the now scanty wind.  The fire had made steady progress
during the night, the hull forward being burned down nearly to the
waters' edge; while aft, the flames had extended to the after hatchway,
and the main-mast, burnt through at its heel, had gone by the board and
fallen forward into the fiercest of the fire, where it was rapidly
consuming.  Luckily for the wretched Walford, the ship was once more
dead before the wind, and the flames were fanned forward; had her head
been in the opposite direction, his retreat would have been effectually
cut off.  As it was, the heat was so intense that he instinctively
avoided it by springing up the poop-ladder and making his way as far aft
as possible.

Arrived at the extreme end of the poop, he stood gazing intently down
into the black water, and presently he began muttering again.

"Yes," he said, pointing down into the hollow of the swell as it came
creeping up after the ship, "that is the spot where he went down; I saw
him; I was standing near the bulwarks, and when he sprang my eyes
followed him; I heard his dying cry; and I saw his last agonised upward
look of despair as he went down with a plunge into the hollow between
the waves, and the waters closed over his head for ever.  For ever?
Yes, surely--and yet--what is that white gleaming object there now,
glaring up at me from beneath the water?  It is--it _is_ the face of the
dead man.  Ha! see he is beckoning to me.  Then it _was_ his voice I
heard calling to me.  Listen--what was that?  Did you call, Thomson?  He
will not answer; he is tired of calling; but the white ghastly face is
still there, and--see--there too is the beckoning hand.  It is my
summons, and I must obey."

At that moment the weird plaintive scream of a sea-bird came floating
down out of the grey shadows of the dawn, and Walford, starting
violently, stood for a moment in an attitude of rapt attention.  The cry
was repeated; he glared wildly round him for an instant, and then,
screaming hoarsely "I come--I come!" sprang over the guard-rails and
into the sea.



CHAPTER TEN.

A STRANGE RENCONTRE.

We left the _Aurora_, as the reader will remember, at the moment when,
by the merest hair's breadth, she was enabled to avoid what must have
been a terribly disastrous collision with the ill-fated _Princess Royal_
on the day when the hurricane burst with such destructive effect upon
the outward-bound fleet.

Deprived of her fore-topsail, the little barque was soon left astern by
her two unwelcome neighbours, and--the fleet rapidly dispersing, now
that it was no longer possible to regulate the speed of the several
craft which composed it--by nightfall her crew found themselves,
comparatively speaking, alone, there being only some twenty sail in
sight from the deck.

That night was a most anxious one for Captain Leicester, the gale being
heavier and the sea considerably higher than he had ever before
witnessed; the _Aurora_, however, proved to be a capital little
sea-boat, riding over the great liquid hills light and dry as a gull;
and when at length the morning broke, revealing only two sail in sight,
George felt so easy in his mind that he did not hesitate to go below and
seek in his comfortable berth an hour or two of that rest which he so
greatly needed.

The first stroke of the hurricane had been, as is generally the case,
the worst; for about half an hour it had blown with frightful and
disastrous fury, as has already been described, after which it lulled
somewhat, and then had again steadily increased.  Accordingly, when
Captain Leicester went on deck at noon, he found the gale still
gathering strength, the sea higher than ever, and the sky looking more
threatening than he remembered to have ever before seen it.

The ship was scudding under bare poles, and behaving capitally, too; but
George saw that if the sea rose much higher there would be great danger
of being "pooped;" so he--like the people on board the unfortunate
_Princess Royal_--roused out a new foresail and, with very great
difficulty, got it bent and set, reefed.  This sail dragged the little
barque along at a tremendous pace; and from that time there was no
further danger of her being "pooped" or overrun by the sea.

On the third day the gale broke; and by sundown the weather had so far
moderated as to permit of the _Aurora_ being brought to the wind and
hove-to, a manoeuvre which George was most anxious to accomplish, since
the ship had, for over seventy-two hours, been running to the eastward,
or directly away from her port, at the rate of some ten knots an hour,
giving her over seven hundred miles of extra distance to make up.  The
_Aurora_ remained hove-to during the whole of that night; but at eight
bells next morning she made sail under single-reefed topsails and
courses; stretching away to the northward and westward on the port tack.
She continued on this tack all day; and went about at the end of the
second dog-watch, George's object being to work his way back to the
spot, as nearly as possible, where the fleet had separated, and there
wait two or three days if need be, in the hope of falling in with the
bulk of them again.

Captain Leicester had of course taken full advantage of the return of
fine weather to repair damages; the crew had been busy during the whole
day getting two new topgallant-masts aloft and rigging them, bending new
sails in place of those split or blown away, and so on; the _Aurora_ was
consequently, when night fell, all ataunto once more; and a stranger
looking at her, would, except for the _new_ look of some of the spars
and canvas, never have suspected that she had had her wings clipped.

At nightfall she was standing to the southward and westward on the port
tack, under every stitch of canvas that would draw; the wind was failing
fast; the sea had long since ceased to break; there was now only an
occasional white fleecy comb to be seen on the crests of the waves; and
the ship was gliding gently along, with a slow, steady, rhythmical
rising-and-falling motion over the long heavy swell, at the rate of some
five knots in the hour.  The skipper was in excellent spirits at having
escaped so well and so cheaply from the fury of the hurricane; and he
remained on deck until midnight, chatting with Mr Bowen, the chief
mate.

The relief-watch had just been called, and George was waiting to
accompany the mate below when his attention was suddenly attracted by a
curious appearance in the sky to windward.  It was still cloudy; and,
low down on the horizon and about two points on the weather bow, he
noticed that the clouds were lighter and brighter in tint than anywhere
else.

"Look, Bowen," he exclaimed, "do you see that peculiar-looking cloud
away there on the horizon, just over our cat-head?  What is the meaning
of it?"

The mate looked in the direction indicated; and his more mature
experience at once suggested an explanation.

"Looks to me," he said, "as if there was something afire over there.
Here, you Tom," to a lad belonging to the relief-watch, who had just
come on deck, "slip up as far as the fore-topmast cross-trees, and see
if you can see anything out of the common away there on the weather
bow."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered the lad; and in another moment he was dancing
nimbly up the fore-rigging; his form just dimly discernible in the dark
shadow of the sails.

Presently he hailed from the cross-trees, "I can't _see_ nothing, sir;
but the sky away over there looks uncommon bright, and it seems to
_flicker_ now and then, as if there was a big fire burning under it."

"That'll do; you can come down again," answered the chief mate.  Then,
turning to George, he said--

"Depend upon it, sir, there's a ship afire away over there.  Well, we're
steering a course as'll take us pretty close to her, if so be as there
_is_ one; and I suppose, sir, you'll feel like giving of her a overhaul,
won't you?"

"Most certainly," answered George earnestly.  "We will at least
ascertain whether there are any human beings on board her.  Mr
Ritson,"--to the carpenter, who since Cross's impressment had acted in
the capacity of second mate--"steer your present course, please, as long
as the wind will allow you; crack on all you can; and, as soon as the
burning ship--or whatever it is--is fairly in sight, give me a call."

He then descended to his cabin, and in another five minutes had fallen
into a state of blissful oblivion.

At eight bells (or four o'clock a.m.) Ritson knocked at George's
state-room door, after calling the chief mate, and said--

"We can see the flames and smoke from the deck, sir, though the ship
herself is still hull-down.  I've been up in the fore-top, howsoever,
with the glass, and make her out to be a large ship--close upon a
thousand tons, I should say--but I can't see any people on board of her,
nor I can't make out no sign of boats.  She's all ablaze from for'ard
right aft as far as the main-mast, which toppled over and fell for'ard
while I was lookin' at her.  I fancy the people must ha' left her, sir."

"All right, Ritson," answered George, "I'll be on deck in a minute or
two."

Within the stipulated time Captain Leicester made his appearance on
deck, and proceeded at once to the fore-top, where, with the aid of his
glass, he made a careful inspection of the burning ship.

"Well, Mr Bowen," he said, when he had completed his examination, and
was once more down on deck, "it is as Ritson says: there is no sign of
any human being on board her; I have looked long and carefully at her,
and am quite sure I should have seen the people moving about, had there
been any.  We will stand on as we are going, however, and cross her
stern; we shall then perhaps get a chance to make out her name.
Somehow, she has a familiar look with her, as though I had seen her
before; I wonder if she was in the fleet?"

"Like enough, sir," answered Bowen; "we're right in the track of 'em;
and maybe this is one of the slow-coaches as we run away from."

"Possibly," answered George abstractedly; and then the two fell to
pacing slowly fore and aft, from the main-mast to the taffrail, in that
persevering way which is so characteristic of seamen.

The _Aurora_ was now sliding gently along at a speed of about four
knots, with every sail set that would draw; and gradually she crept up
closer and closer to the burning ship, which, meanwhile, was slowly
drifting to leeward.

The watch on deck were clustered together in a body, forward, watching
the unusual sight; the ship being now about a point on the lee bow and
about half a mile distant.  Suddenly there was a loud shout from them,
followed by the cry--

"There's somebody still aboard the burning ship sir!"

George and the mate, who at the moment were walking towards the
taffrail, with their backs towards the burning ship, turned quickly at
the cry, and the former, hastily seizing the telescope which lay ready
to hand on the skylight, swiftly brought it to bear.  There, sure
enough, standing right aft on the raised poop, could be distinctly seen
a solitary figure, apparently that of a man.  He seemed to be gazing
intently into the water astern, pointing and gesticulating, and was
evidently wholly unaware of the approach of the _Aurora_.

"Yes," said George, "truly enough there _is_ a man on board; and he does
not seem to have seen us yet; perhaps the glare of the flames has
dazzled his eyes.  Just step down into the cabin, Mr Bowen, if you
please, and bring up a couple of muskets; we will fire them, one after
the other, and the reports will call his attention to the fact of our
presence."

The mate turned away to do George's bidding, and he had hardly
disappeared down the companion-ladder when the skipper, who had the
telescope once more at his eye, saw the figure start--look behind him,
as though he had heard some alarming sound--and then spring, in apparent
terror, into the sea.

"He's jumped overboard, sir!" reported the men forward, who were now
eagerly watching the actions of the stranger.

"Ay, ay," answered Leicester, "I see he has.  One of you call the watch
below; the rest of you lay aft here and clear away the starboard gig,
cast off her lashings, and get her ready for rousing off the gallows and
into the water."

The gig which had been hanging at the davits ever since the _Aurora_
cleared out of the docks at London, had been destroyed when the ship was
thrown on her beam-ends in the hurricane; and the men had been so busy
on apparently more important duties that they had had no opportunity of
getting another boat ready for service; hence there was now a
considerable amount of delay in the launching of the boat which George
intended to despatch in search of the swimmer.

Mr Bowen soon returned to the deck with the muskets, and handing one to
George and retaining the other himself, they fired them one after the
other in rapid succession, hoping by this means to attract the
unfortunate man's attention and show him that help was near.

George then sprang into the mizzen-rigging and looked anxiously out over
the glittering surface of the sea, in the effort to catch a glimpse of
the man, should he happen to be still above water.  It was not, however,
until the _Aurora_ was fairly crossing the wake of the burning ship--
which by this time had drifted a considerable distance to leeward--that
he was successful.  Then, indeed, he did for an instant detect a small
dark object on the crest of a sea, standing out in bold relief against
the bright ruddy reflection of the flames in the water beyond it.
Almost at the instant that he caught sight of it, he lost it again as it
disappeared in the hollow of the swell, then once more it rose into
view, clearly and unmistakably the head of a man.

"All right, I see him," he exclaimed.  "Now then, Mr Bowen, is the boat
ready?  I am going to that poor fellow's assistance, so back the
main-topsail, if you please, and send the boat after us as quickly as
you can."

As the last words left George's mouth his hands rose above his head, his
body curved itself over towards the water, and in an instant he shot
downward out of the rigging swiftly as a sea-bird making its swoop, and
entered the water without a splash.

On coming to the surface, Captain Leicester struck vigorously out at
once in the direction of the burning ship, knowing that the man he
sought was exactly in line with her, but that he would probably not see
him until he was close upon him.  He swam steadily on, not hurrying
himself, but husbanding his strength as much as possible, and in about
ten minutes he caught sight of the object of which he was in search.
But the manner in which that object presented itself to his view was so
startling that George's first impulse was to turn round and swim back
towards the _Aurora_ with all speed, an impulse which, however, was only
felt to be instantly overcome.  The man was suddenly revealed, within
some six feet or so of George's grasp, as the latter rose upon the crest
of a sea; but, instead of swimming as George expected he would be, the
unfortunate creature was lying on his back, his ghastly white face
upturned to the sky, and his eyes fixed and staring, with that terrible
indescribable expression in them which tells at once and unmistakably
the dreadful tale of _madness_.

Very naturally, our hero felt a little doubtful as to the expediency of
placing himself within the grasp of a madman; he therefore, before
closing with him, exclaimed in a loud, cheery voice--

"Hillo, there! are you tired?  If so, just say the word, and I'll drop
alongside and lend you a hand."

For all the visible effect this speech had on the stranger he might as
well have been stone-deaf, for he vouchsafed not the slightest notice.

George shouted again, with a like result, and then--still feeling very
doubtful as to the best mode of proceeding--he struck out, and swam
quietly round the ghastly floating figure.  A stroke or two sufficed to
place him in such a position as enabled him at last to get a clear and
distinct view of the stranger's features, fully illumined by the glare
of the flames, and instant recognition followed.

"Walford!" he exclaimed.  Then, without another moment's hesitation, he
dashed up and, throwing himself upon his back, seized his rival by the
hair and drew him into such a position as permitted of his taking
Walford's head upon his shoulder and supporting it high enough above the
surface to prevent the sea washing over it and so suffocating him.

Walford offered no resistance, and gave not the faintest sign of being
aware of George's presence; and there the two lay, quietly floating on
the bosom of the long heaving swell, until the boat came to their
assistance and conveyed them both on board the _Aurora_.

On reaching the ship, George had his rival promptly stripped, rubbed
vigorously down, and comfortably bestowed in his own berth, well and
warmly wrapped up in blankets, with Tom Price--one of the forecastle
hands, and a very smart, intelligent young fellow--to watch over him.
After which, the skipper gave a little attention to his own comfort, and
finally went on deck once more, it being by that time too late to think
of turning in again.

By the time that George regained the deck, the _Aurora_ had crept to a
distance of about four miles from the _Princess Royal_.  The unfortunate
craft was by that time blazing fiercely fore and aft, the fire having at
last reached her store-room, in which there was a considerable quantity
of highly inflammable material; and half an hour afterwards her
powder-magazine (almost every ship of any size in those days was
provided with a magazine) exploded; and the charred fragments of
half-consumed timber, which were widely scattered over the now sleepily
heaving surface of the sea, alone remained as relics of the once noble
and stately ship, the destruction of which had been the last link in a
chain of disastrous occurrences resulting primarily from the
overbearing, tyrannical, and imprudent behaviour of her officers.

With the appearance of the sun above the horizon the clouds gradually
disappeared, the wind dropped, the surface of the ocean became like
heaving oil; and the _Aurora_, losing steerage-way, rolled almost
gunwale-to, with her canvas flapping loudly and monotonously against her
masts.

About two bells (or nine o'clock) one of the hands, upon being sent
aloft to "grease down," reported a sail in the southern quarter, and on
the usual inquiry being put to him, as to what he made her out to be, he
replied that she was a small topsail-schooner.

"A small topsail-schooner!" muttered George.  "I wonder what she can be;
I cannot remember having seen any such craft in the fleet.  Ritson,"--to
the carpenter who had charge of the deck,--"do you remember having seen
a topsail-schooner among the fleet?"

"No, sir; can't say as I do," answered Ritson.  "Don't believe there
_was_ any such craft, sir; the smallest, as I remembers was that purty
little brig painted all white down to her water-line; perhaps you
recollects her, sir?"

"Yes," said Leicester, "I recollect the craft perfectly well; and, as
far as my memory serves me, she _was_, as you say, the smallest craft in
company."

The conversation here dropped for a time, George resuming the somewhat
dejected saunter fore and aft from the main-mast to the taffrail, and
the half-unconscious whistling for a wind, in which he had before been
indulging.  His pursuit of this monotonous and uninteresting occupation
was interrupted by the steward, who requested him to step down into the
cabin, "to take a look at the man as was picked up this morning; as he
seems to be took a bit worse, sir."

George at once went below, and found Walford sitting up in the berth,
muttering to himself disconnectedly and occasionally addressing with
great earnestness the watchful Tom, whose horror-stricken face plainly
revealed that his patient's random observations had been of a somewhat
startling character.  On entering the state-room, Leicester at once
addressed Walford, asking him whether he felt better; and the
unfortunate man glanced for a moment in George's face with an air of
semi-recognition; but this immediately passed away, and the incoherent
mutterings went on again as before.

"That's just how he've been goin' on for the last half-'our," explained
Tom; "talkin' about `murder' and `hangin',' and being left to burn in
the ship; it's enough to give one the 'orrors to listen to him."

George sat down by the side of the cot and listened patiently for nearly
an hour to Walford's rambling talk; and, although he was unable to make
out from it a clearly-connected story, he heard enough to give him a
shrewd idea of the truth, and to convince him that a terrible tragedy of
some kind had occurred on board the ill-fated _Princess Royal_.  The
patient at length grew calm once more, and, lying back upon his pillow,
seemed inclined to sleep, upon which George quietly rose and went on
deck again to see how matters were proceeding there.

As he meditatively made his way up the companion-ladder, he could not
help thinking of the singularity of this last meeting between him and
his rival, and comparing it with the one which had occurred on that
lovely June evening, on the road to Stoke.  As the two men stood there
on the white dusty road, with the rays of the declining sun darting down
upon them through the foliage of the overhanging trees, and as Walford
told the story of his just concluded engagement to Lucy, how little,
thought George, could either of them suspect that, when they next came
into such close contact, it would be literally on the bosom of the broad
Atlantic, up-borne by nothing save its restless waters.  Poor Leicester
was greatly disturbed by this singular and unconscious claim upon his
hospitality which had so recently arisen.  He was as generous-hearted a
man as the sun ever shone upon, ever ready to give liberally and
ungrudgingly to any one who seemed to be in need; but somehow he wished
that in the present instance it had fallen to the lot of some one else
than himself to play the part of rescuer and benefactor, or that the
rescued individual had been any one rather than Walford.  The fact was
that he wanted to forget, if possible, the keen and bitter pain of his
disappointment: and now the presence of his unhappy guest had brought it
all back to him and would keep it in poignant remembrance as long as
they two should remain together.  Then, he bethought himself how selfish
a feeling he had been allowing himself to indulge; how utterly he had
forgotten that the matter was one with which Lucy's happiness must be
inseparably connected; and that fate--or Providence, rather, as he
reverently corrected himself--had in a very great measure confided that
happiness to his keeping, by delivering into his care the man upon whom
she had bestowed the priceless treasure of her heart's best love.  And
as he thought this, he solemnly vowed that he would honestly strive to
prove worthy of the trust; that he would be to Lucy's lover a brother--
ay, _more_ than a brother; that he would nurse and tend him, restore to
him his reason if God willed it, and, in any case, watch over and
protect him--at the cost of his own life even, if need were--until he
could restore him to the arms of the woman who was impatiently awaiting
at home his safe return.

"His well-being has been confided to me as a sacred trust," he murmured
in conclusion, "and, please God, I will prove myself worthy of it."

With this resolution he dismissed the subject temporarily from his
thoughts, and turned his attention once more to the affairs of the ship.

Glancing aloft, and then all round the horizon, he observed that it had
fallen a flat calm, and that moreover there was no immediate prospect of
a breeze.  The sky was a clear deep blue in the zenith, merging by
imperceptible gradations into a delicate warm grey at the horizon.  The
water was absolutely without a ripple, there was not so much as the
faintest suggestion of a "cat's-paw" on all its glassy surface; and save
for the long sluggish sweep and heave of the swell which, as it
undulated past the ship, caught and reflected the varying tints of the
sky, it would have been difficult to detect the presence of water at all
at a distance of more than a few yards from the ship.  The _Aurora_ was
still rolling sluggishly on the sleepy swell; her dazzling white canvas
flapping and the slings and trusses of the yards creaking with the roll;
the men, rendered languid by the heat, were making such show as they
were able of being busy on various odd jobs about the decks or aloft;
and the man at the wheel had lashed it and was leaning upon it more than
half-asleep.  Ritson, apparently for want of something better to do, was
seated on the main-topmast cross-trees, with the ship's telescope in his
hand, scrutinising the motions of the distant schooner, whose tiny
"royal" was now visible from the deck, gleaming white as snow on the
extreme verge of the horizon.

Noting all these things at a glance, George turned to saunter aft,
thinking that on such a perfectly calm day, and with such still water,
he might, by leaning well out over the taffrail, get a glimpse of the
ship's bottom and see whether it had fouled at all, or whether the
copper showed any signs of wrinkling.  Arrived at the taffrail, he
leaned well out over it, and peered down into the water.  The first
thing which attracted his notice was the deep, pure, beautiful
ultramarine tint of the water, as he gazed far down into its
unfathomable depths; the next was, the presence of a long greyish-brown
object under the ship's counter, which had escaped his notice at first
in consequence of its being in the deepest shadow of the hull.  A moment
sufficed to satisfy him that it was a huge shark; and as the creature
caught sight of him, and with a barely perceptible movement of its fins,
backed out a foot or two from under the ship, as if in preparation to
make a dart at him in case he should fall into the water, George
shuddered at the thought of what might have been his or Walford's fate,
had the monster been in the neighbourhood of the ship a few hours
earlier.

Sliding his body gently inboard again, Leicester turned to the dozing
helmsman, and exclaimed--

"Here, you Ned; rouse up, man.  There's a big shark under the counter,
so get out the shark-hook, ask the cook for a piece of good fat pork,
and muster the watch aft in readiness to haul him inboard, in case we
can coax him into swallowing the bait."



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A SUSPICIOUS SAIL.

The man hurried away joyously to do George's bidding, hailing his
comrades aloft to "knock off work and come shark-fishing, all you
sea-dogs aloft there," as soon as he had placed a sufficiently
respectful distance between himself and his skipper.  There is no sport
or pastime in which sailors will engage more eagerly than in the attempt
to capture a shark; they regard the creature as their worst and most
relentless enemy, and never willingly let slip an opportunity to catch
and destroy one, frequently venting their hatred upon the unfortunate
fish, when caught, in the utmost refinement of cruelty.  Accordingly, no
sooner was Ned's hail heard than, dropping incontinently whatever work
they happened to be engaged on, the whole watch, Ritson included,
hurried down on deck and aft to the taffrail, to take a share in the
sport Ritson, by virtue of his superior rank, assumed the lead at once,
and as a matter of course.  Taking the hook with its swivel and chain
attached, and a piece of fat pork, some three or four pounds in weight,
from the now lively and wide-awake Ned, he called out for "a bit of
stoutish line," busying himself meanwhile in burying the hook cunningly
in the bait, in order that the shark might not see it--for it is a
well-established fact that these monsters, unless very hungry, are acute
enough to refuse a bait if the hook is not well hidden.  The line, in
the shape of the gaff-topsail halliard-fall, hastily unrove for the
occasion, was soon forthcoming, and the hook, being at last baited to
the second mate's satisfaction, bent on to the chain.

"Now stand clear," commanded Ritson, as he prepared to pitch the bait
overboard, "stand clear all of yer; and when I gives the word to `haul
in,' walk away for'ard with the line and bring his head out of water."

A long steady pendulum-like swing or two of the bait followed, and then
away it went out over the stern and into the water with a splash.
Leicester who was leaning over the taffrail and watching the proceedings
with the greatest interest, saw the great fish turn like a flash and
rush to the spot where the bait had fallen, turning himself over on his
side as he did so.

"Hurrah!  He bites; he's got it," shouted one of the men eagerly.  But
he spoke rather too soon; Jack Shark was not to be caught quite so
easily.  Instead of opening his great jaws and swallowing the bait, hook
and all, at a gulp, as was expected, he stopped dead in his rush, and
began to poke the bait about suspiciously with the point of his
shovel-shaped nose; and finally, with a contemptuous whisk of his tail,
left it, and resumed his former position under the ship's quarter.

Great was the disappointment of the younger hands at this failure.

"He ain't hungry," explained one.

"Ain't he?" contemptuously retorted another.  "Just you drop overboard
and try him, bo'; why he'd take you--sou'wester, water-boots, and all--
down that main-hatchway of his'n without winking, and then come back and
axe for more.  No, no; 'taint that, mates; he's _waiting_ for somebody,
most likely for the poor chap as the skipper picked up this mornin'!"

"Come, stow all that rubbish!" exclaimed the second mate; "how do you
expect we're going to catch the brute if you all stand there palavering
like so many fish-wives?  It's enough to frighten him away altogether.
Clap a stopper on your jaw-tackles now, all of you; and give me a chance
to play him a bit."

The speaker thereupon, by sundry dexterous movements of the wrist,
imparted a gentle wriggling motion to the line, which in its turn
conveyed a corresponding motion to the bait, the latter being slowly
drawn through the water at the same time.  This was too much for the
shark's equanimity; and he made another dash at the bait, still refusing
to swallow it however.  The second mate then tried the virtue of a few
quick jerks upon the bait, as though drawing it away from the creature,
which had the effect of causing him to turn once more on his side, and
make a snap at it, actually taking it into his mouth.  Still he would
neither swallow it nor close his jaws upon it, but unresistingly
suffered it to be jerked out of his mouth again.

"We'll have him yet, boys," Ritson exclaimed.  "Pay out the line to its
bare end."

This was done, the shark keeping close to the bait, turning it over and
over with his nose, but persistently refusing to take it.

"Now walk away steadily for'ard with your line, and stand by for a
surge," was the next command.

Away went the men, dragging the line after them, and towing the bait
through the water.  The shark followed it closely up; and at last, just
as the pork was being dragged out of the water altogether, he made a
determined jump at it, swallowing it and the hook together; and the next
moment the men were brought-up "all standing" by the tremendous strain
on the line as the hook buried its barbed point in the creature's body,
while the water was lashed into foam and splashed clear in over the
barque's taffrail in the fish's frantic efforts to free itself.

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Ritson.  "_Now_ you have him, lads.  Hold on every
inch of line, or he'll break away from you yet.  Bear a hand here, one
of you.  Take the spanker-sheet and throw a running-bowline round the
line, so's we can get it down over his fins.  That's your sort, Ned;
don't let him get it into his jaws.  Cleverly done; haul taut.  _Now_ we
have him safe.  Lead the sheet for'ard, let all hands tail on to it, and
we'll run him up out of the water and in on deck."

The bowline in the end of the sheet having been successfully passed over
the fish's shoulders and under his fins, the rope was laid along the
deck, and the watch, leaving one by one the line to which the hook was
attached, got hold of the sheet, and then with a joyous shout of "Stamp
and go, boys; walk away with him," they dragged the monster, still
struggling furiously, up out of the water and in on deck over the
taffrail.

For a moment the huge fish lay perfectly still, then he began to plunge
about and lash right and left with his tail in a manner which caused the
whole ship to resound with the terrific blows; rousing the watch below,
and causing them to "tumble up" _en masse_ to ascertain the nature of
the disturbance.

"'Ware tail," exclaimed the second mate warningly.  "If any of you chaps
catches a smack with it across your shins it'll snap 'em like
pipe-stems.  Where's the cook's axe?"

The question was promptly answered by the appearance of cookie himself,
his sable visage beaming and his eyeballs rolling with delight as he
danced nimbly about the deck, dodging the strokes of that terrible tail,
with his gleaming axe upraised in readiness to deal a blow at the first
opportunity.  At length there was a momentary pause in the tremendous
struggles, a pause of which Snowball (all black cooks who go to sea seem
to be dubbed "Snowball") promptly availed himself.  A quick flash of his
axe-blade in the sun, a dull crunching thud, and the back-bone was
severed at the junction of the tail with the body; a lightning-like
stroke of his long keen knife followed, and the severed tail was flung
quivering aside as a long thin jet of blood spouted out from the body,
broadly staining the snow-white deck-planks.

But the shark had plenty of fight left in him still, as one of the men
speedily discovered when, on thrusting a handspike into the great jaws,
the strong, stout wooden bar was promptly bitten in two.

"Here, lay hold, two or three of you, and capsize him," ordered Ritson;
"we must make an end of the beast, or some of yer'll get hurted yet, I
can see.  Now then," as three of the men seized the shark by his
enormous fins, "one, two, three, and over with him!"

With a cry of "Yo, heave he!" and a hearty drag the great fish was
turned over on his back; and then Snowball, stepping forward once more,
placed himself astride the creature and, with a quick, powerful stroke
of his knife, slit open its belly, and so put an end to its sufferings.
But so tenacious of life was it that even after the removal of the vital
organs the heart was seen to be still expanding and contracting, which
it continued to do for fully five minutes after being taken out of the
fish.  The head was next cut off and the back-bone removed for
preservation as "curios," after which the mutilated carcass was thrown
overboard and the decks washed down.

Ritson did not wait for the completion of this operation, but, leaving
its superintendence to Mr Bowen (who, like the rest of the watch below,
had come on deck to see what was the cause of the unusual tumult),
retired once more with the telescope to his former post in the
main-topmast cross-trees, and resumed his scrutiny of the strange
schooner.

George noticed this, and vaguely wondering what had so greatly excited
his second mate's curiosity, glanced in the direction to which the
telescope was pointing, to find to his surprise that the upper half of
the stranger's topsail was visible from the deck.

"Why, Ritson," he hailed, "the schooner must have a little air of wind,
surely; she is nearing us perceptibly."

Ritson, entirely contrary to nautical etiquette, made no reply to the
skipper's hail, but remained with his eye immovably glued to the tube
for a full minute longer, when he gently closed the instrument and
descended slowly to the deck.

Arrived there, he walked up to Captain Leicester, and first glancing
cautiously round to make sure that no one was within ear-shot, murmured
in a low voice--

"She's heading as straight for us as she can steer, sir, _with six
sweeps out_--_three of a side_.  That means, sir, that her skipper wants
so badly to get alongside of us, that he's noways particular about the
trouble he takes to bring him here."

George gave a low involuntary whistle of astonishment.

"That is queer news indeed," he remarked after a contemplative pause.
"And you think then, Ritson, that the craft is a--"

"A rover, sir; neither more nor less," answered the second mate.  "She
ain't French, I'm certain; she ain't got the look of it; besides, the
Johnnies wouldn't ventur so far as this in a craft of that size--why she
ain't more than about a hundred and twenty tons at the very outside.
No; she's a rover, that's what _she_ is; a craft with a low beamy hull
painted all black, tremendous long spars, and canvas with just no end of
a h'ist to it."

"Give me the glass," said George; "I'll go as far as the cross-trees and
take a look at her myself."

The second mate handed over the telescope, and the skipper, proceeding
aloft, soon saw quite enough to satisfy him that Ritson's conjectures as
to the character and intentions of the schooner were only too likely to
prove correct.

Descending once more to the deck, he held a hurried consultation with
his two officers, the result of which was a determination to fight to
the last gasp, if the crew were only willing to stand by them.  It would
be necessary to ascertain their feeling upon the subject before anything
could be done; so, it being then within a quarter of an hour of noon,
George and the chief mate went below for their quadrants, took the sun's
meridian altitude, and, on the bell being struck to denote the hour of
noon and the termination of the morning watch, Captain Leicester gave
the word for all hands to muster aft.

"My lads," said George, when the men were all standing before him in
obedience to his summons, "I have called you here in order that I may
communicate to you a very disagreeable piece of intelligence.  Briefly,
it is this.  The strange schooner yonder is a very suspicious-looking
craft; Mr Ritson and I, who have both carefully examined her through
the glass, are quite of the same opinion about her, namely, that she is
_a pirate_.  She has all the look of one; and her conduct tends greatly
to confirm us in our suspicions, for she has rigged out half a dozen
sweeps and is sweeping as straight down for us as she can come.  Now,
lads, I want to know what you propose to do in the event of our
suspicions proving correct.  Will you allow her to come alongside and
throw her bloodthirsty crew in on our deck to cut our throats as if we
were so many sheep!  Or will you fight for your lives, and take your
chance of being able to beat her off?"

There was a few minutes of anxious consultation among the men; and then
Ned stepped forward as spokesman of the party, and asked--

"What would you advise us to do, sir?  What do you think of doin'
yourself, sir, if we may make so bold as to axe?"

"Mr Bowen, Mr Ritson, and I have resolved to fight as long as we can
raise a hand in self-defence," answered George; "and my advice to you is
to do the same.  Alone, we three men cannot hope to do much; but with
your aid I certainly should not despair of beating off yonder schooner,
even though she be full of men.  And if the worst comes to the worst and
we find that we _must_ die, it will be far better to do so with swords
in our hands, than to be slaughtered in cold blood."

"Yes, yes; that's true; none o' that for me, thank'ee," and sundry other
exclamations of concurrence followed the conclusion of the skipper's
speech; then came another very brief consultation; and finally Ned once
more stepped forward and said--

"We've agreed, sir, as you're in the rights of it about the fightin';
and we're quite ready to stand by yer--all hands of us--and do our
best."

"Very well," said George.  "Then we will lose no time in making ready
for our defence.  Mr Bowen, we will have up that brass long
nine-pounder which is down below; I provided it for just such an
emergency as this."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered the mate, in a cheery tone of voice which spoke
volumes as to his confidence in their ability to beat off the pirate, if
such the schooner should prove to be.  Then, turning to the men, he
continued--

"Now then, some of you, whip the tarpaulin off this after hatchway, and
lift off the hatches.  Mr Ritson, will you be good enough to rouse out
a couple of fourfold tackles and get them made fast aloft?  We shall
require a chain strop also.  That's right, lads; off with those hatches;
we'll soon have the old barkie in fighting trim."

Inspired by the mate's cheery manner, the men worked with hearty
good-will; and in less than an hour they had the long nine-pounder on
deck, mounted on its carriage, its tackles hooked on, the gun loaded,
cutlasses and pistols distributed, boarding-pikes cast loose, and
everything ready for a stubborn resistance.

These preliminaries arranged, George and the chief mate made their way
aloft as far as the main-top to watch the approach of the suspected
schooner, which had by this time crept up to within about nine miles of
the _Aurora_.  She was still heading straight for the barque; and the
telescope enabled them to see that her six sweeps were being vigorously
plied; their long steady swing and the perfect time which was maintained
in the working of them conclusively showing that they were being handled
by a strong gang of men.

"Why, she must be full of men, or those long, heavy sweeps could never
be kept going for so great a length of time," remarked George to the
mate.  "We shall have to devote all our attention to those sweeps in the
first instance, I can see.  If we are only fortunate enough to knock
away two or three of them, it will at least _delay_ their approach; and
if a breeze would only spring up, smart as that schooner looks, I should
not despair of being able to show her a clean pair of heels."

"Ay," answered Bowen, "and we're going to have a breeze by-and-by; just
the way we wants it, too.  I can make out the upper edge of a cloud-bank
rising now above the horizon to the east'ard there; and if we can only
keep yonder cut-throat crew at arm's length until we get the wind, and
if it'll only come down upon us pretty fresh when it _does_ come, I
think, as you say, sir, we may give them handsomely the slip."

With the view of getting a still clearer idea as to the possible advent
of the desired breeze, Mr Bowen forthwith undertook a journey as far as
the main-royal yard, upon which he comfortably established himself, with
one arm round the royal-pole, whilst he carefully studied the aspect of
the weather, and as carefully scrutinised the horizon to see whether
there were any other craft in their immediate neighbourhood.  No other
sail excepting the schooner, however, was in sight in any direction; and
having at length formed a tolerably clear opinion with regard to the
weather, he descended again to the main-top, and remarked to George--

"That schooner must be coming up at the rate of about three knots, by
the look of her."

"Yes; about that," answered George.

"And she's about eight miles off now, I should say," continued Bowen.

"Yes; about eight miles," returned George, with his eye still peering
through the telescope.

"Then," remarked the mate, "it will take her a matter of some two hours
and forty minutes, or thereabouts, to get alongside.  And by that time,
unless I am greatly mistaken, the first of the breeze will have reached
us.  I hope we shall get it _before_ then; because in light winds I
don't doubt but what that craft could sail round and round us; but only
let it come strong enough to oblige us to stow our royals, and I'll bet
my old hat that we can walk away from her.  I'm afraid we sha'n't scrape
clear without finding out the weight of the shot she can pitch at us;
but if our lads are only steady when the powder-burning begins, I
sha'n't feel noways very greatly concerned."

With which summing up of the case Mr Bowen dropped into a sitting
posture alongside his commander, and, letting his legs dangle down over
the outer edge of the top, filled his pipe, and proceeded to regale
himself with what he chose to term "two whiffs and a half."



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A MARINE DUEL--AND ITS RESULT.

The two occupants of the main-top maintained their position therein,
keeping a watchful eye upon the movements of the schooner, until that
craft had approached to within about three miles of the _Aurora_, when
they descended to the deck; Captain Leicester remarking to the mate, as
the latter swung himself down off the rail--

"I think, Mr Bowen, we may as well run up our ensign; perhaps the
schooner will return the compliment and oblige us with a sight of the
colour of her bunting."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered the mate; and he walked aft, got out the ensign,
bent it on to the halliards, and ran it up to the mizzen peak, where it
hung in drooping folds, swaying listlessly with the sleepy roll of the
ship.

For some time there was no response on the part of the schooner, which
held steadily on her way straight for the barque, her six long sweeps
plying as vigorously as ever, and churning up the glassy water into a
long line of miniature whirlpools, which gradually diminished until they
finally subsided on each side of her gleaming wake.

"The breeze, the breeze; here it comes at last, thank God!" ejaculated
Bowen, who had been for some time anxiously regarding the rising bank of
greyish cloud to the eastward.  As he spoke, a faint, barely perceptible
breath of cool air fanned the faces of the anxious watchers on the deck
of the _Aurora_, and was gone again; a "cat's-paw" or two momentarily
ruffled the surface of the water here and there, only to leave it as
glassy as before; then came another puff, which lasted just long enough
to trail out the ensign for an instant and to rustle the royals; and
then away on the extreme verge of the eastern horizon, the gleaming
water assumed a light blue tint, which gradually spread, creeping slowly
down towards the two vessels, the blue on the horizon insensibly
darkening all the while, and conveying the thrice welcome intelligence
that the breeze was slowly but steadily freshening.

"Yes," said George, "here it comes, sure enough; and in a few hours we
shall have plenty of it, by the look of the sky.  Stand by the braces,
lads; let go, and haul the yards round, and be lively about it; we
cannot spare the time to be taken aback just now; that's right, men;
well there with the fore-braces; well with the main; brail in the mizzen
and stow it; haul down the mizzen-topmast staysail.  Now she feels the
breeze.  Hard up with your helm, my man, and let her wear short round.
Let go your lee main-braces and round in to windward--gently now; not
too quick; that's well; catch a turn with your after-braces and then
square the fore-yard; well with the fore-braces; belay all and coil up.
Ah!  I expected that."

The latter exclamation was evoked by the boom of a gun from the
schooner; and, turning his eyes in her direction, George saw the white
smoke floating lazily away from her to leeward, and then a white jet of
water started up as the shot came flying towards the barque, then
another--another--and another, and finally a scurrying splash as the
iron messenger swept along the surface of the water and sank, falling
short by about a hundred yards.  At the same moment the heavy sweeps
were laid in; the schooner's sails were trimmed as if by magic to the
coy breeze; her head paid off; and as she swept gracefully round upon a
course which would enable her to intercept the _Aurora_, a tiny ball
went soaring aloft to her main-topmast-head and, breaking abroad as it
reached the truck, a square _black_ flag fluttered threateningly out, a
fit emblem of the character of those who sailed beneath it.

"Not quite close enough, Mr Rover," remarked Bowen, cheerfully, as the
shot sank into the placid depths of the ocean, now gently ruffled by the
increasing breeze.  "Shall we return the compliment, sir?"

"Not just yet," answered George; "she is still a long way off; and we
cannot afford to waste a single ounce of powder or shot.  But it is time
that we should have everything ready to carry on the fight in earnest,
so I must ask _you_, Mr Bowen--as the most reliable man I have on
board--to go below and see to the passing up of the powder; it will
never do to run the risk of having an explosion in the powder-magazine."

"Very well, sir; I'd have greatly preferred to have been on deck, to
take my fair share in the fighting; but I'm ready to do my duty wherever
you may choose to order me," said the chief mate, as he walked away aft
with a rather rueful face, on his way below to the magazine.

The schooner, finding that she was not yet within range, remained silent
for the next five minutes; and then George, who was keenly watching her,
saw another flash, another puff of white fleecy smoke, and once more the
ball came bounding over the water, straight for the barque.

"It will reach us this time," thought the skipper; and he was right, the
shot striking the water about forty feet from the side of the _Aurora_
and then bounding harmlessly over her, except for a hole which it
punched in the main try-sail in its passage.

"Now, lads," said George, "it's our turn.  Mr Ritson, run out the gun,
if you please, and show us what you can do in the way of shooting."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered Ritson gleefully, "the water's smooth, the
ship's steady, and altogether it's a capital day for this kind of work.
Man the tackles, there; run out; muzzle to the right, a trifle; not too
much; so, well there; elevate the muzzle a _leetle_ more; there, that'll
do; I'll try that.  Now then, Snowball, let's have that `loggerhead.'
Ned, just freshen that priming a bit.  Now stand clear, lads, and you,
Tom, touch her off when I give the word."

Then, stooping down, he glanced along the sights for an instant or two,
and finally gave the word "Fire!"

At the word Tom promptly applied the loggerhead; there was a ringing
report; and as the smoke cleared off the shot was seen to strike the
water close alongside the schooner, and the next instant a white scar in
her bulwarks attested Ritson's skill as a marksman and showed that the
shot had taken effect.  A hearty cheer from the _Aurora's_ crew
manifested their elation at this lucky hit; and George, who was watching
the schooner through his telescope, quietly remarked--

"Thank you, Ritson; that was capitally aimed; you must have done some
execution among the crew of that craft, too, for there is a great deal
of confusion among them on deck, I see.  Ah! there they fire again."

Once more the shot came flying straight for the barque; and once more it
whistled harmlessly over her, just touching the main-mast as it passed,
but inflicting no injury on the spar.

"Capital practice on both sides," remarked the skipper coolly; "six
inches further to the right, gentlemen, and you would have plumped that
shot right into our main-mast.  Now try again, Ritson, and aim for his
spars; the sooner we can cripple him the better will be out chances of
getting clear of him without loss to ourselves."

Again the _Aurora's_ long nine rang out its sharp report; but for some
reason, probably from over-eagerness on the part of the second mate, the
shot flew wide, passing some twenty yards astern of the schooner.

"Bad luck to it!" exclaimed the discomfited Ritson impatiently.  "Run in
the gun, lads; and be smart with it; that's your sort; sponge it well
out; that'll do; now in with the cartridge; three strokes with the
rammer; now home with the shot; run out the gun again; bear a hand with
the priming-iron, you Ned; muzzle to the left--a little more yet; well
with that.  Now Tom, stand by--Fire!"

Both vessels fired at precisely the same moment; the schooner's shot
passing in through the _Aurora's_ bulwarks close to the gun, and making
the splinters fly in all directions, one of the latter grazing Captain
Leicester's cheek, and drawing blood; but, very fortunately, beyond this
no further damage was done.

On the other hand, the _Aurora's_ shot, much better aimed this time, cut
the weather whisker-stay on board the schooner, and compelled her to at
once keep dead away before the wind in order to prevent the loss of her
jib-boom.

"Well shot!" exclaimed George enthusiastically.  "Fore and main-braces,
lads; port your helm, my man,"--to the helmsman--"and let her come up
`full and by;' round in upon the port-braces, fore and aft; board the
fore and main-tacks; aft with the sheets, cheerily, my lads; if we are
smart we may get out of gun-shot before they can repair that damage.
Well there of all.  Now to your gun again, lads, and let's treat them to
another dose of the same sort."

The men sprang about the decks like wild-cats, and, in their elation and
excitement, did the work of at least three men each; the yards were
braced up almost as soon as the ship could luff to the wind; the tacks
were seized and boarded with irresistible strength and energy, the
sheets flattened in; and in considerably less than five minutes the
_Aurora_ was rushing along on a bowline with her lee covering-board
nearly awash, and a clear, glassy surge spouting up on each side of her
cutwater, and foaming away from her sharp bows with a hissing roar which
was sweetest music just then to the ears of her delighted crew.

"_Now_ the old barkie travels," exclaimed the exultant Ritson.  "Unhook
the gun-tackles, you sea-dogs, and rush the gun aft; we'll try a shot
out through the stern-ports this time."

At this moment the boom of another gun from the schooner was heard; and
next moment the shot came flying through the _Aurora's_ rigging, cutting
the main-brace pennant, and passing through the head of the foresail.
The lee main-yard-arm at once flew forward, throwing the main-sail
aback, and of course seriously interfering with the barque's flight.

"Up with your helm and keep her away until the main-sail fills again,"
commanded George; "haul inboard the brace, and one hand get a
marlinespike and jump aloft to make the splice.  Be smart, lads; there's
no great harm done."

Ritson was, in the meantime, busy aft with the gun; and presently he
fired again, pitching the shot fairly on the schooner's forecastle,
where some of her crew were busy with the cut stay.

On board the _Aurora_ the main-brace was very soon spliced; after which
Captain Leicester had the mizzen, gaff-topsail, and, in short, every
stitch of canvas that would draw, set to the freshening breeze; then,
inquiry having elicited the fact that tea--or supper, as the men termed
it--was ready, he ordered the crew to knock off and take the meal whilst
they had the opportunity.

George and the two mates had their meal served on deck, the top of the
skylight doing duty for a table; and they were about half-way through
with it when the pirate schooner was seen to once more haul her wind in
pursuit.  This, however, gave them no immediate apprehension, as she was
far out of gun-shot; the breeze was still steadily freshening, and the
_Aurora_ was plunging along at a racing pace over the short sea which
had already been raised, with the wind humming merrily through her
rigging, and a great foaming surge hissing and buzzing under her lee bow
and streaming out in a long trail of bubbling froth behind her.

"We're going to have a fresh breeze to-night, I think, sir," remarked
the chief mate, as he helped himself to another slab of salt junk, "and,
if it'll only come fresh enough to oblige us to stow our royals, I think
that, on an easy bowline--our best point of sailing--we shall be able to
fairly run away from that chap."

"Yes," said George, "I believe we shall.  And if we can only get weather
which will give us the advantage over her in the matter of speed, I
shall feel very much inclined to turn the tables on her, and give her a
good wholesome lesson.  It struck me that our gun threw its shot
considerably further than hers did."

"I'm _sure_ it did," emphatically corroborated Ritson; "and it'd be
doin' a real service to give the piccarooning rascals a thorough good
drubbing."

It appeared, however, as though the fortuitous combination of
circumstances hinted at by Captain Leicester was not to be; for before
long it became evident that the schooner, notwithstanding the freshening
breeze and the increasing sea, was slowly but steadily gaining on the
barque.  But "a stern chase is a long chase," and the schooner, while
repairing damages, had not only been left astern, but had also been
compelled to run a considerable distance to leeward.  So that, when the
sun set, and the short brilliant tropical twilight faded out of the sky,
she was still some six miles distant, broad on the _Aurora's_ lee
quarter.

With the setting of the sun there came a still further freshening of the
breeze, laying the barque down upon her side until her lee
covering-board was buried, and the water, spouting up through the
scuppers, was washing the deck on the lee-side almost up to the coamings
of the main-hatchway.  The wind was making weird, wild music as it swept
through the tautly-strained rigging; and the topgallant and royal-masts
were whipping and bending like fishing-rods with every pitch and 'scend
of the ship, while the straining canvas, towering away aloft toward the
dusky heavens, stood as firm and steady as though moulded in iron.  The
watch below were in their hammocks, enjoying the repose which they had
earned by a day of unusual exertion; and the watch on deck were also, by
George's express command, snatching such a weazel-like sleep as could be
obtained consistently with the holding of themselves ready for a prompt
call in case of emergency.

The night wore slowly on; the young moon, which had been hanging like a
silver crescent low in the western sky, sank beneath the horizon; and
the spangled heavens became almost wholly obscured by the broadening
masses of dusky vapour which swept rapidly athwart them.  There was
light enough, however, to render the schooner easily distinguishable
with the aid of the night-glass; and George, after attentively watching
her for more than half an hour, came to the conclusion that the _Aurora_
was at length holding her own.

"We will clew up and furl the royals, if you please Mr Ritson," said he
to the officer of the watch; "I am getting uneasy about those sticks;
and it would be most unfortunate to lose them just now.  I believe we
shall do just as well without the royals as with them in this fresh
breeze.  How is she steering?  Pretty easily?" to the man at the wheel.

"No, sir," was the reply; "she's `gripin'' awful; it takes a half-turn
of the wheel to keep her out of the wind."

"Then we'll take in the gaff-topsail and mizzen-topmast staysail as
well," said George.  "All that weather-helm must make at least half a
knot difference in her sailing."

Sail was accordingly shortened, the result proving the justice of
Captain Leicester's surmise, for there was no perceptible diminution in
the speed of the barque; on the contrary, in another half-hour both the
skipper and his second mate were convinced that the _Aurora_ was
gradually creeping away from her pursuer.

The spread of canvas was then further reduced by the hauling down of the
main-topgallant-staysail, and the furling of the fore-topgallant-sail;
and finally the flying-jib and main-topgallant-sail were stowed, after
which the two craft appeared to maintain, as nearly as possible, an
equal speed all through the remainder of the night.

The next morning dawned with a coppery-red tint in the eastern sky, and
a streaky look in the clouds, which was a presage of a windy day.  The
schooner was about six miles distant, bearing three points on the
barque's lee quarter.  Her royal, topgallant-sail, and flying-jib were
stowed; but by the way in which she was lying over to the breeze, and
the dense showers of spray which were incessantly flying in over her
weather bow, it was evident that she was still carrying all the canvas
she could stagger under.

"Now," said George to the first mate, when the latter came on deck to
take charge at eight bells, "I think we have that fellow in our power,
and can do pretty nearly what we like with him.  In this breeze and with
this sea we can outsail him; and with all that water pouring in upon his
forecastle it will be difficult for him to work his long-gun to
advantage, which I believe, unlike ourselves, he has fixed there on a
pivot; so I propose to let him creep up within gun-shot astern of us,
and fight him there, where all the advantage will be on our side."

Accordingly, as soon as the crew had taken their breakfast, Captain
Leicester ordered the jib and fore-topmast staysail-sheets to be hauled
over to windward in order that the barque's speed might be reduced
without shortening sail and so exciting any suspicion in the minds of
the pirates of a desire on the part of the _Aurora_ to renew the action.

This manoeuvre had the desired effect; and shortly before noon the
schooner once more opened fire, the shot flying past the _Aurora_, and
at some distance to leeward of her.  This was doubtless in consequence
of the violent motion of the schooner, which, being a much smaller
vessel than the barque, was much more lively in the sea-way.  This gave
the _Aurora_ another advantage over the schooner, as was at once
apparent when Ritson recommenced his gun-practice; his first shot
passing through the schooner's topsail in close proximity to the mast.

The firing soon became pretty animated on both sides, the _Aurora_
having, however, a decided advantage over her antagonist both in
rapidity and precision of fire.  Thus, while at the end of half an hour
only one of the schooner's shot had touched the barque, and that without
doing any material damage, her own sails and rigging were pretty well
cut up, several shot-holes being visible in her canvas, whilst a number
of ends and bights of ropes were seen streaming to leeward in the wind.

At length a lucky shot from the _Aurora_ struck the schooner's fore-mast
just below the eyes of the rigging, wounding the spar so badly that it
almost immediately afterwards went, carrying away the main-topmast with
it, and in an instant the whole of the pirate's top-hamper was towing to
leeward, causing tremendous confusion on board, and placing the craft
almost completely at the mercy of her antagonist.

A hearty cheer burst from the lips of the _Aurora's_ crew at the sight
of this disaster on board their adversary, a disaster of which George
was determined to take the fullest advantage.

"Now, lads," he exclaimed, "she is at our mercy, and we will inflict on
her a lesson she is not likely to speedily forget.  Clew up the courses,
then let go the topsail-halliards, and double-reef the fore and
main-topsails, and, as you come down, stow the courses."

The men sprang aloft with alacrity to execute these duties; and, on
their return to the deck, sail was further shortened, until the barque
was under double-reefed topsails and fore-topmast staysail only; when
she wore round and stood directly for the disabled pirate schooner, the
long-gun being run forward and pointed out of the foremost port on the
lee-side, and the firing resumed.

In a very short time she was close to the schooner, round and round
which George proceeded deliberately to sail, maintaining a steady fire
upon her meanwhile.

The pirate schooner, however, though disabled, was by no means rendered
harmless, as Captain Leicester soon discovered to his cost; for, as he
was sailing past her to windward, at a distance of about fifty yards, to
his very great surprise, her crew suddenly threw open three ports in her
weather bulwarks, and the next moment three six-pounder shots came
whistling through the _Aurora's_ rigging, cutting a rope or two, but
happily missing the spars and all gear connected with the canvas which
was set.  At the same moment Ritson fired his nine-pounder, and struck
the schooner (which was listing over to leeward with the weight of her
wreckage) exactly between wind and water.

Now that the two vessels were so close together, it became apparent that
Captain Leicester had been perfectly correct in his estimate as to the
strength of the schooner's crew; for whilst a strong gang could be seen
hard at work clearing away the wreckage of the spars, a sufficient
number of men were still available to work the broadside guns to
windward, which they did with great animation as long as it was possible
for one of them to be pointed at the _Aurora_.

This was not for long, however, for the barque, holding on her way, wore
round as soon as she was out of musket-shot, and, passing across the
schooner's stern, swept up again to leeward, Ritson all the while
keeping up an animated fire from the long-nine, and evidently doing
tremendous execution among the thickly-clustering men on the schooner's
deck, who, whilst the barque was to leeward, were unable, in consequence
of the wreckage, to return more than a very ineffectual fire.

At length, after an hour of this work, the black flag, which had fallen
with the main-topmast, was exhibited above the bulwarks of the schooner
for a moment, lashed to a boat's oar, and was then dropped again, in
token of surrender.

"That means that they've struck, sir, you may depend on't," exclaimed
Ritson, walking aft as if for further instructions.

"Yes, I have no doubt it does," replied Captain Leicester; "but if they
expect that the fact of their striking will be of any benefit to them,
they are woefully mistaken.  We are altogether too short-handed to
attempt to take possession of her as a prize; and as to leaving her
alone, in order that she may repair damages and have the opportunity of
renewing her depredations, it is not to be thought of.  She is not
entitled to any of the privileges of an ordinary enemy, nor shall I
extend any such to her.  She is simply _a pirate_, one of those pests of
the high seas which it is the duty of any honest man to destroy, if he
have the opportunity.  And that," he concluded grimly, "is what I intend
to do.  Keep up your fire, sir, and aim so as to strike her between wind
and water if possible.  I'll sink her before I've done with her."

Ritson accordingly returned forward, and, communicating the captain's
determination to the crew, they resumed work at the gun, with the stern
set faces of men who recognised that they had a very terrible and
disagreeable duty to perform, from the responsibility of which they
dared not shrink.

As soon as the schooner's crew discovered that their surrender had not
been accepted, they reopened fire as well as they could from their own
guns, and a man was seen to jump into the main-rigging and run aloft
with something rolled up under his arm, which proved in another minute
to be the black flag.  Ascending as high as the lower masthead, he
coolly climbed up on the cross-trees, and, standing there, deftly and
rapidly lashed it to the masthead, after which he deliberately descended
the rigging again, defiantly shaking his fist at the _Aurora_ as he did
so.

About ten minutes after the occurrence of this incident there followed
another of an infinitely more thrilling and startling character.  The
_Aurora_ had worn round, and was once more passing the schooner; and
Ritson was in the act of glancing along the sights of the gun,
preparatory to giving the order to fire, when, without the slightest
warning or premonition of the dreadful tragedy about to take place, a
dazzling flash of light was seen on board the schooner, her spars, her
deck, and all that was upon it went soaring in fragments high into the
air, her sides were rent open, and in a tremendous cloud of smoke, and
with a deafening report, the devoted craft disappeared.

The barque's whole frame jarred, her canvas flapped violently, and she
careened perceptibly under the terrific concussion; a dead silence
seemed suddenly to have fallen upon the scene of strife, and then came
the _splash, splash_ of the falling fragments into the water around,
accompanied by the heavy thud of others descending upon the barque's
deck; the water seethed and leaped madly for a few seconds on the spot
where the schooner had a minute before been floating, then subsided once
more into the long, steady, regular run and heave of the sea, and all
was over.

Whether the explosion was the result of accident, or the deliberate act
of her desperate and reckless commander, it was of course impossible to
ascertain; very probably it was the latter; but, whatever the cause of
it, the pirate schooner was no more; a few rent and blackened timbers,
with here and there the mangled remains of what had a few minutes before
been a human being, floating on the surface of the heaving waters, was
all that remained of her and her crew.  George Leicester's grim deed of
retribution was complete.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

SURPRISED.

"A Terrible ending to a sin-stained career," murmured the skipper of the
_Aurora_ with white set lips, when the first shock of surprise and
consternation had passed away sufficiently to allow him to speak.  "Up
with your helm, my man," he continued to the seaman at the wheel; "up
with your helm, and keep her away upon a west and by south course; we'll
get away from this accursed spot as soon as possible.  Man the braces,
fore and aft, if you please, Mr Ritson, square the yards, secure the
long-gun, and then let all hands make sail."

Then, going to the companion, he passed the word below for Mr Bowen to
close the magazine and come on deck.

Five minutes later the chief mate emerged from the companion, and,
walking up to George, observed--

"Well, sir, you've managed to make a pretty effectual end of the
buccaneer, I see."

"Yes," answered George gravely.  "The schooner struck; but we are much
too short-handed to take and retain possession of such a craft as that,
so, as I did not feel justified in leaving them at liberty to resume
their nefarious business, I continued to fire into the schooner,
intending to sink her; and I am of opinion that her captain, recognising
the fact that escape was hopeless, blew her up with his own hand, hoping
to involve us in the destruction also.  It was a terrible thing, Mr
Bowen, to cause the loss of so many lives, but I am convinced that I
only did my duty.  And now, as there seems to be no immediate prospect
of our falling in with the fleet again, I propose to take full advantage
of this fine fair wind, and proceed upon my voyage; so please pack on
the ship everything that will draw; then let the men clear up the decks,
and knock off work; they have had two very fatiguing days, and have
fought well; let them get all the rest they possibly can between this
and to-morrow morning."

When the sun set that evening, the _Aurora_ was flying to the southward
and westward (as if instinct with life and thrilling with horror at her
terrible achievement) before the freshening gale at the rate of fully
twelve knots per hour, with studding-sails set on both sides, alow and
aloft; while her crew, assembled on the forecastle, discussed in low
tones the incidents of the fight, and her skipper, with hands clasped
behind him, bent head, and furrowed brow, held solemn self-communion
upon the same subject.

George Leicester now found himself at liberty to attend to his guest,
and he spent almost the whole of his leisure time by the side of
Walford's cot.  For the first week after the arrival of the latter on
board the _Aurora_ very little change or improvement could be detected
in him; his mental faculties seemed to be almost paralysed; and he would
lie in his cot for hours at a time, with wide-opened eyes, staring into
vacancy, the blank, expressionless look upon his face betraying the
utter inactivity of his mind.  Then there would occur a short period,
during which it seemed that memory was struggling to re-assert itself;
he would glance vacantly round the cosy sleeping-cabin in which he found
himself, a look of mild surprise would overspread his features, and he
would pass his hand over his brow with the action of one who is trying
to remember something; then would recur another vacant period.

During all this time he never expressed a wish or uttered a single
coherent word; only occasionally, when the memory was struggling to
regain its seat, he would mutter a few incoherent words, that of
"murder" being sometimes repeated, in low tones of suppressed horror,
half-a-dozen times together.  His appetite appeared to be good, since he
ate and drank freely whatever was offered him; but if the food was
withheld, as it sometimes was, by way of experiment, at Captain
Leicester's order, he never asked for it, or evinced any surprise or
uneasiness at its non-appearance.

About the tenth day, however, after the one on which he had been picked
up, George thought he detected signs of improvement.  The periods of
thinking were more frequent and more prolonged, and once during that
day, when the skipper entered the cabin, Walford noticed the opening of
the door, and, turning his eyes in that direction, regarded George for
some moments with a steadfast inquiring look; but the recognition, if
such there was, was momentary only, the hand was pressed meditatively to
the forehead the next instant, and then the blank look returned.

The next day witnessed a recurrence of the same symptoms, added to which
there seemed to be a vague sort of semi-recognition of George's voice;
for, whenever the latter spoke, Walford would look up with an anxious
questioning glance, as though he had an idea that he had heard the voice
before.

Finally, on that same evening, when George and Mr Bowen were in the
saloon together, chatting over the tea-table, the after-cabin door being
open, so as to insure a current of air through the apartment, Walford,
who had been asleep, suddenly started up in his cot with the
exclamation--

"Surely that is Leicester's voice?"

George heard the ejaculation, and, springing to his feet, stepped
eagerly into the sleeping-cabin, saying--

"Of course it is, my dear fellow.  How do you feel now?  Better?"

"Better?" repeated Walford.  "I haven't been ill, have I?  Where am I?
How did I come here?  And where did _you_ come from?"

"What a string of questions!" said George with a laugh.  "But don't
worry yourself by trying to guess the answers to any of them just now,
you have been ill; but, thank God, you are getting better again.  When
you are well enough to listen, I will tell you all I know; until then
you must be satisfied with the assurance that you are as safe as a man
can be in a tight little ship, with fine weather and plenty of
sea-room."

"Safe!" ejaculated Walford.  "Ah! but _am_ I safe?  I have a horrible
feeling of dread upon me--a sensation of some frightful danger hovering
over me--a feeling that unless I can do something, I know not what, a
hideous disaster will happen."

He shuddered violently as these words left his lips; then, turning
suddenly to George, he grasped him convulsively by the arm, and
exclaimed in agitated tones--

"Oh, Leicester! tell me what is it that threatens?  What have I to guard
against?  If you know what it is--"

"There," said George soothingly, "do not worry about it any more.  I did
not intend to say a word about it for some time to come; but, since I
find that you remember something about it, I will tell you this much.
You _have_ been in very great danger indeed, but all that is long past;
you are now on board my ship, more than a thousand miles away from the
danger which threatened you, and as safe as a man can be in mid-ocean."

"Thanks, thanks!  I believe you," muttered Walford with a sigh of
ineffable relief, as he sank back upon his pillow.  "So I am in your
ship, eh?  That's strange; I can't imagine--but, there, I shall not
worry myself any more about the matter; you'll look after me, I know;
you're a thorough good fellow, Leicester, and I'm almost sorry now that
I--that I--um! what _was_ it, now?  Well, I dare say I shall remember it
further on.  I say, old fellow, what time is it?  Nearly dinner-time, I
should think, for I feel most confoundedly hungry."

"It _is_ nearly dinner-time," answered George, delighted to find so
great an improvement in the man he had vowed to protect and restore.
"If you can hold out for another half-hour, I think I may promise you a
decent meal by that time.  Will that do?"

"Yes, oh, yes, I dare say I can manage to survive until then," murmured
Walford.

Whereupon the skipper hurried away and took counsel with the steward;
the result of which was that in little more than the stipulated
half-hour Walford was served with the best meal which the _Aurora's_
resources could furnish.

From that time he grew steadily better, and in another day or two he was
able to leave his cot and to indulge in a bath, a clean shave, and an
hour or so on deck, half-sitting, half-reclining in a hammock which the
skipper had ordered to be slung for him from the spanker-boom.  He
suffered from extreme bodily weakness, doubtless the result of his
frenzied exertions on board the ill-fated _Princess Royal_; but that
was, of course, an evil which rest and nourishing food would speedily
remedy.  But he did not recover the use of his reasoning faculties for
some time after the period now referred to, and then the recovery was
only partial.

As for Captain Leicester, he was in high spirits; the breeze lasted
fresh for four full days after his encounter with the pirate schooner,
so fresh indeed that once or twice he was obliged to furl his royals, in
order to save the sticks; and the barque, no longer compelled to
moderate her pace to that of the slowest sailer in a large fleet,
maintained a steady speed of twelve knots during the whole of that time,
thus fully making up, in the skipper's opinion, for the time and ground
lost during the gale, and encouraging him to look forward hopefully to
the accomplishment of a quick passage.

But such a state of things was too good to last.  On the fifth day the
wind fell light, and on the sixth it failed them altogether, leaving the
_Aurora_ helpless in the "doldrums," she being at that time about a
thousand miles from Cape Haytien, and six hundred from the island of
Saint Thomas.  This was particularly vexatious, because Captain
Leicester considered that, had the breeze continued fresh and favourable
for only twenty-four hours longer, it would in all probability have run
him fairly into the North-East trades, and he would then have been able
to calculate the duration of the remainder of the voyage with almost
mathematical exactness, and, what was still more to the purpose, would
have been sure of a breeze, and that a fair one, for the remainder of
the way.

However, there was no help for it, they had to take the wind and weather
as it came, and the crew had a busy time of it "box-hauling" the yards,
now this way, now that; trimming the sails to every passing breath of
the capricious air, and, after all their trouble, accomplishing only
some half-a-dozen miles during the whole day.

On the next day it was the same, excepting that the proceedings were
varied by a tremendously heavy thunder-storm, followed by, instead of
the wind which Captain Leicester so earnestly hoped for, a perfect
deluge of rain, which lasted for rather more than an hour.  It was a
regular tropical downpour; the water descended, not in separate detached
drops, but in _sheets_, which splashed down on the decks as if from a
cataract.  Advantage was taken of this copious downfall of pure fresh
water to refill all the water-casks; after which the scuppers were
plugged, wash-deck tubs filled, and all hands, stripping to the skin,
indulged in the unwonted luxury of a thorough ablution in the warm soft
water, finishing up by rousing out all their "wash clothes," and
treating them to the same beneficial process.

The storm cleared away as rapidly as it had worked up, leaving the sky
absolutely cloudless, and the water thrashed down by the rain until it
was smooth as a polished mirror.  The heat was intense, and the men,
notwithstanding their refreshing bath, went about their work languidly,
perspiring at every pore.  It was a positive relief to them to see the
sun at last go down behind the gleaming horizon, and a greater relief
still when, an hour later, a faint breeze from the eastward came
creeping over the water, and, barely filling the _Aurora's_ light upper
sails, gave her just sufficient way through the water to allow of her
head being kept in the right direction.

At eight o'clock that evening Mr Bowen retired to his cabin, it being
then his watch below, and at nine the skipper followed his example.  The
ship was then stealing along through the water at a speed of about two
knots, the royals, topgallantsails, and more lofty staysails just
"asleep," the topsails alternately filling out and flapping again to the
masts with the barely perceptible swing of the ship over the low, long,
sleepy heave of the swell, and the courses drooping heavily and
uselessly from the yards.  The sky was "as clear as a bell," to use a
favourite metaphor of Ritson's, not a trace of cloud being visible in
any part of the vast sapphire vault which stretched overhead, spangled
here and there with a few stars of the first magnitude, and with the
moon, nearly at the full, hanging in the midst like a disc of burnished
silver, her pure soft light flooding the sea with its dazzling radiance,
and causing the sails to stand out like sheets of ivory against the deep
dark blue of the sky.  There seemed to be no immediate prospect of any
change in the weather, but George was thankful that the ship was really
at last moving once more--though ever so slowly--in the right direction;
and, fervently hoping that the breeze would last long enough to run him
into the "trades," he went below with an easy mind, after giving Ritson
the usual stereotyped order to call him should any untoward event occur.

After the overpowering heat of the day the comparative coolness of the
night was unspeakably refreshing, and with all the doors, the skylight,
and the stern-windows open, and a thorough circulation of fresh air
through the cabins, their several occupants were soon wrapped in a sound
and dreamless slumber.

It was even more pleasant on deck than it was below, for the hull of the
ship had, during the long scorching day, absorbed a considerable amount
of heat, which it gave off again during the night, causing the cabins
and forecastle to be unpleasantly warm even after all possible means had
been adopted for their thorough ventilation, whilst on deck the full
benefit of the breeze, what there was of it, was to be obtained.

Such, at all events, was Mr Ritson's opinion, as he sauntered
listlessly fore and aft, between the taffrail and the main-mast,
glancing now aloft at the all but idle canvas, then into the binnacle,
then over the side at the tiny bubbles creeping lazily past the ship's
side, and finally forward, to where the man on the lookout could be seen
seated upon the rail, facing ahead, with his arms folded and his back
leaning against the great wooden stock of one of the anchors, his form
showing black as that of an ebony statue against the brilliant silvery
sheen of the moonlight on the water.  The remainder of the crew were
dimly visible seated on the deck in the black shadow of the bulwarks, a
tiny red spark or two indicating that some of them were solacing the
idle hours with a whiff or two of the fragrant weed.  Officers who were
strict disciplinarians would have forbidden smoking in the watch on
deck, and would have insisted on the whole watch keeping constantly on
the move, as a safeguard against dozing; but Ritson was not a strict
disciplinarian; he liked to spare the men all unnecessary labour of
every kind, and, as there was no sail-trimming to be done, he just
allowed them to rest their weary bodies as much as they could.

He would have liked greatly to rest his own weary body, too, for indeed
he felt it to be almost a torture to be pacing ceaselessly to and fro
there on the deck, hour after hour.

He pulled out his watch, the hands indicated that it was ten minutes to
ten; it would be full two hours more before he would be relieved.  There
was a most inviting-looking chair standing on deck near the skylight,
which Captain Leicester had been using during the day, and poor Ritson
thought how pleasant it would be to rest his tired limbs in it for a few
minutes.  Then he took a stroll round the decks, just to wile away the
time, and to make sure that the watch--and especially the lookout--was
not "caulking."  The shadowy figures scrambled somewhat hurriedly to
their feet on his approach, giving rise to just the faintest suspicion
that perhaps after all they _might_ have been "shutting their eyes to
keep them warm;" but the lookout man seemed unconscious of his presence,
and was humming, scarcely above his breath, the air of a homely song as
Ritson passed him, his gaze resting on a brig ahead, which had been in
sight all day, and which, from the fact that she was steering in the
same direction as the _Aurora_, was thought to belong, like themselves,
to the dispersed fleet.  When Ritson again reached the quarterdeck, it
was ten o'clock, so he struck "four bells" sharply; the wheel and
lookout were relieved, and then everybody settled down once more, to
pass away the remaining two hours of the watch.

As has been already hinted, Ritson was not so strict a disciplinarian as
to forbid smoking by the watch on deck, so long, of course, as the
smoking was not allowed to interfere with the duty of the ship.  Nay,
more; he sometimes allowed himself the luxury of a pipe under similar
circumstances, and he thought he might safely do so on the present
occasion.  So, seating himself in the skipper's chair, he drew out his
pipe, tobacco, and knife, and prepared to enjoy his whiff.

Oh! how comfortable a chair that was!  How great a relief to sit in it,
even for the minute or two during which he was cutting up his tobacco
and filling his pipe!  This work, though performed with great
deliberation, was at length accomplished; his steel and tinder-box
furnished him with a light; and he began to smoke.

Somehow he forgot to get up out of the chair again when his pipe was
lighted, but, leaning back restfully in it instead, watched the little
rings and wreaths of smoke which issued from it and went floating lazily
away until they vanished in the soft cool air of the night.  Then, by
association of ideas, Ritson's thoughts strayed away to the little
flaxen, curly-haired urchin at home, his one-year-old son, who used to
be so delighted to watch the wreathing smoke issue from his father's
pipe, that he would crow and jump and kick upon his mother's knee, until
the good woman had hard work to hold him.  He fancied he could see the
young rascal still, his fat, dimpled cheeks wreathed with smiles of
delight, his blue eyes sparkling, and his fat chubby arms and legs
flourishing in the air as he made frantic grasps at the little blue
smoke-rings floating toward him.  Yes; and he could hear Anna's, his
wife's voice, half-jestingly, half in earnest, scolding the happy father
for keeping the child awake.  And, letting his thoughts have free play
on _so_ pleasant a theme, he could recall the same voice crooning a
soothing lullaby to the little fellow as, later on, he nestled into his
mother's breast, tired out with his romp, and softly sank to sleep.
Very soothing was that lullaby--very soothing indeed--yes--it was--
very--a--very--soothing--little--song--and--and--

And Ritson's head sank upon his breast, as he, too, yielded to the
seductive influence of sleep.

A _few_ feet away stood or rather lolled the helmsman, his body drooping
over the wheel, on the upper rim of which he had crossed his arms for
the sake of the welcome support.  On taking charge of the wheel he had
been given the course, and, glancing into the binnacle, he found that
the barque was heading in the required direction; upon which, like a
good helmsman, he at once selected a star to steer by, a star which was
just a finger's breadth clear of the main-royal yard-arm.  By the time
that he had been at the wheel a quarter of an hour he discovered that
the ship was steering herself, and he accordingly relaxed his vigilance,
allowing his thoughts to travel away whithersoever they would.
Gradually his weary eyelids closed, and a short period--perhaps a minute
or so--of forgetfulness followed, from which he would suddenly start
guiltily and glance first aloft at the star, and then at the motionless
figure of Ritson.  This glance of inquiry showing that the star still
occupied its proper position, and that the second mate had not observed
his dereliction of duty, the eyelids again closed, and a longer period
of forgetfulness would ensue, which of course ended, as it was sure to
do, in the man falling soundly asleep as he stood.

As for the man on the lookout, he was notorious for his somnolent
powers.  He made no pretence of an effort to keep awake.  There was no
reason, he argued, why he should.  It was a fine night, as light as day;
there was nothing in sight but the brig ahead, and, although the
_Aurora_ was clearly gaining on her, there was no likelihood of her
running over her in _his_ watch; therefore to keep a lookout just then
was quite a useless formality.  Besides, there was the officer of the
watch, who would keep all the lookout required on such a brilliantly
fine night.  And, arguing thus, he settled himself comfortably into the
position vacated by his predecessor, and, folding his arms across his
breast, tranquilly composed himself to sleep.

The remainder of the watch had settled down to sleep, as a matter of
course; _they_ had not the lookout; and they were within call of the
officer of the watch, should their services be required; that, they
considered, was all that was just then expected of them; and they closed
their eyes, and yielded to their feelings of drowsiness without a shadow
of compunction.

Thus, by half-past ten o'clock that night, the entire ship's company of
the _Aurora_, fore and aft, were fast asleep.

Whilst all hands were thus wrapped in peaceful oblivion a small object
gradually merged into view immediately ahead of the _Aurora_.  Had the
lookout man been broad awake--instead of fast asleep, as he was--he
would certainly not have noticed this object until it was within a mile
of the ship--unless his gaze had happened to have been attracted by an
occasional momentary flashing gleam of silvery light--because its colour
so artfully matched the delicate steely blue grey of the gently-rippled
sea that it was absolutely invisible beyond that distance.  Even at the
distance of _half_ a mile a cursory careless glance ahead might have
easily missed it.  But when a quarter of a mile only intervened between
it and the barque the look out man, had he been wide-awake and with all
his wits about him, would suddenly have become conscious that a large
boat, painted grey, and full of men, was pulling swiftly and noiselessly
toward the ship.  On she swept, silently as a dream; not a word was
uttered on board her; there was no warning roll and rattle of the oars
in the rowlocks to apprise the sleeping crew of the approach of danger;
there was not even the plashing sound of the oar-blades dipping into the
water, they rose and fell silently as the misty oars of a phantom boat;
and when at length she swept up alongside the _Aurora_, a _sign_ was all
that was needed to convey the orders of the officer in charge to his
crew: his right hand was gently raised, the oars were noiselessly lifted
from the rowlocks and laid in without a sound upon the padded thwarts,
the boat sheered alongside, without absolutely touching, the painter was
made fast to the _Aurora's_ fore-chains, and sixteen armed figures
climbed noiselessly as ghosts over the bulwarks, leaving two in charge
of the boat.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

SOLD INTO SLAVERY.

When George Leicester retired to his cabin that night, it was with the
full intention to at once retire to his cot.  Instead, however, of doing
this, he flung himself down on the sofa, to indulge in a few minutes of
entirely undisturbed thought, and there sleep overtook him.

From this he was abruptly startled into complete wakefulness by a sudden
cry, immediately followed by a confused sound of struggling on deck, and
of a dull crunching blow, a cry of "Oh, God! have mercy upon my dear--"
another blow, a heavy fall on the planking overhead, a deep groan, and
then a splash in the water alongside.

Conscious at once that something terrible had happened, he sprang to his
feet, buckled on his cutlass, and, snatching up a pistol in one hand and
a lamp in the other, hurriedly stepped out of the cabin to investigate.
He was just in time to encounter at the foot of the companion-ladder a
motley crowd of swarthy-skinned strangers, who, with bared daggers and
sword-blades, were making their way down to the cabin.  That they were
enemies was so instantly apparent that George unhesitatingly levelled
his pistol at the foremost man and fired.  The bullet struck the man in
the shoulder, shattering the bone, and he staggered to one side,--only
to make way for others, however, who, pressing upon George, disarmed and
overpowered him before he had opportunity to do further harm.  Mr
Bowen, who had dashed out of his cabin just behind George, was similarly
disarmed and overpowered; and then the crowd pressed on into the cabin,
where they found and secured Walford and the lad Tom.

Having made a thorough search of the various state-rooms, the
strangers--who were evidently Spaniards--hurried their prisoners on
deck.  Here a single glance sufficed to show Captain Leicester that his
ship had been taken from him by a clever surprise, aided--or rather
rendered possible--by terrible carelessness on the part of those left in
charge of the deck.  The crew, as he found on rapidly counting heads,
were all present--with one exception--securely bound hand and foot, and
huddled together under the bulwarks.  The exception--the missing man--
was Ritson; and the overturned and broken chair, the blood-spattered
deck in its immediate vicinity, and the heavy splash into the water
alongside, which George had heard, rendered the whole story as plain and
clear as the moon which rode so serenely in the heavens above.  Poor
Ritson! he had paid with his life the penalty of his disastrous lapse of
duty.  And the drowsy helmsman--who had obviously awakened in time to
spring to the assistance of his superior--was lying near the skylight,
white and ghastly in the moonlight, with his skull cloven, and a great
black pool of blood slowly spreading on the planking beneath his head.
The brig ahead, now hove-to and evidently awaiting the approach of the
_Aurora_, told George from whence his enemies had sprung; and--now that
it was all too late--he bitterly reproached himself for his lack of
caution with regard to her.

The individuals who had thus cleverly gained possession of the barque
were as ruffianly a set of scoundrels as could well be met with on the
high seas.  Their leader, a brawny, thick-set Spaniard, with a skin
tanned to the hue of well-seasoned mahogany, his ragged black locks
bound round with a filthy red silk handkerchief, and surmounted by a
broad-brimmed straw hat, his body clad in a red and yellow striped
worsted shirt, confined at the waist by a cutlass-belt, into which a
long-barrelled pistol was thrust, and his legs encased in sea-boots
reaching nearly to the thigh, was a particularly truculent-looking
ruffian; and a powerful negro, somewhat similarly clad, who seemed to be
his chief _aide_, was little if anything better.

That they were pirates there could be no possible doubt, and poor George
Leicester expected nothing less than that he and his ship's company
would all have their throats cut, and then be unceremoniously pitched
overboard, to keep poor Ritson company.  It soon appeared, however, that
his career was not to be thus summarily brought to an end, for after a
few words between the leader and the negro, George and his crew were,
after their bonds had been looked to and made more secure, distributed
about the deck, and chained to the ring-bolts in the bulwarks and
elsewhere.

The _Aurora_, under the influence of a slightly freshening breeze, soon
joined company with the brig, from which a boat then put off, bringing
on board the barque a tall handsome man, whose features were, however,
spoiled by the expression of cunning and cruelty legibly imprinted on
them.  He said a few words to the Spaniard in charge, glanced round the
deck at the helpless prisoners, made a jesting remark or two, at which
of course everybody dutifully laughed, gave George--who unfortunately
happened to be nearest him--a playful kick in the mouth with his heavy
boot, and then sauntered leisurely down into the cabin, where, from the
repeated loud bursts of laughter, and the singing which soon arose, a
carouse seemed to have been promptly entered upon.

The sky to the eastward was brightening with the approach of dawn, when
the revellers at last staggered once more on deck.  Here the handsome
man--who seemed to be the chief of the pirate crew--paused for a moment,
apparently to reiterate and emphasise certain commands already laid upon
his subordinate, after which he went down the side into his boat, and
some five minutes afterwards the two craft filled away once more upon
their former course.

It would be impossible to convey to the reader, without going into the
most shocking and disgusting details, any clear idea of the sufferings
and indignities to which the unfortunate captain and crew of the
_Aurora_ were subjected during the next three weeks.  Suffice it to say
that during the whole of that time they were _never_ released from the
ring-bolts to which they were chained; that they lay there on the hard
planking day and night, alternately scorched by the fierce rays of the
noonday sun, and chilled by the heavy dews of night; that they were
sparingly and irregularly fed--and then only upon the coarsest and most
loathsome of food--and still more sparingly and irregularly supplied
with water; that they were the recipients of incessant abuse and
brutality from the wretches who were in possession of the ship; and some
slight conception can be formed of their dreadful state of body and mind
during that interminable three weeks.

At the end of that time the land was made, and late at night both ships
glided into an anchorage, where they brought-up, the canvas was furled
in a slovenly fashion which drove poor Bowen--in spite of all that he
had suffered--half-distracted, the boats were lowered, and preparations
were at once made for the transport of the prisoners to the shore.

This operation, under the direction of the truculent-looking and
ruffianly Spaniard already mentioned as the head of the gang in
possession of the _Aurora_, was speedily effected.  The prisoners,
handcuffed with their hands behind them, were sent down into one of the
boats lowered for their reception, and there secured to a length of
heavy chain, so that where one went, the rest were compelled to go also;
and, thus yoked together, they were transferred to the shore.  A glance
at the star-lit sky, in which the pole-star hung, only some twenty to
twenty-five degrees above the horizon, told poor Leicester that they
were landing upon a shore open to the northward, and that, from the
position of Polaris in the sky, they were somewhere within about
twenty-five degrees of the equator; but, beyond that, he was just then
unable to learn anything further concerning their whereabouts.

As the boat's keel grated upon the beach, the prisoners were ordered by
sufficiently significant gestures--none of them understanding a single
word of Spanish--to climb over the side and make their way up the beach.

The Spaniard in charge pointed significantly with a long whip which he
carried to a break in the dense growth of trees which clustered close to
the water's edge and then, with an ominous flourish of the lash, gave
the word for the miserable band to move forward.  A toilsome march of
some four or five miles along a track of heavy sand then commenced; a
march which, fatiguing enough in itself, after the long period of close
confinement to which they had been subjected, was rendered trebly so by
the constraint of the heavy chain to which they were secured.
Staggering, reeling, and stumbling forward, conscious of nothing beyond
their dreadful state of misery and suffering, it took them over three
hours to perform that horrible journey, urged on though they were by the
incessant application of the cruel whip; and then they found themselves
outside an enclosure formed of heavy slabs of planking some nine feet in
height.  A narrow door gave admittance to the place, and, this being
unlocked, the prisoners were driven in, and after the door had been
again securely fastened, they were released from the chain, and, still
with their hands secured behind them, allowed to stretch their exhausted
bodies upon the ground, and take such repose as was possible under the
circumstances.

The first definite idea to take possession of George Leicester's mind,
after he had fully realised the calamity of his capture, was escape.
Whilst chained immovable to a ring-bolt on his own vessel's deck, this
was clearly a simple impossibility; and as he now glanced round the
enclosure in which he found himself, he recognised the fact that it was
still equally so.  It was true that the place was open to the sky, and
that the scaling of the barricade would be, to a strong, active, _free_
man, simply a pleasant gymnastic exercise; but he was _not_ free; his
hands were shackled behind him; a sentinel, armed with cutlass and gun,
was promptly placed on guard over the wretched group of captives; and
last, but not least, the three weeks of confinement, exposure, and
privation to which he had been subjected had left their mark upon him;
he could no longer call himself a strong and active man.  Besides this,
there was Walford.  George's vow to watch over and protect this man,
and, if possible, to restore him to Lucy's arms, was ever present to
him, and he recognised from the very first that, if ever he should be so
fortunate as to escape, Walford must certainly accompany him.  When
Leicester contemplated the additional difficulties which this necessity
forced upon him, his courage _almost_--though not quite--failed him; for
since the capture of the _Aurora_ Walford had, under the influence of
the sufferings to which he, in common with the rest, had been subjected,
relapsed into a state of almost complete imbecility; so that, so far as
assisting in the matter of his own escape was concerned, he was helpless
as an infant There was, however, one point in Leicester's favour; and it
was this.  Walford still _knew_ him, and appeared to recognise, in spite
of the mists which obscured his intellect, the fact that George was
keenly interested in him; and he was always passively obedient to any
injunction which the latter laid upon him.

The unfortunate crew of the _Aurora_ were kept confined in this
enclosure four days, during which their condition was somewhat
ameliorated by the administration of a better quality and a more liberal
quantity of food than before, and also by the permission--or rather, the
command--to exercise their cramped and stiffened limbs by a
daily-increasing amount of exercise.

The cause for this altered treatment soon became apparent.  On the
morning of the fifth day--by which time their haggard, half-starved, and
feeble appearance had to some slight extent passed away, and they were
once more able to keep upon their feet for an hour or so without
dropping exhausted to the ground--the Spaniard who had charge of them
made his appearance in the enclosure, still arrayed in the filthy
habiliments which he wore on board the _Aurora_, and armed as usual with
whip, cutlass, and pistol; and, flourishing the former threateningly in
the air, roughly bade them rise to their feet.  This command being
obeyed, a chain was produced--somewhat lighter than the one before
used--the prisoners were secured to it, and then the negro who acted as
the Spaniard's _aide_ or chief mate, unlocked the door, and the whole
party marched out.

The route on this occasion, as on the last, was along a narrow
bridle-path of heavy sand, which led through a dense growth of tropical
trees and plants.  Following this path for about a mile, the party
emerged upon a road crossing the path at right angles, into which they
turned, when, at a distance of about two miles, a straggling town of
low, white, flat-roofed houses became visible, with blue water beyond,
just beginning to be ruffled by the sea-breeze.

A toilsome march, of about an hour's duration, along the glaring white
road, during which they were scorched by the fierce rays of the sun, and
nearly blinded by the whirling clouds of fine dust, and they entered the
town.  Passing along a number of narrow sandy streets--deserted, save
for the presence of a few negroes and miserable-looking Spaniards,
ragged and dirty, bearing barrels of water strapped upon their
shoulders, and a goat-herd or two driving his flock of milch goats from
door to door--they emerged at last into a large open square, in the
centre of which stood a tall, ugly stone fountain, from which more
negroes and Spaniards were filling their barrels.  From the wide basin
of this fountain George and his companions in misery were allowed to
slake their thirst, and then they were conducted to a large open shed
which stood on one side of the square, and, under the welcome shade of
its wide shingled roof, ordered to sit down.

They had not been here long when another gang of unfortunates--negroes
this time--were driven into the square and under the shed; then another,
and another; making in all some four hundred human beings huddled
together there, like cattle in a pound.

Then, for the first time, the full horror of their position burst upon
George and his wretched companions; they were in a slave-market, and
were about to be sold as slaves.

The conviction that this was actually to be their fate fell upon them
like a thunder-bolt; it was almost too much for even George's courage to
bear up against; and as for poor Bowen, for a moment it seemed that he
would go out of his senses altogether; he prayed; he cursed himself and
everybody else; he swore solemnly that he would kill the man who dared
to buy him, and finally, in a paroxysm of mad fury, started to his feet,
dragging at the chain and exerting such an extraordinary amount of
strength--in spite of all his recent sufferings--in his efforts to break
away, that for a moment it seemed almost possible that he would succeed.
A cruel lash across the face from the Spaniard's whip--a lash which
tore away the skin and left a livid bloody weal on both cheeks--only
maddened him the more; seeing which, the negro who, with the Spaniard,
was in charge of the party, sprang upon him, and, gripping him by the
throat, hurled him to the ground with such brutal force that the poor
fellow lay there, for a time stunned.

At about nine o'clock the square gradually began to fill, a large number
of Spanish gentlemen arriving upon the scene; some on horseback, and
others in gigs drawn by a pair of horses driven tandem-fashion.  They
all smoked incessantly, and nearly all of them, on reaching the square,
proceeded at once to the shed, and, walking up and down its entire
length, examined with the utmost minuteness every individual beneath its
roof, frequently stopping to make some inquiry of those who had the poor
wretches in charge.

At ten o'clock a small shrivelled-up specimen of a Spaniard, dressed
entirely in white, made his appearance in the square, followed by four
negroes bearing a couple of chairs and a lightly-constructed rostrum,
and accompanied by a sallow cadaverous-looking individual, with a large
book under his arm, a pen behind his ear, and a silver-mounted ink-horn
at his button-hole.

Selecting a suitable spot for the purpose, the negroes placed the
rostrum on the ground, with one chair in and the other in front of it;
the shrivelled-up Spaniard mounted into position, his clerk seated
himself in front, a negro perambulated the square, ringing a large
hand-bell, and the sale began.

The blacks were offered first, and of these a large proportion had
evidently been landed very recently from a slaver.  For the most part
they were a tall, fine-looking set of men and women; that is to say,
they _had_ been; but disease and privation had done almost their worst
upon them; and as they took their places upon the block, one by one,
their forms showed gaunt and spare as so many skeletons.  In spite,
however, of their poor condition, competition ran high; the bidding was
brisk, and they were rapidly "knocked down," one after the other, until
the whole of the cargo was cleared.

Then came a gang of negroes--slaves already--belonging to the estate of
a tobacco planter, recently deceased, whose heir was disposing of
everything prior to a trip to Europe.

Most of these poor wretches had been born on the estate; others had been
on it long enough to form family connections upon it; and now husbands
and wives, parents and children, were in many cases about to be
ruthlessly torn from each other for ever.  It was pitiful--it was
heart-breaking--to those unaccustomed to such a scene to witness the
expression of utter despair on the faces of these poor creatures.  Then,
as the sale proceeded, this expression would sometimes give way to one
of feverish hope as the purchaser of a husband or parent would become a
bidder for the wife or child.  In one or two rare cases the hope was
realised; and as husband and wife, or parent and child, found themselves
once more reunited--once more the property of the same man--their joy
was enough to wring tears from the heart of a stone.  But in most cases
the families were utterly broken up, no two members becoming the
property of the same purchaser; and then their dreadful misery, their
heart-broken anguish, was simply indescribable, and must be left to the
imagination of the reader.

At length it came to the turn of the _Aurora's_ crew, and Mr Bowen was
selected as the first man to be "put up."  On being released from the
chain, instead of at once stepping up on the block, as he was signed to
do, he turned to George, whose arms were still bound behind him, and,
extending his hand, touched the latter lightly on the head by way of
farewell, exclaiming--

"Well, cap'n, the moment of parting's come at last, and a sorrowful
enough parting it is!  Battle, storm, fire, or shipwreck I _was_
prepared for; but when we sailed out of London, I never dreamed that I
was on the highway to _slavery_.  Well, God's will be done!  Here we
are, and I s'pose we must make the best of it while it lasts, which
won't be a minute longer than either of us can help, if I know anything
of you or myself.  If I get clear first, I vow never to steer to the
east'ard until you've joined company; and if _you_ should happen to be
off first, I hope--"

An impatient exclamation from the Spaniard in charge of the party, with
a savage lash of the whip, and a gesture of command to mount the block
at once, here cut short the rest of poor Bowen's farewell speech.

The mate fairly reeled under the force of the blow, but he steadied
himself in an instant, and turned upon his assailant with eyes literally
blazing with fury; the veins on his forehead stood out like cords, the
muscles of his arms and legs swelled, as he gathered himself together,
and his body quivered like that of a tiger crouching to the leap.  In
another instant he would have had the presumptuous Spaniard in a
death-grip, but a cry from Leicester stopped him just in time.

"Steady, Bowen!" exclaimed George eagerly; "steady, dear old friend;
resistance is _worse_ than useless just now.  It is their turn to-day;
but ours will come, it _shall_ come, some day; and then we will repay
them with interest for all our present sufferings."

"Right you are, cap'n," was Bowen's reply, as he stepped quietly up on
the block; "but," turning to the Spaniard, "if ever you and I meet on
blue water--well, you shall rue this day, that's all."

This incident, being of a somewhat exciting and novel character, seemed
to afford great gratification to the crowd of buyers gathered round the
spot, who eagerly remarked to each other upon the courage and
indomitable spirit of the British seaman, and dwelt upon the pleasure it
would afford them to quell that courage and humble that proud spirit to
the dust.  The result of it all was a keen competition for the
possession of the man, and Bowen was at length "knocked down" to a tall
man with thin aquiline features, the expression of which was pretty
evenly made up of pride, resolution, and relentless cruelty.

Walford was next put up, but the miserable condition of the unfortunate
man, and his vacant look of imbecility, excited nothing but laughter and
ridicule, and no one would make a bid for him.

Seeing that it would be impossible to sell this "lot" alone, the
Spaniard with the whip ordered George to be released and placed upon the
block also, stepping forward at the same time and whispering eagerly in
the ear of the auctioneer.

The latter thereupon explained to the crowd that while the first of the
two men offered was undoubtedly valueless of himself and alone, he could
be made very useful if purchased along with the second, who had been
found to have great influence over him, and could, in fact, persuade him
to do anything which might be required; and so on, and so on.

A little brisk bidding then ensued for the two on the part of the more
speculative among the buyers, who were willing to risk a little possible
loss on the chance of obtaining two slaves for a trifle more than the
price of one; and finally they were purchased by a man who had all the
appearance of being an overseer on some extensive estate.  The lad Tom,
who was next put up, was also bought by the same purchaser; and in a few
minutes the three white men--now slaves--found themselves chained to a
gang of negroes--men and women--who had also fallen into the hands of
the same owner.

Half an hour afterwards the gang was put in motion, and, with the
overseer (for such he eventually proved to be) at their head, and three
other men, mounted--one riding on each side and one in the rear--as a
guard, took their way through the town (which George at last ascertained
was Havana), out into the country, and inland toward the hills, along a
fairly good road, well shaded for the most part with a dense growth of
tropical verdure.

A wearisome tramp along this road for a distance of some ten miles
brought them late in the afternoon to the plantation which was to be
their future home, or prison; and George, Walford, and the lad Tom, with
an old negro who possessed a slight smattering of English, were
installed into a small, but fairly comfortable, wooden hut, thatched
with sugar-cane-leaves.  Here the clothing which they had been wearing
when purchased was taken from them, and they were supplied instead with
short drawers and jumpers of blue dungaree; a plentiful meal of ground
maize with a little salt was served out to them, and they were left for
the remainder of the day to recover themselves and prepare for the
labours which awaited them on the morrow.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A DASH FOR FREEDOM.

To find one's self sold into slavery must be a thoroughly unpleasant
experience; yet when George Leicester that night found himself actually
a slave, the tenant of a slave-cabin, and with slaves only for his
future companions and associates, he felt by no means discouraged.
There was no oppressive feeling of despair weighing down his heart and
crushing his spirit into utter hopelessness; on the contrary, he had the
feeling as if a great load of care and anxiety had been lifted from off
his heart; he now knew the worst of what was to befall him; he fully
recognised that the life before him was to be one of unrequited hardship
at least, and, it might be, also of suffering and bitter tyranny; but he
braced himself to meet it all, whatever it might be, with unflinching
fortitude, sustained by the steadfast, inextinguishable hope of eventual
escape.

This hope indeed of eventual escape rose high within his breast, now
that he had actually arrived upon the spot from which it must be made.
The estate of which he was now one of the chattels was that of a tobacco
and sugar planter.  Of its extent he could at present form no opinion;
but he saw that it was of considerable size, the whole of the cultivated
ground within sight being the property of his owner.  It was situated
upon a tolerably level plain, with a road running through it, from the
main road along which they had recently travelled, up to the planter's
house, a wide straggling stone structure, with a thatched roof and a
verandah all round, occupying the summit of a slight eminence nearly in
the middle of the estate.  Behind the house, at a distance of some
twenty yards, stood another building, which George rightly guessed to be
the stables; the slave-huts, of which there were thirty-four, were
built, at a distance of about a quarter of a mile from the house, on a
gentle slope, at the foot of which stood the boiling-house and
sugar-mill, the store-houses, the tobacco factory, etcetera; and just
beyond them, again, ran a tiny sparkling stream, from which was obtained
the power for driving the crushing machinery.

The slave-cabins were wholly unenclosed, and George had not failed to
notice on his arrival upon the estate that, though it was certainly
fenced in, the fencing consisted of nothing more than a common rough
post-and-rail fence, evidently intended merely to keep out cattle, and
in his innocence he began to think that escape from such a place would
prove a very easy matter, after all.  "What, indeed," he asked himself,
"was to prevent his rising from his bed upon the very first favourable
night which should arrive, and quietly walking off the estate?"  What,
indeed?

But escape was far too precious a thing to be risked by being undertaken
in ignorance of whatever perils might attend the attempt, so he resolved
that for the present he would not attempt to frame any plans whatever;
he felt pretty certain that, as a new acquisition, he would be closely
watched for some time to come by those who might have the more immediate
charge of him, and his first task, he told himself, must be to disarm
any suspicion which might exist in their minds as to an intention on his
part to escape.  The time necessary to the accomplishment of this might
also be profitably employed in acquiring a knowledge of Spanish, without
which he fully realised that his attempt must inevitably fail; and he
believed that, by the time he had thus paved the way for the great
attempt, his ingenuity would have proved sufficient to gain without
suspicion from his fellow-slaves a tolerably accurate idea of the perils
and difficulties with which he would have to contend.

He took the lad Tom into his confidence at once, intending, of course,
that the poor boy should, if he were willing to incur the risk, go with
him and Walford, and share with them at least the _chance_ of freedom;
and so, from the very first day of their thraldom, there were two keen,
intelligent brains incessantly at work, diligently clearing the way to
recovered liberty.  To Walford George said nothing whatever of his
purpose; the unfortunate wretch could not possibly aid them, and there
was the possibility that he _might_ unwittingly betray them.

At six o'clock next morning the great bell at the engine-house rang,
this being the signal for the slaves to turn out and get breakfast.
Half an hour was allowed for this, and at half-past six they were formed
into gangs, and marched off to the fields in charge of the overseers.

George and Walford were handed a hoe apiece, and attached to one of the
gangs detailed for work in the tobacco-fields.  The lad Tom was attached
to another gang, and he spent his first day of slave-labour among the
sugar-cane.

The tobacco was fast ripening, and was just then at one of its many
critical stages, the plants requiring individually almost as much care
and attention as a new-born child.  Each plant required that the earth
should be hoed up round its stalk with almost mathematical accuracy to a
certain height and no more; and every leaf had to be tenderly and
scrupulously examined twice or thrice daily, to guard against the
ruinous attack of the tobacco-grubs.  It was exhausting, back-breaking
labour, particularly for those unaccustomed to it, and the drivers'
whips were freely used to stimulate the sluggards or those who exhibited
any signs of a _tendency_ to shirk the work; but George soon saw--and
congratulated himself upon the circumstance--that the rule was evidently
a mild one on this particular plantation, the whip being rarely used
without provocation.  It is scarcely necessary to say that Leicester was
quite resolved to save himself from the indignity of the lash, if hard
work would do it; and he was fortunate enough to return to his hut on
that first day without the whip having once been raised against him.

Thus passed day after day, and week after week; the only variation being
that, when the tobacco was in proper condition, the fields had to be
gone through with the utmost care, and those leaves which were
sufficiently ripe were then picked, and laid in little heaps in the sun
to "sweat" and cure, this process being repeated daily until the entire
crop was gathered in.  Then followed the "cleaning" of the fields and
their preparation for another crop, and so on, upon all of which it is
unnecessary to dwell.

George and Tom devoted the whole of their brief leisure after the work
of the day was over to the cultivation of a knowledge of Spanish, being
fortunate enough, in their pursuit of this acquirement, to make the
acquaintance of a young and very intelligent negro, who had been for
many years valet to his master, but, being unlucky enough to incur that
gentleman's displeasure, had been sent in disgrace into the field-gang.
With him as a tutor their progress was rapid, and in little over six
months they were able to converse in Spanish with tolerable fluency.

When at length George found that he was fairly master of the language,
he began cautiously to touch on the subject of escape, a topic upon
which Pedro, his tutor, was luckily always ready to enlarge.  This
gentleman, regarding himself as an injured individual, was always
threatening--among his fellow-slaves, of course--to run away; and George
was once on the point of declaring to the fellow his own intention of
doing the same thing, but luckily his discretion stepped in and
prevented his committing so great an imprudence, the reflection
occurring to him just in time, that a man who _talked_ so much about the
matter was, after all, very unlikely to _act_ to any purpose.

One night, however, Pedro entered George's cabin, looking very gloomy
and sulky; and, flinging himself down on a stool, he announced that he
had called to say farewell, as he was fully determined not to submit any
longer to such base treatment.

"Why, what has happened now, Pedro?" exclaimed George, when he heard
this announcement.

"I will tell you, friend George," answered Pedro.  "You may possibly
have observed that miserable piece of insolence called Juan, who has
been promoted to the post from which I was so unjustly expelled?  Well,
this wretched ape must needs send--_send_, mind you, not come down and
himself ask, but _send_--for a man to move some furniture up at the
house there.  I have no doubt he specially named _me_, as I was ordered
to go; and I--I refused; I declined to be subjected to such an
indignity, and for this I was at once flogged.  I have been humiliated,
disgraced, dishonoured, and I am resolved not to bear it any longer; I
shall fly to-night."

"Well," said George, "I hope you will get off clear; I see no reason why
you should not."

"You do not?" exclaimed Pedro.  "Ah! my good friend, that is because you
are new to this wretched country.  Are you not aware, then, that the
master keeps quite a pack of bloodhounds for the purpose of hunting
runaway slaves, and that these bloodhounds are turned loose every night
to scour the estate?  They have been trained to watch over us and
prevent our escape.  If I should happen to encounter one to-night, I
shall be compelled to abandon the attempt; for he will follow me about,
and, should I attempt to pass the fencing, spring upon and hold me until
his baying brings the overseers to the spot.  Have you never encountered
any of these fiends of dogs?"

"Never," answered George, his heart sinking at the startling news.
"This is the first I have heard of them.  Then is it quite impossible to
walk about the estate at night without being pounced upon by a
bloodhound?"

"Oh, dear no," was the reply.  "They are so trained that they will not
molest you so long as you keep within the boundaries of the estate; but
they will watch and follow you until you return to your cabin.  And, of
course, as there is only a dozen of the dogs in all, you _may_ perchance
get away without encountering one of them.  But if you do, your
prospects of escape are still small, for you would be missed in the
morning, the dogs would at once be put upon your track, and a regular
slave-hunt would then begin.  A slave-hunt is rare sport, I promise
you--for everybody but the slave."

"Then it seems," remarked George, "that, even in the event of your
getting clear of the estate, you have very little hope of escape, after
all?"

"None," was the reply, "none whatever--unless you happen to possess a
certain secret, the secret of _hiding the scent_, so that the dogs
cannot follow your trail.  Then, indeed, you _may_ hope to escape, but
not otherwise.  _I_ am fortunate enough to possess this secret, and as
we have been good friends--you and I--I do not mind letting you into
it--provided that if you make one in the hunt to-morrow--they take
slaves to help sometimes--you will aid my escape in any way you can."

"Agreed!" exclaimed George joyously.  "In any case I would do that.
Still, the secret is a valuable one, and I should like to be made
acquainted with it."

"You shall, _amigo_," said Pedro.  And, placing his hand inside the
bosom of his shirt, he produced a handful of leaves.

"Do you see these?" he asked.

George intimated that he did.

"Take particular notice of them, so that you may recognise them again
with certainty whenever you see them," urged Pedro.  "Note their shape,
their exact colour; note their peculiar odour; and, above all, note
their taste; for there are other plants, quite worthless for the
purpose, closely resembling this one; but the _taste_ will at once tell
you when you have found the right one."

George eagerly took a quantity of the leaves in his hand, and carefully
examined them, noting that, though they varied in size, they were all of
exactly the same shape and hue; then he held them to his nostrils and
inhaled their odour until he thought he had become fully acquainted with
it.  And finally he put one in his mouth, and masticated it.  The juice
had a very peculiar flavour indeed, so peculiar that he felt sure he
should never forget it.

"And how do you use these leaves?" asked George.

"If," answered Pedro, "you have an opportunity to gather them only a few
hours before you wish to use them, so that they are perfectly fresh, all
that you have to do is to bruise and crush them, so that their juice
shall be free to escape, and then rub them well all over your feet.
This imparts the odour of the plant to the skin, and so `hides the
scent' that the dogs are quite unable to follow it.  But if the leaves
have been gathered so long that they have become dry, you must put them
in water to soak until they become soft once more; then first wash your
feet in the water, and afterwards rub them thoroughly with the leaves.
Only, in the latter case, you will require a much larger quantity of
leaves."

"Thanks, Pedro, I shall remember that," answered George.  "One more
question, and I have done.  Where is this plant to be found?"

"Ah! now you have given me a puzzle," exclaimed the black.  "The plant
is very scarce, and is growing daily more so, for the reason that the
slave-owners carefully root it up and destroy it wherever they find it.
They are fully acquainted with its peculiar properties, they know that
it has freed many a persecuted slave from the bondage of a cruel and
tyrannical master, and that, if allowed to flourish, it would free many
more; so it is carefully sought out, and ruthlessly dug up when found.
Notwithstanding which, a plant is to be found here and there by
diligently searching after it.  It grows generally in wet or marshy
ground, and in such spots you will have to seek for it, if ever you need
it.  Now, I must go; it is close upon the time for the head overseer to
go his rounds, and I want him to see me in my own cabin.  As soon as he
is once more fairly out of the way I shall be off.  Good-night--and
good-bye."

"Good-bye," answered George, grasping the negro's proffered hand;
"good-bye, and thank you for your valuable secret.  I heartily wish you
good luck; and if they get up a hunt, and take me to help, I'll do what
I can to throw them off the scent.  Which way do you go?"

"You had better know nothing about that," answered Pedro cautiously.
"All I ask is, that if you catch sight of me, or observe any sign of my
having passed, you will simply keep quiet about it.  And now, once more,
good-bye."

Ten minutes later the head overseer, going his rounds, on looking into
Pedro's cabin, found that individual apparently fast asleep on the
floor, with his back against the wall, and such an utterly fagged,
worn-out look pervading his entire personality that the man was almost
betrayed into a momentary feeling of pity for "the poor boy."

His surprise was therefore proportionally great when, on the following
morning, it became apparent that Pedro had succeeded, in spite of the
dogs, in making good his escape from the estate.

A slave-hunt was at once organised, and about nine o'clock, as George
was hard at work in the fields, he saw the hunters--some half a dozen in
number, mounted, and accompanied each by a bloodhound--pass down the
main road through the estate and out on to the open ground beyond.  Here
the party divided, half going in one direction, and half in the other,
to encircle the estate, and endeavour to pick up the trail.  They were
absent the whole day, but when they returned at about midnight, the
unfortunate Pedro was with them, handcuffed, and secured by a rope round
his neck to the saddle of one of the horsemen.  It afterwards transpired
that he had been perfectly successful, not only in evading the dogs
during his actual escape from the estate, but also in "hiding the scent"
from them; and his capture was due to the unfortunate circumstance of
his having been met by a friend of his master's who, an hour afterwards,
encountered the party in pursuit of him, and so put them upon his track.
Next morning the unhappy wretch was "made an example of," by being
flogged so severely in the presence of all the other slaves belonging to
the plantation that at first it seemed doubtful whether he would ever
recover from the effects of it; and, though he did eventually, it was
nearly three months before he was again fit for work.

This incident of Pedro's escape and its unfortunate failure was
naturally the chief topic of conversation among the slaves for a long
time afterwards, and George heard so much of the many difficulties
attending such attempts, that he often felt upon the very brink of
despair.  The obstacles were so great as to be almost insurmountable
when those who made the attempt were strong, healthy, thoroughly inured
to fatigue, and had all their faculties about them; but when it came to
not only making good one's own escape, but also that of a feeble and
weakly companion of unsettled reason, the task seemed so utterly
hopeless, so thoroughly impracticable, that it appeared almost worse
than madness to dream of undertaking it.

Yet, in spite of all this, and notwithstanding the terrible example
which had been made of the unhappy Pedro, George clung tenaciously to
the idea, and never let slip an opportunity to do anything which in ever
so slight a degree might contribute to his success when the time should
come for the effort to be made.  As time passed on, and his knowledge of
the Spanish language became perfected, his uniform industry and good
conduct procured him many little indulgences; such as a few hours of
release from field-labour now and then, in order that he might instead
be despatched, duly provided with a "pass," on some errand or message,
either to a neighbouring plantation or to Havana itself.  These little
journeys not only afforded him an opportunity--of which he made the
most--of studying the physical geography of the island, but also of
hunting for the precious plant by means of which he hoped to
successfully hide his trail; and in this latter quest he was so far
fortunate that he found at different times as many as eight of them,
five of which he successfully transplanted to a favourable spot on the
estate itself in such an out-of-the-way locality that he fervently hoped
they would escape discovery.

The next task which he set himself--and Tom--was that of propitiating
and making friends with the dogs which nightly guarded the estate; but
in this they were wholly unsuccessful; the creatures had been too well
trained, and they absolutely refused all overtures from men who wore the
detested garb of slavery.  The circumstance, however, that they were of
white instead of negro blood was a point in our adventurers' favour, and
George accidentally made the discovery that, probably in consequence of
this circumstance, when he was able by any means to conceal the uniform
he usually wore, the hounds, though still suspicious, were puzzled and
undecided how to behave towards him.

In the meantime, whilst steadily cultivating the favour of the overseers
by his unvarying industry and good conduct, he as sedulously cultivated
the good-will and friendship of his fellow-slaves; and by the exercise
of great tact and circumspection he gradually won from them, without
exciting their slightest suspicion, such a mass of valuable information
as quite decided him, when the time should come, to make his way inland
and to the southward, rather than to the northward, the latter route,
though that which would soonest enable him to reach the coast, being
chiefly, in consequence of that circumstance, by far the most perilous
one.

The next matter requiring attention, was the acquisition of arms of some
description, with which the party could defend themselves in the event
of their being pursued and overtaken.  These, by a lucky chance, he was
at length enabled to procure, in the shape of three cane-knives, weapons
closely resembling a cutlass as regards the length and curve of the
blade, but provided merely with a wooden handle, instead of the metal
guard usually fitted to the latter weapon.  The same lucky chance which
enabled him to secure these cane-knives--namely, the finding of a gold
five-dollar piece on the road during one of his excursions into Havana--
also supplied him with the means of purchasing three coarse canvas
jackets, such as were commonly worn by the Cuban coasting seamen at that
time, and with these he hoped to sufficiently disguise himself and his
companions to avoid any inconvenient questioning on the road, when the
time for the great attempt should arrive.

The auspicious moment arrived, as such moments frequently do, quite
unexpectedly, and it came about in the following manner.

When George and his comrades had been in slavery a trifle over a year, a
message reached the estate to the effect that a ship had that day
arrived from Europe, in the cargo of which there were certain household
articles that had been ordered expressly for the use of the planter's
wife, and that, as they happened to be stowed on the top, and the ship
had already begun to discharge, it was desirable that they should be
sent for at once, in order that they might escape damage.  This message
reached the estate quite late in the evening, in fact it was within half
an hour of the time for knocking off work for the night; but so
impatient was the lady to see her new possessions, that she insisted
upon their being sent for at once, and George, as the most trustworthy
slave on the plantation, was ordered to take the mule-waggon and a
couple of companions, and proceed into town forthwith to fetch them, so
that they might be at the house and all ready for unloading by the first
thing next morning.  He was instructed that, as it would probably be
very late, or rather, early next morning, before he returned, he was to
drive the waggon down to the engine-house, and place it under the shed
there for the remainder of the night, instead of driving up to the
house, so that he might not disturb the occupants by the noise of his
arrival.

Leicester at once saw that this errand would afford him probably the
best opportunity he would ever have for the attempted escape; he
therefore mentioned to the overseer that he thought Tom and Walford
would be the most handy men he could take with him as helpers, and at
once went off in an unconcerned manner, but with a well-assumed air of
imperfectly concealed dissatisfaction at the prospect of his night
journey, to harness up the mules.  On his way to the stables he sought
out Walford and the lad Tom, bidding them both be ready to go with him,
and imparting to the latter his determination to take advantage of this
opportunity to attempt their joint escape.

This done, he hurried away to the spot where he had concealed his
treasured plants, and arrived there, only to find that they were gone.
Whether they had been discovered and destroyed by the overseers, or had
been found and appropriated by some fellow-slave acquainted with their
valuable properties, it was impossible to tell; the one indisputable
fact was that the plants had vanished.

This was a most unfortunate circumstance, but George would not allow it
to dishearten him; the fugitives would have several hours' start before
the pursuit would commence, and then there was always the possibility
that other specimens of the plant might be found.

Thinking thus, he slowly wended his way to the stable, where he
harnessed up the mules, threw into the waggon a quantity of grass and
cane-leaves, together with a canvas cover and rope, supposed to be
required for packing and protecting the articles, and then drove to the
hut, where Tom and Walford awaited him.  The former, a very shrewd and
intelligent young fellow, had immediately, upon being apprised by George
of his intention, hurried off to prepare "supper," recognising the great
importance of a good substantial meal before starting, especially in
view of the uncertainty as to when they would be able to secure another;
and when George reached the hut, this meal was just ready.

The trio partook of this, their last meal in slavery, as they hoped,
with great deliberation, George being most anxious not to start until
darkness should so far have settled down upon the scene as to allow of
his smuggling the cane-knives and canvas jackets in under the grass in
the waggon without detection.

This was at length successfully managed, and, first taking a careful
look all round the hut, to see that they were leaving nothing behind
them which might possibly prove useful, they clambered into the cart,
and drove slowly off.

Night had by this time fairly set in; the stars were just beginning to
peep out from the deepening blue of the cloudless vault above them, and
the moon, in her first quarter, and hanging almost in the zenith, was
already flooding the scene with her soft silvery radiance.  It promised
to be a magnificent night for their enterprise, though excessively close
and hot; and as they turned into the main road leading into Havana, and
left the estate fairly behind them, George and the lad Tom felt their
spirits rising and their pulses bounding with joyous anticipation of a
speedy return to freedom.

Whilst harnessing the mules, Leicester had rapidly turned over in his
mind the _pros_ and _cons_ of the situation, and had come to the
conclusion that it would be necessary in the first instance to proceed
some three or four miles on the road toward Havana.  This necessity
arose from the circumstance that the planter's house stood upon a slight
eminence commanding a perfect view of the road for that distance, and as
Leicester could not possibly be sure that some one might not be idly
watching, from the verandah, the progress of the waggon as long as it
remained in view, he deemed it only common prudence to keep to the road
until he had passed completely out of the range of any such chance
watchers.  This done, he intended to turn sharp off and make the best of
his way southward, utilising the waggon and mules for as great a
distance as possible, and then abandoning them and pressing forward on
foot.  The distance which they would have to travel was not very great,
the island being, according to such information as had been available to
him, only some twelve and a half Spanish leagues, or about thirty
English miles wide at that part.  Thus, if they were fortunate in their
choice of a route, so as to be able to use the waggon for the whole
distance, they might succeed in reaching the southern shore of the
island before their escape was so much as suspected.

George explained all this to Tom as the mules trotted cheerily along the
road, and by the time that the plan of escape had been fully elucidated,
they had reached a point where they might with perfect safety branch off
and make their way to the southward.  This they did at once, branching
square off to the westward in the first instance, until they were about
a mile distant from the road, and completely hidden by the bush from the
observation of any one upon it, and then turning in a southerly
direction.  A dense belt of forest then lay before them, at a distance
of some six miles, with a lofty hill-top rising behind it, and toward
this latter object George now headed the mules as straight as the
scattered clumps of bush would permit.

The soil was very light and sandy, but it was covered with a thick
growth of grass, which prevented the mules' feet or the waggon-wheels
from sinking, so that the travelling was nearly, if not quite as rapid
as it had been along the road.  A sharp lookout was maintained for signs
indicative of their approach to the neighbourhood of plantations, and
two or three bridle-paths, evidently leading to such, were crossed; but
at length they reached the welcome skirts of the forest without having
had the least cause to suppose that they had been observed.

In the meantime, however, a heavy bank of thundercloud had been observed
rapidly gathering on the southern horizon, and the runaways had scarcely
plunged a mile into the forest before the heavens were obscured, and it
at once became so pitch-dark that it was utterly impossible for them to
proceed.  The mules were consequently pulled up, and the three
adventurers made what few preparations were possible for their
protection from the coming storm.

Soon the low threatening rumble of the thunder was heard, and then, as
it rapidly increased in volume of sound, bright flashes of light were
seen blazing out beyond the interweaving branches of the trees.  The
storm, as in all tropical countries, quickly gathered force and
intensity, and very soon it was raging in all its fury above and around
them.  The loud reverberating roll of the thunder was incessant, the
lightning flashed with ever-increasing rapidity, and at last the entire
atmosphere seemed to be in one continued tremulous glare of unearthly
light.

The mules started and quivered, as the lightning-flashes grew more rapid
and intense; and finally they became so terrified that George had as
much as he could do to restrain them from bolting, and so dashing
themselves, the waggon, and its occupants to pieces against the trees.

The storm was at its fiercest when suddenly the party found themselves
enveloped in a blinding blaze of greenish-blue light; simultaneously
there came a terrific rattling crash, as though the universe had burst
asunder; the occupants of the waggon--blinded, and deafened by the
dazzling brilliancy of the flash and the tremendous report which
accompanied it--felt themselves hurled violently to the earth, and then
followed oblivion.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

THE PURSUIT.

When George Leicester at last awoke from his stupor, and had
sufficiently recovered his scattered senses to remember where he was,
the strength and fury of the storm had passed, the lightning-flashes
being much less vivid, and coming at considerably longer intervals.  But
the rain was descending in a perfect deluge, and, notwithstanding the
shelter of the thick overhanging foliage, the ground was already so
completely flooded that George at first thought he was lying in the bed
of some shallow watercourse.  He staggered to his feet, chill and
dripping wet, and, taking advantage of the intermittent light afforded
by the lightning, looked around him to ascertain, if possible, what had
actually happened; and he then saw that an immense tree close by had
been shivered from top to bottom by the lightning, and, falling across
their path, had killed both mules, and completely wrecked the waggon.

His own escape and that of his companions, if indeed they _had_ escaped,
had been simply miraculous, a huge branch having struck the waggon only
about one foot behind the seat upon which they had been sitting.  The
ground was littered with splinters, and encumbered with the spreading
branches of the fallen tree, and among these he proceeded to search for
Tom and Walford.

A low moaning sound some short distance on his right told him that in
that direction he would probably find one of the missing, and, groping
his way cautiously to the spot, he found the unfortunate Walford lying
on his back, with the water surging round him like a mill-race, and a
large branch of the fallen tree lying across his breast and pinning him
down.  By exerting his whole strength, George managed to bear up the
branch sufficiently for Walford to work his way from underneath it, and
then he helped the poor wretch to his feet, inquiring at the same time
if he had received any serious hurt.  Unfortunately one of the apathetic
fits which occasionally seized Walford had come upon him, and George was
quite unable to gain anything like an intelligible answer from him; but
he was scarcely able to stand, and his continued moaning and the
constant pressure of his hands upon his breast showed that he was
evidently suffering great pain.

Seating the unfortunate man at the foot of a tree, where he would be
beyond the reach of the water, and making him as comfortable as was
possible, George then went in search of the lad Tom, whom he found
standing bewildered over the wreck of the waggon, with a thin stream of
blood slowly trickling down his face from a scalp-wound, probably
inflicted by a blow from one of the branches of the tree as it fell.

"Ha!  Tom, is that you?" exclaimed George joyously.  "I was just coming
to look for you.  How have you fared in the general smash?"

"Is that you, cap'n?" answered Tom.  "Well, I'm very glad to find you've
turned up all right.  It _has_ been a smash, and no mistake; a total
wreck, and no insurance, I'll be bound.  Well, it's unfort'nate; but it
can't be helped; it might ha' been much worse.  I got a whack on the
skull that knocked the senses out of me for a while, but I don't feel
very much the worse for it a'ter all.  Where's poor Mr Walford, sir?
What's become of him?"

"He is close by," answered George; "but a big branch fell across his
chest, and I am afraid he is very much hurt."

"Let's have a look at him," said Tom.  And the two men groped and
stumbled their way without more ado to the place where Walford was still
seated, with his back resting against the giant bole of the tree.

A few trials were sufficient to establish the fact that the poor fellow
was practically helpless, for the time at least; and it then became a
question of what it would be best to do under the circumstances.  The
first idea was that George and Tom should each take an arm of the
injured man over their shoulders, and so assist him along; but he moved
with such great difficulty that it was soon apparent some other plan
would have to be adopted.

"I have it!" exclaimed George, as a bright idea struck him; and hurrying
away to the waggon, he secured the canvas and rope which had been thrown
into it, together with the cane-knives, canvas jackets, and other
trifling belongings, and hurried back to the tree.

"Now, Tom," he said, "look about you, my lad, and see if you can find a
nice light handy branch, tolerably straight, and about ten feet long,
and bring it here as quickly as you can."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered Tom, starting off on his errand at once.

Whilst he was gone, George spread out the canvas upon the ground, and,
with the aid of a pocket-knife, which he had seen lying about in the
stable that evening, and had taken the liberty of appropriating,
proceeded to roughly shape a hammock out of the material, leaving enough
canvas at each end to form, with the rope, an eye, through which to pass
the branch from which he intended it to be slung.

He had hardly finished his preparations when Tom reappeared with the
waggon-pole, which he had found fortunately unbroken.

"Will this do, sir?" asked Tom.

"The very thing," was George's delighted reply.  "Now, Walford," he
continued, "lie down on that canvas, old fellow, and we'll soon have you
slung comfortably in your hammock between us, where you will travel
without much pain to your poor chest.  That's it; now, Tom, pass the end
of the pole through this eye; capital! now through the other; that's
your sort!  Now I'll take the fore end of the pole and you the after
end; lift handsomely; have you got your end on your shoulder?  Then off
we go.  We have not such a very great distance to travel--only some
twenty miles or so--but we must get over the ground as quickly as
possible; for when once nine o'clock to-morrow morning has passed, we
may make certain that they'll be after us; so we must reach the coast by
that time, or soon after it, if we wish to get clear off."

And in this manner, with Walford slung in his impromptu hammock between
them, George and Tom set off upon the wearisome journey which lay before
them, and which, they fondly hoped, was to end in the absolute recovery
of their liberty.

_Tramp, tramp; splash, splash_; on they trudged,--stumbling over the
roots of trees, tripping over the long, tough, straggling creepers which
crossed their path, sometimes brought-up "all standing" and
half-strangled by the cord-like _llianas_ which hung festooned from tree
to tree, their naked feet and legs torn by thorns and stabbed by the
spines of the wild cactus--in thick impenetrable darkness for a couple
of hours, and then the clouds suddenly vanished away on the wings of the
land-breeze, the stars reappeared, the soft silvery rays of the moon
streamed down once more through the gaps in the foliage, and the weary
fugitives flung themselves down upon the sodden ground for a short
breathing-space.

George was of opinion that, from the time they had been tramping through
the forest, they ought to have very nearly reached its southern skirts;
but as far as the eye could penetrate, in the uncertain moonlight,
through the sylvan vistas, there was no sign of break or opening of any
kind; nothing but an apparently endless succession of trees and dense
undergrowth.  Seeing this, Leicester began to feel uneasy.  He knew that
they had been travelling through the timber in anything but a straight
line--indeed, to do so would have been simply a physical impossibility--
and he began to fear that, in spite of all his efforts to avoid such a
misfortune, they had been journeying along the arc of a circle, instead
of progressing steadily in a southerly direction.

The wanderers were beginning to feel thoroughly fatigued, what with
their day's work in the fields, their exposure during the storm, and
their painful tramp afterwards; but George felt that, fatigued or not,
they must push on; liberty _must_ be secured first; when that was won,
they could afford time to rest, but not until then.

The first thing to be done, however, was to get a definite idea of
whereabouts they were; it was obviously useless to continue plodding on,
they knew not whither; besides, it was frightfully fatiguing and painful
work, this marching through the forest, and George felt that it would be
a positive advantage even to deviate somewhat from their direct course,
if by so doing they could earlier gain the open ground once more.  So,
looking around him, he picked out the most lofty tree he could find,
and, leaving Tom to keep watch by Walford's side, nimbly scrambled up
its trunk, and was soon among its topmost branches.

A single glance around sufficed to show him that his suspicions were
correct; they were only about half a mile from the _northern_ edge of
the timber; and, consequently, rather worse off than if they had never
left the wrecked waggon at all.  And, worse still, George found that,
after all their travelling, they were little more than three miles from
the estate, the whole of which was distinctly visible from his lofty
stand-point.  This was rather discouraging, but there was no help for
it; he now knew exactly where they were, and how much greater than even
he had imagined was the necessity for immediate action; so he turned his
glances in a southerly direction, and sought to discover the most direct
road out of their unpleasant predicament.  Here he met with an ample
reward for his trouble in climbing the tree, for he saw that, if they
pursued their way due south--as they could now do, directing their
course by the moon--they would have to travel through at least seven
miles of forest; whilst by heading in a south-westerly direction,
keeping the moon a little on their left hand, they would only have to
traverse some two miles of forest, after which there seemed to be
tolerably open ground as far as the eye could reach.  About three miles
East-South-East of him he detected the gleaming white walls of a number
of buildings, which he judged to be a portion of the town of Santiago;
beyond it rose a curiously-shaped, double-coned mountain; away on his
right lay the table-land of Mariel; and--joyous sight--through a break
in the rising ground to the southward he caught a glimpse of the sea,
with, far away on the utmost verge of the horizon, an appearance of
land, which he conjectured must be the Isle of Pines.  Noting all these
matters carefully, and making a rough mental sketch of "the lay of the
land," George rapidly descended to where he had left Tom and Walford,
and rapidly detailed to the former the result of his observations.

"We must be off at once," he explained, "for we have no time to spare;
we have lost nearly three good hours blundering about here blindly in
this wood; it must be now nearly or quite midnight; and, if so, it
leaves us only ten hours at most to reach the sea, if we are to do so
without being overtaken."

Accordingly, weary and stiff as they were, they again shouldered the
pole from which Walford in his hammock was slung, and once more set out
upon their journey, which, now that they were favoured by the light of
the moon, they hoped would be of a somewhat more prosperous character
than it had hitherto been.

Another painful and toilsome tramp of a couple of hours and they
emerged, to their unbounded joy, from the southern side of the forest on
to comparatively open ground.  Trees and dense straggling clumps of bush
were still abundant enough--far too much so, in fact--but there were
wide patches of grass-land between, over which their progress was
tolerably rapid.  Once clear of the thick timber, George again shaped
his course due south, intending to pass through the break in the rising
ground which he had seen from his lofty lookout; but somehow they missed
it, and this involved a great deal of toilsome climbing.  At length they
plunged once more into a belt of timber which stretched, seemingly for
miles, across their path; and here exhausted nature gave out; Tom
declared his utter inability to walk another yard, George felt scarcely
better than his companion, and so, notwithstanding the terrible loss of
precious time which it involved, they selected the first suitable spot
they could find, and flinging themselves upon the ground, one on each
side of Walford, gave themselves up to the sweetest sleep which had ever
sealed their eyelids.

George was the first of the trio to awaken, and when he did so, he
found, to his dismay, that the sun was already several hours high in the
heavens.  He immediately aroused the lad Tom, and, greatly refreshed by
their sleep, the pair once more shouldered poor helpless Walford and his
hammock, and resumed their flight.  They were as hungry as healthy men
usually are after great exertion and a fast of several hours' duration,
but they had not a particle of food with them, so they were compelled to
subsist for the present upon hope, the hope that ere long they would
meet with something more substantial.  They felt no particular anxiety
upon this score, as George knew that wild fruits of several kinds were
tolerably plentiful on the island, and about half an hour after they had
started they were fortunate enough to fall in with a wild plantain, the
fruit of which was just in the right condition for eating.  No time was
lost in securing a goodly bunch of this very nutritious fruit, upon
which they feasted, as they went along, until their appetites were
completely satisfied.

After trudging manfully along for about a couple of hours, they found
themselves upon the crest of a range of low hills, from which they
caught, through a break in the scrub, a glimpse of the sea, sparkling
invitingly under the noonday sun.  They also caught a glimpse of
something, by no means so pleasant--namely, a town of considerable
dimensions immediately before them and only about two miles distant.

To avoid this they were compelled to make a wide detour, and much
valuable time was lost in this way and in reconnoitring; for they knew
there would be several plantations in immediate proximity to so
important a place, and through these they would have, as it were, to run
the gauntlet.  And, notwithstanding all their caution, they failed to
effect their passage entirely unobserved through this dangerous
district; it unfortunately happening that, just as they emerged from the
bush, and were about to cross a high-road, which they had been watching
for nearly half an hour, a vehicle appeared in sight, suddenly wheeling
into the road close to them from a bush-path which they had failed to
observe.  This vehicle was occupied by two persons, a white man and a
negro driver; and as it was utterly impossible to avoid the observation
of these two persons, George told Tom, in a few low hasty words, to
continue moving, to carefully conceal all appearance of chagrin, and to
leave him to answer any questions which might be put to them.  As the
vehicle approached the fugitives, its owner signed to his driver to pull
up, but he immediately changed his mind and passed on, contenting
himself with a careful and prolonged scrutiny of the travellers.  This
disagreeable incident caused George and his companion to push on with
renewed vigour, and it was with sincerely thankful hearts that they at
last plunged into a shallow ravine, which promised to lead them directly
down to the sea, then not more, in Leicester's opinion, than some four
or five miles distant.

The sun was by this time sinking low in the heavens and the travellers,
unutterably weary as they were, pressed eagerly forward, hoping to reach
the coast before nightfall, and to discover a craft of some kind which
they could appropriate, and in which, later on, when the night was well
advanced, and they could hope to do so unobserved, they might venture to
put to sea.  This was the only effectual method of escape which George
could devise--to put to sea upon the chance of being picked up by some
passing vessel.  He knew that, when once the fact of their escape became
established, the news would travel faster than they possibly could; the
whole country for many miles round, would be apprised of their number
and appearance, and recapture would be certain.  To get afloat,
therefore, as speedily as possible was their first object; after that
they must trust to chance--or Providence, rather--for their ultimate
rescue.

As they advanced along the ravine, it grew deeper, whilst its sides
became steeper and more rugged, until at last the place assumed quite
the appearance of a mountain-gorge or defile, with rocky, precipitous
sides, to which a few scattered shrubs clung here and there.  At length,
in the deep silence of the breathless evening, the thrice welcome sound
of the sea breaking upon the shore came faintly to their ears.  It was
the merest, faintest murmur, it is true, but their experienced ears told
them in a moment what it was; they were within the sound of the sea, and
in a few short hours at most, please God, they would be safe from
pursuit.

A bend in the defile was before them, about a quarter of a mile distant,
and toward this they eagerly pressed believing that when they had passed
it they would find themselves face to face with the sea.  In their
eagerness they broke into a run, notwithstanding their terrible state of
fatigue, and soon rounded the bend--to find themselves in a
_cul-de-sac_, with a perpendicular wall of cliff in front of them nearly
two hundred feet high.  With a groan of bitter anguish and
disappointment they deposited Walford in his hammock on the ground, and
turned to ask each other what should be done in the face of this new
difficulty.  As they did so, the deep bay of a dog smote upon their ears
from the higher end of the ravine.  The sound was instantly repeated
again and again, in a slightly different key, proving that the cries
were uttered not by one, but by several animals.

"The dogs!  _The dogs_!" exclaimed Tom.  "They are after us, by Jove;
and here we are, caught like rats in a trap."

George glanced eagerly about him, up and down the ravine.  To go back
was simply to throw themselves into the arms of their pursuers, for that
they _were_ pursued he did not for an instant doubt; to hide, even if a
hiding-place could be found, was impossible, with those keen-scented
brutes upon their tracks; and to remain where they were was to await
inevitable capture.  Could they go _forward_?  That meant scaling that
terrible wall of rock.  As George glanced despairingly up the lofty
perpendicular cliff, he thought that an active man, unencumbered,
_might_ possibly accomplish the feat; at all events, were he so
circumstanced, he would try it.  And what he could do, he knew the lad
Tom could do also; but there was Walford, unable to walk, much less to
scale that awful precipice.  As he stood thus, the baying of the dogs
again came floating down the ravine; and how much nearer and clearer
were now the sounds!  The brutes must be coming down after them at a
run, as of course they easily could upon a red-hot scent.  The sounds
decided George to make one more desperate effort for freedom.

"Look here, Tom," said he; "after coming thus far, we must not be taken
for want of a little extra effort.  If we _are_, you may be sure we
shall never be allowed to make a second attempt.  Now our only chance is
to scale that cliff; we _must_ do it, and we _can_ do it, if we only go
resolutely to work.  It will be difficult, fatiguing, and awfully
dangerous, for we must take poor Walford with us; but _liberty_ awaits
us at the top; the sea is not half a mile off, I know, by the sound of
it; and we can reach it before those fellows can ride round to intercept
us; so let us set to with a will, my lad, and we shall scrape clear yet,
you take my word for it.  Now out with your cane-knife, and cut away at
the grass; we must well pad poor Walford all round with it, so that he
may not be hurt by bumping against those rocks; then we'll lash him hard
and fast in the canvas, lash ourselves one to each end of him, and away
aloft we go."



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

ON THE FACE OF THE PRECIPICE.

The cane-knives were speedily at work; the grass was long and abundant,
and as the two men were working for liberty--nay, probably for life
itself--they were not long in cutting a sufficient quantity for their
purpose.  Walford was then lifted carefully out upon the ground, the
grass was thickly and evenly distributed over the inner side of the
hammock, and then the invalid was again deposited within it, and
securely lashed up, his head only being left free.  This done, two
lanyards were securely attached to the extempore hammock, one at its
head, and the other at its foot.

"Well done; that's capital!" exclaimed George, as the last turn was
taken, making all secure.  "Now slip the bight over your--ah! here come
the dogs, by all that's unfortunate.  We must defend ourselves with the
cane-knives.  I'll tackle the first one, you take the next, and--mind--
we have no time to waste; luckily there are only three of the brutes as
yet; we must kill them, and be up out of reach before the others or
their masters arrive.  Keep steady, Tom, my lad, and strike so that one
blow shall be sufficient.  Now then--come on, you devils!"

As George finished speaking, the dogs--three superb specimens of the
Cuban bloodhound--dashed up to within about ten feet of the fugitives,
and there stopped, not attacking them, as they had expected, but merely
baying loudly.

"This will not do," exclaimed George; "if we turn our backs upon them
for a single instant, they will seize us; and we cannot afford the time
to stand looking at them.  I will take the dark one, you attack the
light fellow, and mind what you are about, for they are as strong and
active as tigers.  _Now_!"

At the word both men sprang forward with uplifted cane-knives, and made
a slash at the dogs.  The creatures tried to dodge the blows, and one of
them--the one attacked by Tom--succeeded.  George, however, was more
fortunate; he made a feint, and as the dog sprang aside, he followed him
up, recovering his weapon smartly at the same time, and bringing it down
in another second on the creature's head with such strength and effect
that the skull was cloven open, and the poor brute, with a yell of
agony, rolled over dead.  Tom, meanwhile, was battling ineffectually
with the dog he had attacked, and George turned just in time to see the
hound spring savagely at the lad's throat, and hurl him to the ground.
With a single bound Leicester reached Tom's side, and raising the
cane-knife above his head, and grasping the handle with both hands, he
brought it down with all his strength across the dog's neck, taking care
to avoid the thick leather collar which protected it.  The blow clove
through skin and bone, dividing the spine and nearly severing the head
from the body; but even then it was difficult to free poor Tom from the
iron jaws which had seized him.  With a vigorous wrench, however, this
was effected, and George then dragged the lad to his feet.

"Are you hurt?" panted Leicester.

"No," gasped Tom.  "The beast only seized me by the collar of my jacket,
and--"

"Then come on at once," interrupted George; "the third dog has turned
tail, like a craven, luckily for us.  Now slip the bight of the lanyard
over your neck, and follow me.  Leave the cane-knives; they will only
encumber us, and perhaps throw us down the face of the precipice.  Now,
look out, I'm going to start."

As George spoke, he approached the face of the precipice, and, taking
advantage of whatever projections he could find, began the task of
scaling it, Tom following behind, and Walford slung in his make-shift
hammock between the two.

They worked desperately, these two men, knowing how much depended upon
the next few minutes, and an onlooker would have been astounded at the
progress they made, encumbered as they were with the weight and bulk of
their helpless companion.

In one minute from the time of starting they had gained a height of
forty feet, and then the sudden trampling of horses' hoofs, and the loud
shouts of their pursuers told them that the latter had rounded the bend,
and that they were seen.

In a few seconds the sounds ceased at the foot of the cliff, and in
another instant the voice of the head overseer was heard shouting to
them--

"Hola there!  Giorgio--you miscreant--come down, or I will fire!"

"Keep steady, Tom," gasped George.  "Let them fire; the chances are ten
to one that they will miss us.  Do you feel nervous, lad?"

"Not I," answered Tom; "never felt steadier in my life, cap'n.  This
rope _is_ cutting into my shoulders awful bad, though."

"So it is into mine," returned George; "but we must grin and bear it
now, until we get to the top.  And--whatever you do--look up, boy; if
you look down, you'll grow dizzy, and, likely enough, slip; then down we
must all inevitably go."

"Are you coming down, you rascals?" shouted the overseer.

"It don't look much like it, I reckon, senhor," chuckled Tom to himself,
hoisting himself over the edge of a good broad ledge of rock as he
spoke, a ledge some ten feet in width.

"Now!" exclaimed Leicester, as he helped the lad up, "we'll rest here a
minute or two, and recover our breath.  They may blaze away at us as
long as they like now; we're as safe from their bullets as if they were
a dozen miles away."

The overseer and his companions, however, seemed to think differently,
for the fugitives had scarcely settled themselves comfortably, when a
regular fusillade was opened upon them; but, as George and Tom were
completely sheltered by the projecting ledge, none of the shot came near
them.

They were now about half-way up the cliff, and from this position an
excellent view presented itself for some distance up the ravine which
they had just left; but both George and Tom, now that they were sitting
quietly down, and had leisure to think about it, felt the sense of empty
space immediately before them, and of the sheer precipice which they
knew lay beyond that narrow ledge, to be exceedingly trying to the
nerves.

Presently the clatter of horses' hoofs came ringing upward to them from
the bottom of the ravine, and, peering cautiously over the edge of the
rock, George saw that the party of man-hunters, accompanied by four
bloodhounds, had started off at a gallop on their way back to the
entrance of the _cul-de-sac_.  He at once guessed that their intention
was to ride round over the hills, and endeavour to pick up the trail
again at the top of the cliff.

The act of looking downward from so great an elevation, and the sight of
the sheer precipice, on the very edge of which he was hanging, with
absolutely nothing to prevent him from falling over and going whirling
headlong down to the bottom, produced in George a sudden attack of
vertigo.  The whole landscape appeared to rock to and fro; the ledge
upon which he was standing seemed to sway suddenly forward over the
abyss and threaten to launch him into space; he felt himself wavering
upon the very brink, and an almost uncontrollable impulse seized him to
spring off and take that terrible downward flight.  Another glance
downward, and the impulse became irresistible.  He drew back a step,
braced himself for the terrible leap, flung his arms above his head,
and, uttering a piercing cry, was in the very act of launching himself
forward over the edge, when Tom, happening to glance at him, and to
detect his suicidal determination just in time, sprang up, and, with a
cry of amazement and horror, dragged him forcibly back against the wall
of rock behind.

"Why, cap'n!" exclaimed the lad, as soon as he had sufficiently
recovered from his astonishment to speak,--"why, cap'n, whatever's the
matter with yer?  What was you goin' to do?"

For the moment poor George was too unnerved to speak.  The instant that
he was dragged back from the ledge, the horrible fascination lost its
hold upon him; he suddenly realised in its fullest extent the frightful
peril from which he had been so providentially snatched, and, covering
his face with his hands, as the revulsion of feeling came upon him, he
shook and quivered like an aspen-leaf.  A minute or two more and this
dreadful feeling also passed away, his calmness and self-possession
returned to him, and, placing himself upon his knees, there on that
narrow ledge of rock he humbly returned his hearty thanks to God for his
preservation, and prayed for help and deliverance for himself and his
companions in their present sore need.  Then, turning to Tom, he said--

"Thank you, Tom; you have saved my life as surely as ever man's life has
been saved by a fellow-creature in this world.  I was in the very act of
springing off the rock when you dragged me back, and, but for you, my
body would at this moment be lying mangled and lifeless a hundred feet
below.  I do not know how it was, but when I looked down over the edge,
I turned giddy and sick all in a moment, and then I felt that I _must_
fling myself down the precipice.  Let this be a warning to us both, my
lad; for it shows that, steady as are our heads aloft at sea, they are
not to be too much depended upon when climbing precipices on shore.
But, come! it is high time that we should be moving again; those fellows
are half-way to the head of the valley by this time, and if we are not
smart, they will have us yet.  Do you feel sufficiently rested to tackle
the other half of this cliff?"

"Ay, ay, cap'n, I'm ready," answered Tom; "but, for the Lord's sake,
sir, and for all our sakes, don't you go for to look down and get
tempted to jump off again.  Perhaps I mightn't be able to stop you next
time, you know."

"All right, Tom, never fear," answered George; "I'll take care not to
run such an awful risk again, you may be sure.  Now are you ready?  Then
take your end of this poor fellow, and let us be moving."

But, now that they were ready to resume their ascent, another terrible
difficulty presented itself.  On looking upward for a projection by
which to raise himself, Leicester for the first time became aware that
the ledge on which they stood marked a change of strata.  Below them it
was all hard rock; above the ledge he could see nothing but a vertical
unbroken face, some twenty feet in height, of soft crumbling sandstone,
so soft indeed that it scarcely merited the name of stone at all, but
might be more fitly described as solidly compressed red sandy soil, of
such slight tenacity that it was possible to scrape it away with the
naked finger.  To climb this smooth crumbling face, even with the aid of
a ladder, George at once saw would have been utterly impossible; for,
though it has been spoken of as vertical, it was not strictly so; it
inclined slightly forward, so as actually to overhang them, and a ladder
would therefore not have stood against the face; how, then, could they
hope, encumbered as they were, to surmount it?  The task was an obvious
impossibility, and George saw that it would be necessary to seek for a
practicable place elsewhere.

Accordingly Walford was once more laid upon the rock, with Tom to watch
him and guard against any possible mishap, whilst George went off upon
an exploring expedition.

He first tried to the left, passing along the ledge very cautiously,
with his face turned to the wall, so that he might not again be exposed
to the terrible temptation from which he had so recently escaped.  At
first he had great hopes of success, the ledge beginning to slope upward
as he passed along it to the eastward; but when he had traversed some
fifty yards or so, it suddenly narrowed away to nothing under a
projecting angle of the superimposed sandstone, and in endeavouring to
get a glimpse round this angle, the soft material crumbled in George's
grasp, he lost his hold, staggered, reeled, struggled ineffectually to
recover his balance, and fell.  For a single instant he gave himself up
as lost, and suffered in anticipation all the agonies of a frightful
death; but he had not fallen more than six feet, when his outstretched
hand encountered a long, stout, flexible twig, or rather a young tree,
shooting out from an interstice in the rocks.  He grasped it with the
iron grip of a drowning man, grasped it with both hands, and, though it
bent double with his weight, it held out bravely, and enabled him to
regain his footing on the face of the precipice.  In another moment he
had scrambled once more on to the ledge, where he lay panting,
breathless, with torn and bleeding hands, but safe.

The appalling peril from which he had thus a second time so narrowly
escaped, inflicted a terrible shock on George's nerves, and it was some
time before he could find courage to once more raise his head and look
about him.  The reflection, however, that two men, one of them utterly
helpless, were in the same perilous situation as himself--having indeed
been brought directly into it by him--helped him to once more recover
the command of his nerves, and, somewhat ashamed of their unexpected
weakness, he scrambled to his feet and set out to explore in the
opposite direction.

By the time that he had once more reached the point where Tom sat
patiently awaiting him, the dusk was closing down upon the landscape
with all the rapidity peculiar to the tropics, and, shrouded as they
were in the deep shadow of the precipice, it was already difficult for
them to see each other clearly.  This meant still another danger added
to those which already confronted them, and George felt that, unless a
way of escape could quickly be found, they would be compelled to remain
where they were all night, a prospect which involved so many horrible
contingencies that he dared not allow his mind to dwell upon it, but,
turning his attention strictly to the matter in hand, hurried away on
his quest to the westward.

In this direction he was more successful, the ledge, at a distance of
some thirty yards, running into a steep earthy slope, some ten or a
dozen yards in height, above which the precipice again rose sheer to the
top.  And, as far as he could see in the quick-gathering darkness, this
precipice again presented a rocky face, up the inequalities of which it
might be possible for them to climb.

But a single glance was enough to assure George that the most perilous
portion of their journey still lay before them.  In the first place, the
slope was frightfully steep, rising at an angle of fully fifty degrees
from the horizontal; and, in the next place, it was covered with a long
thick growth of grass, rendering its face almost as slippery as ice.
And its lower edge terminated abruptly in a vertical overhanging face,
similar to that which towered above the place where he had left Tom and
Walford, so that, should either of them slip in traversing this
dangerous part of their journey, they must all, lashed together as they
were, inevitably slide and roll helplessly down and over the edge into
the depths below.

As George contemplated the fearful dangers attending their further
progress, the idea occurred to him that perhaps, after all, now that
their pursuers had gone, and the ground was left clear below, it would
be better to retrace their steps and endeavour to find another and more
practicable way out of the ravine.

But a few seconds' consideration of this plan convinced Leicester of its
utter impracticability.  They had, by superhuman exertions, succeeded in
climbing _up_ the precipice; but he knew that they could never get
Walford safely _down_ again.  There was nothing for it, then, but to go
on, and _upward_, even though they should find their pursuers awaiting
them at the top, a contingency which so much lost time rendered only too
probable.

Before going back, however, and attempting the passage up that awful
slope, encumbered with Walford's helpless body, George thought it would
be prudent to essay the passage alone, so that he might learn, from
actual experience, the full extent of the danger, and thus be the better
able to guard against disaster.

Accordingly down he went upon hands and knees, and forthwith began the
ascent.  His first attempt proved to him that he had in no wise
magnified the perils of the journey, for his knees slipped helplessly
from under him the moment that they touched the grass, and it was only
by clinging desperately with his hands to the long tough herbage that he
escaped being shot down to the bottom and over the edge.

Returning once more to the friendly ledge, which, after the dangers he
had so recently passed through, seemed to afford a position of absolute
safety, George began to cast about in his mind for some means of
overcoming this new difficulty, and at last he hit upon the idea of
making a narrow pathway up the slope by pulling up the grass by the
roots.  This, however, he soon found would be a work of considerable
time; but he also discovered that it would be possible, without any
great difficulty, to remove small patches of just sufficient size to
give a precarious, but comparatively secure, foothold, and this he at
once proceeded to do.

Half an hour of arduous labour in this direction enabled him to safely
reach the top of the slope, where, to his great gratification, he
discovered another platform of rock, about six feet wide.  Passing along
this, he came suddenly upon an irregular fissure in the rocky face of
the precipice.  This fissure was about four feet wide at the bottom, the
walls sloping inwards, like a roof, until they met at a height of seven
or eight feet from the ground.  George at once unhesitatingly entered
the opening, and found that it widened somewhat as it receded from the
face of the rock, until at a distance of some five and twenty feet
inwards it abruptly terminated in a small, cave-like aperture, some six
feet in height, and perhaps twelve in diameter, being, as nearly as he
could ascertain, by the sense of touch only, roughly of a circular form.

George was inexpressibly thankful that he had been guided to this place
of refuge, for here, he resolved, the party should pass the night, as
they easily could, with the most perfect safety.  It was by this time
far too dark to attempt the awful risk of a passage up the precipice,
and he felt sure that, even could they succeed in safely reaching the
top, their pursuers would be found there, awaiting them.  But this
cavernous fissure afforded them the very shelter they required; its
existence was, in all probability, absolutely a secret; and, even were
it not so, it was inaccessible to all but those who chose to risk their
necks in an effort to reach it; and, lastly, they could seek in it the
rest they so absolutely needed, without the haunting fear of rolling
over the precipice in their sleep.

Thinking thus, Leicester rapidly, but cautiously, made his way back to
Tom, whom he found in a state of the greatest mental perturbation, owing
to his prolonged absence.

Hastily describing to the lad the fortunate discovery which he had made,
George made what few preparations were required for the short but
dangerous journey before them, and then the two resumed their load, and
with cautious steps wended their way along the ledge to the treacherous
slope, it was by this time as dark as it would be throughout the night;
but this circumstance rather lessened than increased their peril, for it
prevented their realising as fully as in broad daylight the giddy height
of the narrow path along which they were travelling; whilst the
brilliant light from the stars overhead was sufficient to enable them to
pick their steps, and find the bare patches in the grass, in which it
was so imperatively necessary for them to plant their footsteps.  At
last, after nearly a quarter of an hour's arduous labour, and several
narrow escapes from a disastrous accident, the welcome shelter of the
cave-like fissure was reached, and, feeling their way cautiously into
it, they laid Walford down, released him from his uncomfortable bonds,
and hungry, thirsty, and utterly fagged out as they were with the
arduous labours of the day, threw themselves down beside him, and, with
a half-unconscious thanksgiving for their preservation trembling upon
their lips, fell at once into a profound slumber.

Their sleep lasted until late on in the following day, the sun being
already low in the heavens when George was awakened by Walford with a
querulous demand for food and drink.  He at once rose, and, proceeding
to the mouth of the fissure, effected a cautious reconnaissance, the
result of which was the establishment of the satisfactory circumstance
that no one was visible in the ravine below.  The next point to be
ascertained was, whether his pursuers--any or all of them--were still
maintaining a watch for them on the cliff above.  George had not the
slightest doubt but that, when he saw them riding up the valley on the
previous evening, they had resolved to ride round and intercept the
fugitives, or pick up their trail at the cliff-top, if possible; the
question to be settled was, whether, having failed in both these
objects, they would establish a watch upon that part of the cliff at
which the fugitives might be expected to make their appearance; or
whether, believing that pursuit had been baffled, and an escape
effected, they would return discomfited to the estate.  Leicester was of
opinion that, failing to detect any sign of the fugitives, and the dogs
being unable to pick up the scent, a suspicion might occur to the minds
of the pursuers that their prey was still lurking in some precarious
resting-place on the face of the precipice, and, in that case, no doubt
a strict watch would be maintained for some hours; but as to how long it
would be before the patience of the watchers became exhausted, or before
the conviction should thrust itself upon them that the fugitives had
escaped, he could of course form no opinion.  But, having thus far
evaded capture, he thought it would be only prudent to make sure that
the coast was clear before proceeding further in the prosecution of
their flight.

Having come to this conclusion, he returned to the inner recesses of the
cave, acquainted Tom with his intention to make a trip of exploration as
far, if necessary, as the top of the cliff, and forthwith set out upon
his mission.

George's first act, on issuing from the fissure, was to cast a look
aloft, in order that he might judge of the nature of the task still
before them.  The sight was anything but encouraging, the task of
climbing that vertical face--perfectly smooth, to all intents and
purposes, the projections and inequalities being so slight as to be
barely distinguishable beyond a height of twenty or five-and-twenty
feet--seeming to him, even after his recent experience of
cliff-climbing, a sheer impossibility.  To climb it, even unencumbered
as he then was, was a task not to be lightly entered upon, and he
determined that, before attempting it, he would seek further, and
endeavour to discover a somewhat less difficult path to the summit.

With this object in view, he continued his way along the rocky platform
upon which he was then standing, until he rounded a sharp angle, where
it abruptly came to an end, and gave place to a rough, jagged, and
broken face, very similar to that which they had ascended on the
previous evening.  Casting his eye over and up this uneven face, in an
effort to pick out the most suitable path, his gaze was arrested by the
sight of a bush growing out of the face of the rock.  The bush was only
some ten feet distant, and he was therefore close enough to it, not only
to see that it was evidently a species of wild raspberry, but also to
discern the very welcome circumstance that it was literally bending
beneath its weight of ripe fruit.  He was not long in making his way to
the spot where it stood, and then, removing his jacket, and knotting the
sleeves round his neck, he, with a seaman's readiness of invention,
converted it into a sort of bag, which he rapidly filled to its utmost
capacity with the cool, ripe, refreshing juicy fruit.  With this he
hurried back to the inmates of the cave, and, laying it before them,
bade them eat freely, returning himself to the bush, since it lay
exactly in the way he intended to take, to satisfy the cravings of his
own appetite.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE FUGITIVES MAKE GOOD THEIR ESCAPE.

Having partaken of as much of the fruit as he deemed prudent, George at
once betook himself to the task of climbing the precipice, and was
agreeably surprised at the rapidity and ease with which he accomplished
the ascent.  Now that he was unencumbered with Walford's weight, and was
free from the horrible dread which had before haunted him--that a false
step on Tom's part might precipitate all hands to the bottom--his
confidence in his own powers enabled him to coolly approach and
successfully surmount obstacles which, under less favourable conditions,
he would have dreaded to face, and in a few minutes he was within a foot
or two of the top.

Here he deemed it prudent to pause for a moment and survey the path by
which he had ascended, so that, in the event of danger, he might be able
to effect a rapid retreat.  The glance downward which he permitted
himself to take, though only momentary, brought on again, though happily
only in a mitigated degree, the same feeling of vertigo and nausea from
which he had before suffered; and he was obliged to close his eyes for a
short time, clinging convulsively to the rock meanwhile, to avoid
falling headlong to the bottom.

Having at length once more recovered his steadiness, he rose cautiously
higher and higher, until his head was level with the top edge of the
precipice, and then he ventured to raise his head rapidly, cast a flying
glance round, and dip it again.  But the latter precaution was needless;
the ground still sloped upward, so that he could see for a distance of
some forty yards only, but all the visible space was perfectly clear;
there was no human eye to detect his presence there.  Once more raising
his head, and this time taking a more leisurely and deliberate glance
round, to make assurance doubly sure, he proceeded to make his way up
over the edge on to the comparatively level ground at the top.  This was
a task demanding the utmost caution, for a depth of some eighteen inches
of light soil crowned the rock, thickly covered with long rank grass,
which, owing to the lightness of the soil, afforded but a very
precarious and uncertain hold.  The soil itself, too, crumbled away
immediately beneath his touch, so that at the very top of the precipice
he was unable to find anything to which he could safely hold.  For a
short time it almost seemed as if these apparently trifling obstacles
were about to baffle him altogether, and it was not until he had
actually laid bare the rock immediately in front of him, as far as his
arm could reach, that he accomplished his object, and stood safely on
the top of the cliff.

He now threw himself flat on the ground in the long grass, thus
effectually concealing himself from the view of any chance passer-by,
and crawled to the crest of the hill, where he again peered cautiously
about him.  The ground, from the spot whereon he knelt, declined pretty
steeply to the sea, only a quarter of a mile distant; slightly to his
right there lay a valley, with a tiny river flowing through it into the
sea; and on either bank of this stream there stood two or three crazy
wattle-huts, scarcely worthy the name of human habitations, with a net
or two spread behind them on poles in the sun to dry.  Three or four
fishing-canoes and a boat--a ship's boat, which looked as though it had
been picked up derelict--were moored in the stream; but human beings,
there were none visible.  In line with the river, commencing at a
distance of about two miles from the shore, and extending right out to
the horizon, there lay a group of islets, some forty or more in number;
and far away beyond them, lying like a thin grey cloud of haze on the
water, he could see the Isle of Pines.

"So far, so good," thought George.  The spot was evidently a lonely one,
inhabited by a few fishermen only; there was no sign of any watch being
maintained on the chance of the runaways putting in an appearance, so
the chase had doubtless by this time been abandoned as hopeless; there
was a capital boat--which, in his urgent necessity, he felt he need not
scruple to appropriate--lying in the stream below, and everything
promised favourably for a successful escape from the island.

But though the scene below looked so quiet and deserted, and though the
boat lay there so temptingly within sight, Leicester felt that the
evening would be the most suitable time for making their final effort;
they were in no immediate hurry now, and it was scarcely worth while to
risk detection by putting off in broad daylight.  Besides, the
sea-breeze was blowing half a gale, and in their exhausted condition
they would scarcely be able to drive the boat ahead against it; whilst,
by waiting until sundown, they would have it calm to start with, and the
breeze, when it came, would be off the land and in their favour.

Thus arguing the matter with himself, he rose to his feet, and sauntered
leisurely back to the cliff-edge on his return journey.

He was surprised and greatly disconcerted now to discover how easy it
was to miss the spot at which he had made his ascent.  The strong
breeze, sweeping over the grass, had obliterated every trace of his
recent passage through it, but he confidently walked in what he believed
to be the right direction--only to find himself mistaken.  The bare
patch of rock which he had cleared to facilitate his passage over the
edge was of course, when once found, an unmistakable landmark; but he
was quite five minutes walking to and fro on the cliff-edge before he
hit upon it, and quite long enough to have insured his capture had he
been surprised and closely pursued.

Having at last found it, however, he forthwith began his descent; and
here again he was disagreeably reminded of the much greater difficulty
which is experienced in the _descent_ than in the _ascent_ of a cliff.
His difficulties began with his first attempt to lower himself over the
cliff-edge; and, notwithstanding his utmost care, he several times found
himself in positions of the most appalling peril.  He, however, got down
safely to the cavern at last, and, after detailing to Tom the result of
his observations, threw himself down on the rocky floor, to recover in
sleep, if possible, the strength and nerve necessary for their final
ascent.

When George awoke, the sun was within about an hour of setting.  There
was, therefore, time for him to go out and secure for his companions and
himself another meal of the wild raspberries, which he accordingly did.

The fugitives had all their preparations complete in good time, and,
when everything was quite ready, Leicester went out and stood at the
entrance to the fissure, watching the shadows creep gradually higher and
higher up the eastern side of the ravine as the sun declined toward the
horizon.  At length the last golden gleam vanished, the entire landscape
assumed a hue of rich purple-grey, rapidly deepening in tone as the
darkness of the tropical night settled swiftly down; and the supreme
moment had arrived.

Returning at once to the interior of the cave, George briefly announced
that it was time to start; Walford, already securely lashed in his
hammock, was at once hoisted up between George and Tom as before, and,
issuing from the mouth of the fissure, the fugitives forthwith began the
last and most perilous part of the ascent.

They had scarcely risen a couple of yards when rapid hoof-beats were
heard in the valley below, and, pausing for a moment to glance down,
George saw a mounted figure galloping rapidly up the valley.  He
recognised it at once as one of their former pursuers, and saw in a
moment how completely these pertinacious man-hunters had outwitted him.
It immediately became clear to him that, failing to pick up the trail at
the top of the precipice, these fellows had jumped to the conclusion
that, improbable as it might seem, their prey must still be lurking
hidden somewhere on the face of the precipice, and, doubtless during the
previous night, the individual just seen had returned, and, secreting
himself among the bushes below, had maintained an untiring watch on the
face of the cliff.  There could be no doubt that he had seen George's
ascent of the cliff that morning, and, observing him to be alone, had
rightly concluded that the journey up the cliff had been made for the
purpose of a reconnaissance, and had therefore remained _perdu_,
satisfied that before long his patience would be rewarded, as it had
been, by witnessing the attempted flight of the whole party.

These reflections flashed like lightning through George's brain, and
helped him to an instant decision.

"We _must_ go on _now_!" he exclaimed to Tom.  "They have discovered our
hiding-place, and if we were to return to it, they would simply blockade
the top and bottom of the precipice, knowing that, sooner or later, we
must inevitably fall into their hands; and, in addition to that, they
would spread the information of our position all over the country, and
perhaps offer a reward for our capture, in which case we should have
perhaps a hundred watching for us instead of half-a-dozen.  We have a
chance yet; for it will take them fully twenty minutes to ride round, by
which time, if we are fortunate, we can reach the boat.  Now, Tom, my
lad, do your utmost; in twenty minutes we shall either have won our
freedom or relapsed into slavery for ever."

Not another word was now said by either of them until that awful climb
was over and they had, after countless hair-breadth escapes, safely
reached the top of the cliff.  When at last they once more stood on
comparatively level ground, they felt as though their limbs had no
strength to carry them another yard upon their way, so exhausting had
been the superhuman efforts which they had put forth.  But there was no
pause--no rest for them yet; onward they must still press at their
topmost speed, or all that they had hitherto endured would be in vain.
The short journey from the top of the precipice to the summit of the
rising ground was a cruel one; the slope, gentle though it was, telling
upon them terribly as they staggered forward over the long slippery
grass, panting, breathless, staggering and stumbling at every step, and
dreading every moment to hear the triumphant shout announcing the
arrival of their pursuers upon the scene.

But, so far, save that of their own laboured breathing, not a sound of
any kind broke in upon the deep stillness of the evening hour; and, when
at last they surmounted the crest of the hill, the scene below was one
of peaceful solitude.

"Now one more--one _supreme_ effort, Tom, and in five minutes we shall
be free," gasped George.  "Muster all your courage and resolution, and
let us make a run for it.  Can you do it?"

"Ay, ay, sir, I'll try," was the scarcely articulate reply, and without
more ado they set off down the slope at a run.

A run?  Well, yes, it was a run, if it was anything at all; but such a
run!  Their limbs felt like lead, and Walford's weight seemed to them
enough to drag them down to the very centre of the earth.  Every
individual blade of grass seemed to be invested with the toughness of a
hempen cable, and to trail directly across their path for the express
purpose of retarding their progress and tripping them up.  Their breath
was gone; their mouths were open and gasping; their hearts were beating
like sledge-hammers against their ribs, and pumping the blood in a great
red-hot tide up into their heads; their brains reeled; their sight began
to fail them; and what little of the scene was still perceptible to
their disordered vision was apparently whirling in a mad dance up and
down, round and round them, until they could not tell whether they were
going right or wrong.

Yet on they still staggered and stumbled, first one, then the other,
falling prone to the earth, but up again in an instant, and on once
more.

At last they were at the base of the hill; another half-a-dozen yards,
and they would be beside the stream; another twenty, and they would be
in the boat.  Hark! what sound is that?  The dull thud of horses' hoofs
upon the turf!  With what headlong speed the riders are pressing
forward!  And--ha! there is the exultant shout which tells that the prey
is in sight.

"Thank God, there are no dogs with them," thinks George.  "Are there
not?"  Then what means that deep, sonorous baying sound which breaks
with such startling distinctness on his frenzied ear?  "On! on! for the
love of God, press on!" gasps George; and with something almost like
renewed effort the fugitives once more spring forward.

Hark! now you can hear the deep panting of those hell-hounds as they
lunge forward at a gallop, silent now that their prey is in sight, their
flaming eyes fixed upon the flying men in front of them, and their jaws
champing in horrible anticipation.

One more bound, and the boat is reached.  Poor Walford is tumbled
unceremoniously into her; George and Tom follow, the latter wrenching
from the foetid mud the stake to which the rotting painter is attached,
whilst the former, with a last desperate effort, sends the crazy craft
into the middle of the stream.  As he rolls in over the gunwale a heavy
splash is heard, and some cumbrous body scurries from the slimy bank
into the water, whilst at the same moment the foremost hound, a
magnificent creature, as big and as lithe as a panther, springs boldly
after the receding boat.  He _almost_ reaches her, not quite, his front
paws catch upon the gunwale, but the rest of his body falls short and
drops into the water.  A thrust from one of the oars sends him clear of
the boat, and, with a baffled howl, he turns and swims for the shore.
He is within three feet of the bank when a something, which looks like a
log of charred timber, rises to the surface behind him, two gleaming
eyes glare at him, and, with a horrid snap, a pair of serrated jaws
close upon his hind quarters, and he is dragged back and under, to
furnish a meal to the terrible _cayman_.

But the fugitives have no time for more than the merest superficial
glance at this canine tragedy, for their human pursuers are now close at
hand.  The thowl-pins, luckily, are already in their places, left there
by the fishermen, who have been too lazy to remove and stow them snugly
away; the oars are therefore hastily caught up and tossed into their
places, the boat is spun round like a top until her head points seaward,
and, with vigorous strokes, the two men send her foaming out along the
narrow river-channel toward the sea.

The pursuers rein up upon the bank, and with one accord draw their
pistols, and open a fusillade upon the flying boat.  Fortunately it is a
harmless one; one bullet lodges in the stern transom, a second chips a
shaving off the loom of George's oar, a third passes harmlessly through
the planking of the boat's bow and skims a few yards along the surface
of the water beyond, and the remainder fly wide.

But, after _so long_ and persevering a hunt, these men are not disposed
to sit still tamely and witness the escape of those whom they have sworn
to take back with them, dead or alive, to the plantation; so, after a
few minutes of hurried consultation, three of them dismount, and,
hauling one of the canoes to the bank, enter her and start in chase.

The way in which they handle the paddles and send the light craft
surging down the river in the wake of the boat proves that they are no
novices in the boatman's art, but neither are the two of whom they are
in chase.  George and Tom have already nearly forgotten their terrible
fatigue; they are fast recovering their wind; their legs--the members in
which they suffered most severely--are now comparatively at rest, an
entirely new set of muscles is brought into action, and, as they are
perfect masters of the art of handling an oar, they are getting a
surprising rate of speed out of the old boat without very much effort.
In a couple of minutes they are clear of the river's mouth, through the
rollers which are breaking on the miniature bar, and heading fairly out
to sea.

But human endurance has its limits, and after they had been tugging away
for half an hour at the clumsy, ill-made oars, their exertions began to
tell upon them.  Their strength began to flag, and the canoe, which they
had hitherto contrived to keep at a distance, began slowly to gain on
them, though how much they could not well tell, as it was by this time
quite dark, and they could only distinguish her as a small, dark,
shapeless blot on the surface of the water, with a tiny luminous ripple
under her bow.  They were just beginning to discuss their probabilities
of success, should it come to a hand-to-hand fight with those three
armed and unfatigued men, when a faint puff of warm air fanned their
faces.

"Thank God!" exclaimed George fervently, "thank God! there is the first
puff of the land-breeze."

With that he began to fumble with one hand at the lashings of the sail
which lay stretched fore and aft along the thwart beside him, working
his oar with the other hand meanwhile, and after a little difficulty the
knot which secured them was cast loose, and the turns partially thrown
off.

"Now, Tom, you must finish the job," exclaimed George; "you can reach
and throw off the rest of the turns where you sit; the sail is a lug by
the feel of it--at all events, here is a yard of some sort lying
alongside the mast--and when you have cast off the lashings and are
ready to step the mast, say the word, and lay in your oar; then I'll
scull the boat, whilst you step the mast and hoist the sail.  Hurrah!
here comes the breeze, hot and strong; get the canvas on her, and at
last we shall be able to enjoy a rest.  If those fellows are wise now,
they'll 'bout ship at once, and make for the shore, five minutes hence
it will be blowing fresh, and, if they don't look out, they'll be blown
off the land altogether.  Are you ready?  Then in oars, step the mast,
and sway away upon the halliards."

So said, so done; Tom tossed in his oar, seized the mast, and stepped
it.  The halliards were already bent to the yard--laziness again, the
fishermen evidently having been too indolent to cast them adrift,
knowing that they would only have to bend them on again when next they
wanted to use the sail--and in another minute Tom had the sail
mastheaded, the tack lashed down, and the sheet aft in George's hand;
whilst the latter, sinking down in the sternsheets with a sigh of
ineffable relief, and too tired yet to ship the rudder, steered the boat
with the oar which he had used for sculling, whilst Tom was busied in
the operation of making sail.

The canoe, meanwhile, had crept up to within her own length of the
chase, and oaths and exclamations of mutual encouragement were freely
mingled with peremptory orders to the fugitives to surrender, and
threats of the punishment awaiting them when caught; but no sooner was
the sail set than the boat drew rapidly away, and in ten minutes more
the canoe, with its occupants still paddling furiously out to sea, was
invisible.  George confidently expected to be saluted with a parting
shower of bullets, but he was agreeably disappointed, owing possibly to
the circumstance that in the hurry of pursuit the crew of the canoe had
omitted to bring their ammunition with them.

For the first four hours of their flight the voyagers were sailing
continuously among the group of low islets which George had seen from
the top of the hill; but about midnight, as nearly as they could guess,
the last rock was passed, and they found themselves in open water.

And now the want of a chart made itself disagreeably manifest.  George
was quite seaman enough to be able to steer a tolerably straight course,
using the stars as a guide by night and the sun by day; but
unfortunately, having nothing but his memory to go by, he had only a
very vague notion of the proper course to steer, and of the distance
which they would have to travel.  His plans, moreover, were by no means
fixed.  One of his ideas was, to stand boldly out to sea in a
south-easterly direction, in the hope of hitting Jamaica, where they
would at once find themselves among friends able and willing to help
them.  But against this plan there were several grave objections, the
chief of which was his uncertainty as to the exact position of the
island and the consequent probability that, from its small size, they
would miss it altogether.  Then, again, they were absolutely without
food or water.  It is true, there were a few scraps of putrid fish in
the boat, and Tom had found a fishing-line under the bottom-boards
forward, so that, having a line and the wherewithal to bait it, they
might possibly succeed in catching a _few_ fish.  But then it would
obviously not do to rely on such a mere chance as that.  Another idea
was to get into the open water southward of the Isle of Pines, and look
out for either an English frigate--one of which would be pretty certain
to be cruising in that direction--or an eastward-bound merchantman from
Honduras.

This plan seemed to George the most feasible under the circumstances,
and in favour of it he finally decided.

The first matter to which they devoted themselves, on finding that they
had no longer anything to fear from the canoe, was Walford's comfort.
The poor fellow made no complaint--indeed he had scarcely opened his
mouth to utter a word since the moment when he received his injury,--but
it had for the last two days been growing increasingly apparent to
George that his unfortunate rival was rapidly sinking into a very
critical condition.  Under the combined effects of the injury, exposure,
and want, he was wasting visibly away; his strength was so completely
gone that he was quite unable to move without assistance; and George had
once or twice asked himself the question, whether he was justified in
involving this poor weak demented creature in the sufferings which there
was only too much reason to believe still awaited them.  Would it not
have been truer kindness, he asked himself, to have left Walford in some
sheltered spot where there would be a certainty of his being speedily
found and taken care of?  But reflection satisfied him that it would
not.  To have left him in the hands of the Spaniards would have been to
leave him in slavery for the remainder of his life; and, judging by
himself, Leicester felt that death itself would be preferable to such a
fate.  Then, again, there was the possibility--a slender one, it is
true, but still a possibility--of their speedy rescue; in which case,
with the care and nursing which he would be sure to receive, there was
no reason why Walford should not recover both his health and his
intellect.

So, comforting himself with the reflection that he was doing the best he
could for the unfortunate man, George arranged a comfortable berth for
him in the sternsheets of the boat, and deposited him thereon, still
lashed up in his canvas hammock, the grass packing of which formed a
comparatively soft and comfortable support to his emaciated frame.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

DEATH CLAIMS A VICTIM.

The breeze continued fresh until about midnight, after which it lessened
a trifle, and came off from the larboard quarter.  Daybreak found the
boat off the north-eastern extremity of the Isle of Pines, and about
five miles distant from that curious chain of islets called by the
Spaniards the Islas de Mangles, which curves out like a breakwater
across the northern face of the island.  Their hunger, which had to some
extent been appeased by their last plentiful meal of wild raspberries,
and which had been altogether forgotten in the excitement of their
subsequent flight now returned to them in full force, and, the breeze
failing them, George determined to put the line overboard and try for a
few fish.

He was successful beyond his most sanguine expectations, half-a-dozen
fine but grotesque-looking fish speedily rewarding his efforts.  The
idea of devouring them raw was rather repulsive, but as there was no
possible means of cooking them, they had either to do that or go without
breakfast; so, selecting the most tempting-looking, they cut it up, and,
after making a wry face over the first mouthful or two, managed to
satisfactorily dispose of it.  That is to say, George and Tom did; but
poor Walford, on being offered a share, shook his head, murmured that he
was not hungry, and closed his eyes again in patient suffering.  The
balance of the catch was carefully cleaned and strung up on the yard, in
the hope that it would dry in the sun.

Their great want now was _water_.  Their hunger being satisfied, thirst
began to assert itself, and George would have landed upon the Isle of
Pines and endeavoured to find fresh water, but for the fact that he
caught sight of several people on the shore, who appeared to be watching
the boat with pertinacious curiosity.  In this strait he tried the plan
of dipping his shirt into the sea, and putting it on again dripping wet;
and, to his great delight, he found that this proceeding had a very
sensible effect in mitigating thirst.  Upon this, Tom tried the same
plan, with equally beneficial results, and then they well soused poor
Walford with sea-water, hoping that it would, to some extent, revive and
refresh him.

By mid-day the Isle of Pines was broad on their starboard quarter, the
last _Cay_ on the "Jardines" shoal had been passed, and they were fairly
at sea and in deep water.  They might now reasonably look out for a
frigate at any moment; but, as it would not do to depend upon this
source of rescue alone, George continued to stand boldly to the
southward and eastward, hoping that by so doing he would not only
improve his prospects of falling in with a British frigate, but that he
would also--failing the frigate--meet with a friendly merchantman.

By sunset they were fairly out of sight of land, but, so far, nothing in
the shape of a sail had greeted their longing eyes.  Once or twice a
white speck on the horizon had temporarily raised their hopes, but it
had vanished the next moment, being probably nothing more than the
sunlight flashing upon a sea-bird's wing.

George was hourly growing more and more anxious for a speedy rescue, not
so much on his own account as for Walford's sake, the condition of the
latter being such as to give rise to the liveliest apprehension.  He had
eaten nothing since the previous day, pleading want of appetite, and as
the sun went down he watched its gradual disappearance beneath the
purple waves with wistful eagerness, murmuring, "The last time, the last
time!"  Then as the solemn darkness swept down over the sea, and the
stars came out one by one in the great blue vault above, the little
consciousness of his surroundings which he hitherto retained left him,
and he fell to murmuring snatches of songs, mingled with babblings of
his childhood's days.  The word "mother" was frequently upon his lips,
and once he burst into a passion of hysterical tears, murmuring,
child-like, that "he was very sorry; and that, if she would forgive him,
he would be a good boy for the future, and would never do it again."

This state of things gravely alarmed George, who began to fear that the
last great solemn change was at hand.  It was therefore with a feeling
of intense relief that he heard a hail of "Sail, ho!" from Tom, whose
sharp eyes had at last caught sight of a genuine and unmistakable sail
broad on the boat's lee bow.

There was nothing, however, to be done but to carefully watch the helm
of the boat; she was already under canvas and steering the best course
possible for intercepting the stranger; the only thing, therefore, was
to steer _straight_, otherwise the chances were that the ship would be
missed, after all.  The strange sail was steering about east-south-east,
being close-hauled on the larboard tack, and, from her position, George
thought it just possible that he might intercept her, or, at all events,
near her sufficiently to permit of her crew hearing his hail as they
passed.

As the night deepened, the breeze freshened, and by the time that the
strange sail had been in sight half an hour it was blowing so fresh that
it was as much as they could do to keep the lee gunwale above water.
Yet they dared not shorten sail, for the breeze which was threatening at
every moment to capsize them was also hurrying the stranger more rapidly
along, and consequently lessening their chances of intercepting her.
Thick clouds, too, began to gather in the sky, threatening more wind,
and, by obscuring the light of the moon, rendering it just so much the
more unlikely that the crew of the approaching vessel would see them.

At last a heavy squall burst about a mile to windward of them, and
George was reluctantly compelled to order Tom forward to shorten sail.
Unfortunately the halliards had somehow got jammed aloft in the sheave,
and the sail would not come down.  Tom tugged and tugged at it
desperately, but all to no purpose; there it stuck, with the squall
rushing down upon them like a race-horse.

"Cast off the tack, Tom, and let the sail fly!" shouted George, and the
lad had scarcely time to obey the order when the squall burst furiously
upon them.  The sail streamed out in the wind like a great banner from
the top of the mast, lashing furiously, and shaking the boat to her
keel.  The crazy craft careened gunwale-to, notwithstanding that George
had put his helm promptly up, and in another moment she would
undoubtedly have gone over with them; but just as the water was
beginning to pour in over the gunwale, _crack_! went the mast and the
thwart with it over the side.  The boat was nearly half full of water,
and in their anxiety to free her, and get her before the wind, the mast
and sail parted company from the boat, and they never saw them again.

The squall lasted about five minutes, and then passed off, leaving only
a gentle breeze behind it.  As soon as this was the case, they had a
look round for the strange sail, and made her out--a topsail-schooner--
about a mile and a half distant.  George saw that there was still a
chance for them, so they out oars and pulled vigorously.  All was going
well, when, to their intense surprise, the craft, after approaching to
within little more than a quarter of a mile of them, suddenly put up her
helm, and, wearing round, stood away upon a south-westerly course.  With
one accord George and Tom started to their feet and shouted lustily and
repeatedly, "Ship ahoy!  _Ship ahoy_!  Ship ahoy!" until their throats
were so strained that their voices failed them, and they became unable
to utter another sound.  It was all to no purpose; their cries attracted
not the slightest notice; the schooner ran rapidly away from them and at
last George in despair laid in his oar, flung himself down in the
sternsheets, and covered his eyes with his hands, to shut out the
tantalising sight.

Half an hour afterwards the reason for this extraordinary conduct on the
part of the schooner became apparent, the upper canvas of a large ship
under a heavy press of sail appearing in the south-east quarter.  That
this ship was a man-o'-war was evident at a glance, from the cut of her
sails; and the course which she was steering, together with her large
spread of canvas, showed that she was in pursuit of the schooner.

The first impulse of those in the boat was to out oars and pull toward
her, but five minutes' work sufficed to show them that their chance was
almost hopeless; the frigate would pass them at a distance of about six
miles, and with every eye on board her intently fixed upon the chase,
what prospect was there, in that uncertain light, of so small an object
as the boat being seen at so great a distance?  Nevertheless, they
toiled on with dogged perseverance, and did not abandon their efforts
until the frigate had passed them, and her topsails had sunk below the
horizon.  Then indeed they laid in their oars, and directed their whole
attention to Walford, whose condition became more alarming every moment.

Not that he made any complaint.  The poor fellow indeed seemed to be
quite unconscious of his pain and weakness; but his ghastly pallor, his
laboured breathing, and the convulsive shudders which agitated his frame
from time to time were to George a tolerably clear indication that
dissolution was near at hand.

He was still quite light-headed, his mind wandering in feverish haste
from scene to scene of his boyhood, as was evident from the rapid
disjointed sentences which poured uninterruptedly from his lips.  George
was able to gather pretty clearly from them that, even as a lad, Walford
had been wilful, headstrong, and obstinate, prone to go his own way
without much consideration for the wishes of others, and there were
occasional wild words and broken exclamations which seemed to indicate
that, even whilst little more than a mere child, he had allowed himself
to be betrayed into actual crime.  And as he lay there, gasping his life
away, the follies of boyhood and the graver offences of more recent days
seemed to be in some way jumbled up hopelessly in his disordered mind
with a confused idea of the urgent necessity for speedy repentance of
both.  There could be no doubt that, notwithstanding the disordered
state of the unhappy man's intellect, conscience was busily at work with
him; that he was already beginning to dimly see the error of his ways
and the hollowness--the utter unprofitableness--of his past life, and
possibly also the critical nature of his position.  But the mind was too
completely shattered to avail itself of these promptings, and the
remorse and regret which had tardily come to him found expression only
in the simple pleadings for pardon which a child offers to its grieved
parent.  This distressing state of things lasted at intervals all
through the night and well into the following day, when the dying man,
utterly exhausted, sank into a fitful, troubled sleep.

The pangs of hunger and--still worse--of thirst again making themselves
felt, George once more put the fishing-line over the side, and, after
waiting patiently for nearly an hour, had the satisfaction of feeling a
smart tug at it.  He gave a sharp jerk, to strike the hook firmly into
his fish, and at once began to haul smartly in, but he had only gathered
in a foot or so of the line when there came a terrific pull at it, which
sent the cord flying through his fingers in spite of all his efforts to
hold it.  He promptly called Tom to his assistance, but even with this
aid he was unable to hold the fish; and, as a last resource, he threw a
couple of turns round one of the thowl-pins.  The result was disastrous;
the line snapped short off at the pin, and when they came to investigate
further, they found that they had lost the whole of it, except a bare
fathom, which still remained in the boat.

This was a misfortune indeed, as it deprived them of their only means of
obtaining that sustenance which was now becoming so urgent a necessity
to them.  But sailors are not easily disheartened, and they forthwith
set to work to manufacture a new line out of the rope which they still
had in the boat; Tom carefully unlaying the strands and jointing the
yarns, whilst George tried his best to manufacture a hook out of a nail
drawn from the gunwale of the boat.  This task occupied them for the
remainder of the day, and when it was completed the hook and line
together constituted such a very make-shift, hopeless-looking affair
that George, in spite of his hunger, could not repress an incredulous
smile at the idea of any fish with his wits about him being beguiled by
it.  They tried it, however, but it was an utter failure; they could not
secure even the barren encouragement of a nibble; and at last the
attempt was given up in despair.

Shortly before sunset Walford once more opened his eyes, and began to
stare blankly about him.  For a minute or two there was a look in his
eyes which encouraged George to hope that reason was returning to her
abandoned throne, but the look quickly passed away, and the incoherent
mutterings recommenced.  The sun went down, night's mantle of darkness
once more descended upon the sea, and then the full moon in all her
queenly beauty rolled slowly into view above the horizon, flooding the
scene with her silvery light, and investing it with a magical beauty
which was not without its influence even on those poor famine-stricken
creatures, who were watching with such sympathetic solicitude beside
their dying companion.

Suddenly Walford's mutterings ceased, an expression of joyous surprise
lighted up his ghastly wasted features, he seized George's hand with a
firm clasp in one of his, and, raising the other, exclaimed--

"Hark! what was that?"

"I heard nothing, Ned," answered George tremulously; he knew
instinctively now that the last dread moment was close at hand,--"I
heard nothing; what was it?"

"My mother," answered Walford,--"my mother calling to me as she used to
call me, when I was a little innocent child, when she--ha! there it is
again.  It is her own dear, well-remembered voice.  She is calling me to
go to her; I must not stay out at play any longer; I did so last night,
you know, and it grieved her.  She said I was a naughty, disobedient
boy, and I made her cry.  But she forgave me and kissed me after I had
said my prayers, and--and--`Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be
Thy name.  Thy kingdom come.  Thy will be done on earth as it is done in
heaven.  Give us this day our daily bread; _and forgive us our
trespasses_.'"

As the first words of this simple, beautiful prayer issued from
Walford's dying lips, George and Tom threw themselves upon their knees
in the bottom of the boat, their hands clasped, their heads bent, and
their hearts earnestly uplifted to Him who was thus mercifully taking
the poor sufferer to Himself.  The first sentence was spoken with
child-like simplicity, but, after that, every word was uttered with
increasing fervour and an evident conception of its momentous import,
until the clause was reached, "and forgive us our trespasses," which was
breathed forth with a solemn intensity that thrilled the very souls of
the listeners.  Then the voice suddenly ceased, and as George looked up
with startled eyes he saw Walford's lips tremble, a radiant smile parted
them for an instant, and he sank heavily back on the boat's thwart--
dead.

George gazed long and earnestly in the face of the dead man, his
thoughts travelling rapidly back to that eventful evening when they two
met--the one going humbly and doubtingly to declare his love, the other
hurrying triumphantly away from a successful wooing; and Leicester
grieved, as he pictured the sorrow of that loving woman's heart, when
the news should be taken to her of the sad event just past.  He thought,
too, of the strange meeting in mid-ocean, of the helpless state in which
Walford had remained since then, of his own vow, and all that it had
cost him, and as he reverently gathered the folds of canvas about the
lifeless form he felt comforted with the reflection that, though he had
failed, he had honestly done his best to keep that vow.

He did what he could to dispose the corpse decently and to prepare it
for its last long sleep beneath the waves; it was not much that he was
able to do, but he did what he could, "for Lucy's sake," as he kept on
muttering to himself; and when all was ready he turned to Tom.  The poor
lad, utterly worn-out, had sunk down in the bottom of the boat, and,
with one arm supporting his head on the thwart, was fast asleep.

"Well, better so," thought George to himself; "he is enjoying at least a
temporary respite from his miseries; I will not disturb him;" and,
murmuring a short but earnest prayer, he raised the body in his arms,
lifted it over the side of the boat, and allowed it to pass gently away
from his grasp into the peaceful depths below.  "God have mercy on his
soul," he murmured, and with clasped hands stood and watched the
shrouded form passing slowly out of sight for ever.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

MR BOWEN UNEXPECTEDLY REAPPEARS.

About an hour afterwards a fine breeze sprang up from the north-east,
and, putting the boat before it, George seated himself in the stern,
tiller in hand, and steered as near a southerly course as the boat,
without canvas, would go.

Very gloomy and despondent were his thoughts as he sat there, idly
watching the crisp-curling waves racing past.  One of the trio had
passed away, and, without food or water, without mast or sail, with
their strength rapidly ebbing away, the situation of the remaining two
was hourly growing more critical.  Had they not had the misfortune to
lose both mast and sail, George would have endeavoured to return to the
Isle of Pines; but to do so with the oars alone, now that they had
scarcely strength to use them, was impossible.  There was no
alternative, therefore, but to wait patiently, and hope that they might
be picked up before it should be too late.

The boat drifted on hour after hour, the sun rose, the wave-crests
sparkled and glanced under his cheering rays, and still the horizon
remained sail-less.  At last Tom, after stirring uneasily, awoke from
his stupor, glanced with eager, haggard eyes around him, and uttered a
groan of despair.

"Then it is _not_ true, after all," he gasped; and George noticed with
consternation the difficulty with which the poor fellow
articulated,--"it is _not_ true; it was only a dream."

"What was a dream, Tom?" asked George, and he started at the hollow
sepulchral tones of his own voice.

"I dreamt that a noble ship had hove in sight and was bearing down upon
us under stunsails.  She was painted white from her truck down to her
water-line; her canvas was white as snow; she was flying a great white
flag from her main-royal-masthead, and the people on board her were all
dressed in white.  It was a grand sight to see her sweeping down toward
us, with the cool clear water flashing up under her sharp bows, and
there was--ah! see, it was no dream, after all; hurrah! she comes--_she
comes_!"

And the poor fellow pointed away to where the rays of the sun fell upon
the water in a broad white dazzling glare.

"Merciful Heaven!" muttered George, "this is horrible; the lad is out of
his senses, gone mad with hunger and thirst.  Sit down, Tom," said he
coaxingly, "sit down, there's a good fellow; I can see no ship.  What
you see is only the glare of the sun on the water.  But if we are only
patient, please God, a ship _will_ come and pick us up before long.  But
we must be cool and steady, and keep a sharp lookout, so that when she
heaves in sight we may be ready to signal to her."

Tom passed his hand wearily over his forehead, shaded his eyes with his
hand, again peered long and anxiously over the gleaming sea, and shook
his head despondingly.  The bright vision had vanished, and he sank
moodily down in the bottom of the boat, his arms resting upon the
thwart, and his head bowed upon them.

Oh! that terrible time of _waiting_; with the sun beating mercilessly
down upon their uncovered heads and scorching up their brains; with the
hellish tortures of hunger and thirst, already unendurable, momentarily
increasing in intensity; with a horrible feeling of deadly weakness fast
paralysing their energies and dragging like leaden weights upon their
aching limbs, what wonder that each moment lagged until it seemed an
hour, each minute a day, and that the hours stretched themselves out
into eternities of overwhelming anguish!  At last George feebly felt,
with a curious mingling of despair and relief, that his own senses were
leaving him.  Soon the boat was--to his disordered vision--no longer
drifting helplessly upon a lonely sea; she was tranquilly gliding under
silken sails up the winding reaches of a gently flowing stream, the
crystal waters of which flowed over golden sands and between banks of
richest flowery verdure, with overshadowing trees whose boughs drooped
beneath their load of blushing fruit; whilst, in the distance, palaces
of whitest marble gleamed amid the many-tinted foliage, and all the air
was musical with the songs of birds.  He no longer felt the agonies of
hunger or the fiery torment of thirst; he plucked the ripe fruit as the
boat swept gently past, and his pangs were assuaged; he no longer
suffered from the scorching rays of the sun, for a silken awning floated
over his head, and the cool breeze crept refreshingly beneath it and
gently fanned his aching brow; and he no longer suffered from weariness,
for his body reclined upon cushions of the softest down, and he felt
himself gradually sinking into a luxurious slumber under the soothing
influence of the most entrancing melodies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Ou ay; he'll do weel eneuch, he's comin' roun' brawly; it's joost a
plain common case o' starvation an' exposure; there's naething
complicatit about it at a'; pairfect rest and a guid nourishing diet 'll
set him on his pins again in less than a week."

Such were the words which fell upon George Leicester's ear as he once
more became feebly conscious of the fact of his own existence.  The
words came to him mingled with other sounds, to wit--the creaking of
bulkheads, the rattling of cabin doors hooked back to allow the free
passage of fresh air, the grinding of a rudder and the clank of
rudder-chains, the sonorous hum of the wind through a ship's rigging,
the flapping of a sail, the distant subdued murmur of men's voices, and
the soft plashing of water.  He at the same time became conscious of a
gentle swaying and pitching motion, such as is felt on board a ship
close-hauled, with a moderate breeze and a correspondingly moderate sea.

For a minute or two George felt languidly puzzled as to his whereabouts,
but he was by no means anxious for enlightenment upon the subject; he
was in a state of blissful comfort, and he was quite content to remain
in passive enjoyment of the same, to feel the gentle current of air
softly fanning his brow, to yield himself to the easy, luxurious swing
of the cot in which he was lying, and to listen dreamily to the soothing
sough of the wind and the plash and gurgle of the water along the ship's
side.

It was whilst he remained in this semi-conscious state of beatitude that
another voice broke in, in cheery response to the words of the first
speaker, with--

"That's capital news, doctor; I heartily congratulate you on the
successful result of your efforts.  And the other one is also likely to
do well, you say?"

"Ou ay; he'll do weel eneuch, too; though--mind ye--the puir laddie has
had a narrow escape.  But they're a' richt the noo; I ken richt weel
what tae do wi' baith noo that I hae succeedit in bringin' back some
signs o' life in them.  And noo, captain, if ye'll excuse me, I'll--eh,
weel! hoo's a' wi' ye the noo, my mon?"

This exclamation was elicited by the circumstance that George had at
last mustered sufficient resolution to open his eyes and look curiously
about him.

And this is what he saw.  He saw that he was the occupant of a
snow-white canvas cot, which hung suspended from the beams of a ship's
roomy after-cabin, the situation of the apartment being manifested by
the presence of stern-ports fitted with glazed sashes, all of which were
open.  There were also two side-ports, one on each side of the cabin,
out of which grinned a couple of eighteen-pound carronades, the
carriages of which, as well as the whole of the gun inside the port,
were painted white.  The walls of the cabin, the deck-beams, and the
underside of the deck were also painted white with gilt mouldings; a few
pictures--one of which was the portrait of a lady--were securely
fastened to the walls; the floor was covered with fine matting, and a
large writing-table with three or four solid, substantial-looking chairs
completed the furnishing of the apartment.

But the chief objects of attraction to George were two figures, which
stood beside his cot.  One of these was a tall, lanky individual, clad
entirely in white, with red hair, prominent cheek-bones, and a pair of
piercing grey eyes surmounted by shaggy eye-brows.  The other was a
shorter, stouter man, light-haired and blue-eyed, a genuine Saxon all
over, his fair complexion tanned to a rich ruddy-brown hue, and with a
hearty, kindly, genial expression of countenance which won George's
heart in an instant.  This individual was also in white, his clothing
being reduced to a shirt and a pair of white duck trousers supported at
the waist by a belt.  George had no difficulty in deciding that he was
on board one of his Majesty's frigates, and that the persons who stood
beside him were her captain and the medico.

"Hoo's a' wi' ye the noo, my mon?" repeated the doctor, placing his
fingers upon George's pulse.

"I--I--scarcely know," stammered George drowsily.  "I feel all right and
very comfortable.  Is anything the matter?  And--and _where am I_?"

"Ye feel a' richt, do ye?" returned the doctor, ignoring George's
question.  "Ye're no' hungry--nor thirsty, eh?"

"Not particularly," answered George.  "And yet I think I could take some
breakfast, if it would not be troubling--"

"Brackfast!  Hear til him; brackfast! why, mon,"--drawing out a huge,
turnip-like silver watch--"it's nearly sax o'clock p.m.  Will a bite o'
dinner no' serve ye as weel?  Hech, hech," and the queer, grumpy-looking
visage of the really genial-hearted doctor beamed into a smile, as his
lips uttered the strange sounds which with him passed for laughter.

Doctor Pearson's laughter was infectious, perhaps because of its
singularity.  George smiled in response, and Captain Singleton smiled
too; then, turning to the doctor, the latter said--

"My dinner will be served in a few minutes, doctor.  If you think it
would not injure your patient, I will send him in something from my
table."

"Weel," responded the doctor with the caution characteristic of his
countrymen, "I'll no' commit mysel' by any positeeve statement just;
I'll wait and see, since ye've been so vera kind as to ask me to dine
wi' ye.  But I think I may venture to say that a wee drappie o' soup
will no' hurt the chiel.  And noo, wi' your leave, captain, I'll just
tak' the sma' leeberty o' turnin' ye oot o' your ain cabin, as there's
been an ample suffeecency o' conversation for the present."

The captain laughed good-naturedly, and turned, with a friendly nod to
George, to leave the cabin.  Doctor Pearson also turned to go, but
paused for an instant to once more feel George's pulse, and then, with
an amiable grunt of satisfaction, he also walked out, saying as he
went--

"Never fash your brains, my mon, by wonderin' whaur ye are.  Ye're in
guid han's, ye may tak' my word for it, and in guid time, when ye're
strong eneuch to talk, you'll be told everything.  Noo lie still, and
keep your 'ees open for a few minutes, and I'll see that ye hae a decent
bit of dinner sent in til ye."

The worthy doctor was as good as his word; a substantial basin of
nourishing soup, with a small quantity of fresh, white, wholesome
cabin-biscuit broken into it--"soft tack" was a comparatively unknown
luxury at sea in those days--and a glass of port wine being brought in
to George by the captain's steward about ten minutes later; and, having
demolished these, the patient once more dropped off to sleep, and passed
a comfortable night.

Three days more of Doctor Pearson's skilful treatment sufficed to put
both George and Tom upon their pins once more, and then, and not until
then, Captain Singleton asked of the former an account of the
circumstances which had resulted in placing them in the desperate
situation in which they had been found.

"Well," said the captain at the conclusion of George's story, "I
heartily sympathise with you, Mr Leicester, in all that you have
suffered, and I as heartily congratulate you on your plucky escape.  It
was rather a clever trick, the way in which those rascals took your ship
from you, I _must_ say that.  It is a wrinkle which, possibly, I may
some day play off in turn upon their own countrymen.  By your
description of them, I should say that the fellows were undoubtedly
pirates; the sea swarms with them all round about here--indeed, we are
now cruising for the purpose of putting a stop to their depredations,
and were returning from an unsuccessful chase after a very
suspicious-looking schooner when we picked you up.  There is one craft
in particular--a barque of undoubtedly English build--which we are most
anxious to lay our hands upon; her crew are a peculiarly bloodthirsty
set of ruffians, and have perpetrated an unusually large number of
atrocities.  By-the-bye, did you not say that your vessel was
barque-rigged and a fast sailer?  I should not be at all surprised to
find that she is the identical craft we are so anxious to get hold of.
Would you mind giving me a particular description of the _Aurora_?"

George, of course, readily acceded to this request, detailing with
seaman-like fidelity every peculiarity of hull and rigging.  When he had
finished, Captain Singleton said--

"Thank you.  The set of the spars and rigging, and the cut of the
canvas, does not coincide with the description with which I have been
furnished; but your description of the _hull_ tallies with mine in every
particular, and I have not a doubt that it is the same vessel.  And now,
to turn to other matters, what do you propose to do with yourself when
we land you at Kingston?"

"Well," said George, "I scarcely know; but I suppose I shall endeavour
to get a berth on board a homeward-bound ship, or work my passage home.
There is nothing else that I can do, for I am absolutely penniless."

"Well," said Captain Singleton, "if a sufficient sum to defray the
expenses of your passage home would be of any service to you, I dare say
I could manage to raise such an amount, and you shall be heartily
welcome to it."

"Thank you, very much," returned George; "but I could not possibly
accept your exceedingly kind offer, even as a loan, for I could not be
certain of ever being in a position to repay it.  No, I shall have to
get a berth of some kind."

Four days after the above conversation the cruise of the _Hebe_
terminated, and on the day following George and Tom found themselves
cast adrift, as it were, in the sandy streets of Kingston.

They were not absolutely penniless, however; for, in addition to a good
serviceable suit of clothes apiece out of the slop-chest, Captain
Singleton had insisted upon George's accepting a ten-pound note, to meet
their more immediate needs, and, being in a friendly port now, the two
seamen had very little doubt of getting employment of some kind or other
before long.

Their idea was first to make the round of the various shipping agents'
offices, and endeavour to obtain a berth on a homeward-bound ship.  If
that failed, then George thought they might possibly, aided by Captain
Singleton's influence, obtain work in the dockyard at Port Royal; and,
if the worst came to the worst, they could always depend with absolute
certainty upon being received on board a man-o'-war.

In pursuance of the first-mentioned plan, they were wending their way
along the street, when, as they passed the entrance to a large general
store, they were violently jostled by a man who was making his exit from
the place with considerable precipitation.

"Beg pardon, shipmates, no damage done, I hope.  I ought to have kept a
better lookout when crowding sail to the extent--why--why--no, it
_can't_ be; and yet--hang me if it _ain't_, after all.  Well, this _is_
a pleasant surprise, and no mistake.  Cap'n, how are ye?  And you, Tom,
how did them damned slave-drivers treat you?"

It was Mr Bowen, the late chief mate of the _Aurora_.  He was dressed
in the somewhat rough garb of the mate of a coasting schooner, but was
looking well and hearty nevertheless, and certainly had nothing of the
appearance of a man who had recently been suffering the horrors of
slavery.

George and Tom both shook hands heartily with their old friend, and then
Mr Bowen--who seemed to be pretty well acquainted with the town--led
the way into a quiet, respectable tavern near the water-side.

Having called for some sangaree in honour of the unexpected and very
agreeable meeting, George, at his friend's request, proceeded to recount
all that had happened since the eventful morning when they were
separated (for life, as each then feared) in the square at Havana.  When
he had finished the story, he added--

"And now, Bowen, my dear old friend, let us know how _you_ fared among
the Dons."

"Badly enough, cap'n, badly enough," was the reply.  "But you shall hear
the whole story, such as 'tis.  Maybe you happen to remember the chap as
bought me--a tall, thin feller, with a nose like the beak of an eagle,
and a wicked look in his glittering black eyes.  Well, as soon as this
here Don Christoval--that was his name--as soon as he'd bought all the
slaves he wanted, we was all chained together, and started on a march to
the south'ard.  We travelled the whole width of that cursed island,
taking two days over the trip, and was then shipped across in a little
flat-bottomed sailin'-boat to the Isle de Pinos, where this here
Christoval had a big 'baccy plantation.  It took us a whole day, after
we'd landed on the Isle of Pines, to reach the place, and on the
following morning we were set to work.

"As it happened, I was the only white slave on the plantation, and,
whether 'twas on this account, or whether 'twas because I was an
Englishman, I can't tell, but I soon found out that all hands, from Don
Christoval downwards, had a special spite against me, and seemed
determined to make the place as hot as they could for me.  I was put to
all the heaviest and dirtiest work about the place, and if there was a
job that had to be done after knockin'-off time, I was the man that had
to do it.

"There was nothing but Spanish spoke about the place, so I very soon got
acquainted with the lingo, whether I liked it or not; and almost the
first thing I understood was that Mr Don Christoval had boasted that,
fierce as I was, he'd tame me so that in six months I wouldn't dare to
say my soul was my own.

"Well, you may be sure that my temper hadn't grown much more amiable
from being made a slave of, and this palaver about _taming_ just made me
worse than ever.  I vowed by all that was holy I _wouldn't_ be tamed,
let 'em do what they would, and a pretty miserable time of it this
stupid vow and my own obstinacy brought me.  They used to amuse
themselves by seein' what they could do to rouse me; the overseers, as
they were riding by, would pull up and begin to abuse and scoff at me,
flicking at me with their whips all the time, and I dare say you know
pretty well how clever those same overseers are with their whips--
they'll hit a fly twenty feet off.  And when they'd see my eyes begin to
sparkle, they'd just let out with the infernal whip, fetching me a
regular `stinger' across the shoulders, and gallop off, laughing.  I can
tell you, they made a regular devil of me before all was done.

"Well, one morning there was a regular rumpus on the estate.  Don
Christoval had sold some cattle the day before, and had been paid for
'em.  The money was stowed carefully away by him when he turned in that
night, and next morning 'twas gone--somebody'd crept into the house
during the night, and had stole it.  Well, as there was nobody about the
estate but the regular hands, it was clear enough that some of these
must have got hold of the cash, and the lying scoundrels had the
impudence to say that I was the thief.  They came down, two of the
overseers did, and searched my hut fore and aft, from deck to keelson;
but, of course, they didn't find it, for the simple reason that I hadn't
took it.  Hows'ever, they would insist that I knew where 'twas, and at
last they dragged me up to the house, and told the Don that I'd took it,
but that they couldn't find it because I'd hid it away somewhere.

"The Don happened to be just starting off for a ride, and was mounted on
a splendid black horse.  He sat there in the saddle and listened to all
that the overseers had to say, and when they'd finished, he spurred his
horse at me, and swearing that he'd get the secret out of me, if he had
to cut my heart out to find it, raised his heavy riding-whip, and made a
slash at me.

"Well, cap'n, and Tom, old shipmate, you needn't be told that I had
already been made pretty savage by all this business, and when this
hawk-nosed Don Christoval struck out at me, why, it just roused all the
devil there was in me.  I put up my hand--so--as if to ward off the
stroke, and as the whip came down, I caught it in my hand, wrenched it
out of the Don's grasp, and, as quick as lightning, returned the blow
with all my strength, lashing him fair across the face and cutting his
cheek open.  He reeled backwards in his saddle, and I, first letting out
right and left at the two overseers, who stood one on each side of me,
and bowling them over like a couple of ninepins, sprang upon him, seized
him by the collar, and dragged him out of his saddle, and, leaping upon
the frightened horse's back, gave the poor brute a lash across the
flank, which sent him flying down the road, through the 'baccy plants,
and out upon the open country like a shot out of a shovel.

"Well, I don't know that I'd ever been on horseback in my life before,
but somehow I managed to stick to the saddle, it didn't seem at all
difficult, and on I went, straight ahead, as fast as the horse could
gallop, for an hour or more, and then we fetched up somewhere on the
shore.  There was a schooner in the offing with the British flag flying
at her gaff-end, and, as luck would have it, I'd just managed to hit the
spot where a boat's crew belonging to her were ashore, filling up their
fresh water.  I told the middy in charge who and what I was, and he
shoved off at once with me, took me aboard, and told the lieutenant in
command all about me; and, after knocking about with 'em for a
fortnight, I landed here, just six months ago.  And that ends my yarn."

"And what have you been doing since then?" asked George, after
congratulating Bowen on his escape.

"Well, cap'n," was the reply, "I never once forgot the promise I made to
you the day we were separated in Havana.  I felt certain that you'd
manage to get away somehow some day; and I felt just as certain that,
sooner or later, you'd turn up here in Kingston.  So, as soon as I was
landed here, I made inquiries, and, not being able to learn that
anything had been heard of you, I just looked about me a bit, and got a
berth on board a little coaster, so's to be on the spot whenever you
might happen to turn up.  I'd told our story pretty freely here in
Kingston, so that, even if I'd happened to have been at sea at the time,
there's plenty of people that would have taken you in tow, and provided
you with the needful until I came in again.  Now that you've put in an
appearance, of course I shall throw up my berth, and we'll all sink or
swim together."

"Thanks, Bowen, thanks; that's just like your disinterestedness,"
answered George; "but what are we to do?  The only thing I can see for
it is to get berths, if possible, on board some homeward-bounder."

"Homeward-bounder?" exclaimed Bowen with contemptuous emphasis, "why--
but there, I suppose you don't know anything about it, or you wouldn't
talk like that."

"About what?" asked George, completely mystified.

"Why, about our prize that we took that dark night on the passage out--
the privateer brig--the _Jeune Virginie_.  She's lying down there at
Port Royal, safe and sound, with a British crew on board her; and all
you've got to do, cap'n, is to make your claim, and establish your
identity, and the ship or her value will be handed over to you."

"Is it possible?" exclaimed George.  "Then we are lucky indeed.  But you
must explain the whole affair to me."

"That's easy enough," answered Bowen.  "The very first time I entered
Port Royal harbour I saw the craft lying there, and knew her again at
once.  Thinks I to myself, `Now, Dick Bowen, my lad, your first duty is
to recover possession of that prize on behalf of the skipper.'  So off I
goes to the admiral, stated my case, and made my claim.

"`That's all very well, my fine fellow,' says he, `and I don't doubt but
what you're telling the truth; but, you see,' says he, `you can't
_prove_ it.  Now I _must_ have something beyond your bare word before I
give up possession of the brig.  When you can bring me something in the
shape of proof that what you say is true, come to me again, and I'll see
what can be done in the matter.'

"Of course that was all right and straight-for'ard enough, so I went
away, and troubled no more about it.  The craft is safe enough; they've
been using her as a cruiser, and taking care of her, and I don't doubt
but what she's in just as good order as she was on the night when we
took her.  And now, all we've got to do is to go to the admiral again,
and make our claim.  There's _three_ of us this time, so that there'll
be no difficulty at all in getting her delivered over to us."



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

THE "AURORA" TURNS UP AGAIN.

That same day George waited upon the admiral and formally laid claim to
the _Jeune Virginie_.  He was very well received, his statement
patiently listened to, and--to make a long story short--in about three
weeks afterwards the claim was actually allowed, and the vessel handed
over to her rightful owners.

George was agreeably surprised, for--notwithstanding Bowen's implicit
confidence--he fully anticipated that there would be some trouble over
the matter.  Legal possession once obtained, Leicester had no difficulty
in raising money by means of a bottomry bond, and with this he
provisioned the brig for six months, intending to take out letters of
marque, and endeavour to make good his losses--a resolution in which he
was cordially seconded by Bowen.

But, though all this gave him plenty of occupation, he had not forgotten
his old crew, and he found--or rather took--time, not only to prepare a
complete list of the names and a full description of all those who were
still--so far as he knew--in a state of slavery, but also to put it into
the hands of the proper authorities, with such an urgent representation
of their probable sufferings, that the matter was at once taken up; and
he had the satisfaction of knowing, before he sailed, that negotiations
were already in progress for their discovery and deliverance.

Considerable difficulty was experienced in obtaining a crew for the
brig, good men being scarce; but at last this was overcome, and on a
bright September morning the anchor was hove up, and the _Virginie_
started upon her cruise.  The shoals outside the harbour were cleared in
due time, the brig working like a top, and sailing like a witch, to the
unbounded delight of all hands; and then George hauled sharp up on the
port tack, his intention being to cruise for a few days in the Windward
and Caycos Passages before shaping a course for home.

For the first five days of their cruise they were singularly unlucky,
seeing nothing but a man-o'-war schooner, which, on speaking, they found
had been equally as unfortunate as themselves.

On the morning of the sixth day, however, being then in the
neighbourhood of the Hogsties, the lookout aloft reported at daybreak a
couple of sail dead to windward, hove-to close together.  On the usual
inquiries being made, the lookout further reported that one of the
strangers was a barque; the rig of the other, which happened to be lying
end-on, he could not clearly make out, but, from her size, he judged her
to be a ship.  Mr Bowen, whose watch it was, at once went below and
informed George of this circumstance, and then, leaving him to don the
most indispensable portions of his attire, returned to the deck, and
proceeded thence aloft to have a look at the strangers for himself.

By the time that he had seen all that it was then possible to see, and
had descended again to the deck, George was awaiting him there.

"Well, Bowen, what do you make of them?" was Leicester's first inquiry.

"Well, there's two of 'em there, sure enough, close together--a good
deal too close together to be up to any good, to my thinking," was the
reply.

"What do you think they are, then?" asked George.

"One of 'em is a privateer--or a pirate; and t'other is her prize, in my
opinion," answered Bowen.

"Then we'll make their further acquaintance," said George.  "Perhaps if
we trim the canvas a bit slovenly, and act as though we had not seen
these craft, we may coax down towards us the privateer, or whatever she
is."

"That'll be the best plan, no doubt," acquiesced the chief mate; and he
proceeded forthwith on a tour round the decks, easing up a brace here,
and a halliard there, with a touch also at the sheets and bowlines, by
way of insuring an agreeable and harmonious result.  When he had
finished, the brig looked like a collier, and her speed had decreased
from eight to a little over five knots.

"There," said Bowen to George, with an admiring glance aloft at his own
handiwork, "I think that'll do pretty well; we look helpless enough now
for anything.  Masthead, ahoy!"--to the lookout aloft--"what about the
strangers now?"

"They've dropped alongside one another, sir," was the reply.

"Very well; keep your eye upon them, and let us know when you see any
change in their movements."

The stereotyped "Ay, ay," by way of reply, was duly given, and then
George and Bowen, side by side, and with hands folded behind them, began
to trudge fore and aft, from the main-mast to the taffrail, patiently
awaiting the course of events.

About a quarter of an hour elapsed, and then the lookout hailed again--

"On deck, there!  The barque has cast off, and is standing down towards
us.  They're busy getting the stunsails upon her now, sir."

"All right; stay where you are, and let's hear, if you see anything
worth reporting," replied Bowen.

A few minutes later another report was made to the effect that the other
sail--a full-rigged ship--had filled, and was standing to the northward
under all plain sail.  That was the last news from either of the
vessels, and, the barque shortly afterwards becoming visible from the
deck, orders were given to clear the brig for action, and the lookout
was ordered down on deck.

There was a capital working breeze, and not much sea; it was,
consequently, not very long before the barque had raised her hull above
the horizon.  As soon as she was fairly in view, George brought his
telescope to bear upon her, and ten minutes' careful scrutiny sufficed
to satisfy him that, though her spars were heavier, and she now showed a
wider spread of canvas than of old, she was undoubtedly, as he had
suspected, his own old ship, the _Aurora_.  He further noted that she
was not very deep in the water, being in fact just in her very best
sailing-trim; and, remembering her former capabilities, he was not long
in making up his mind that, if her present crew happened to become
suspicious of the character of the _Virginie_, and shunned an
engagement, it would be a very difficult matter to bring the _Aurora_ to
action.

But if those in possession of the barque entertained any misgivings,
they certainly gave no visible indication of them: on the contrary, they
came sweeping down upon the _Virginie_ under a perfect cloud of canvas,
and in a manner so obviously threatening, that, in order to maintain the
illusion to the last, George thought it advisable to exhibit some slight
signs of uneasiness, and he accordingly ordered the royals to be loosed
and set, and edged away a point or two off his course, at the same time,
however, checking his weather braces to such an extent that the brig's
speed was not very greatly improved by the manoeuvre.  In the meantime
the decks had been cleared, the guns loaded, and the crew fully armed
with cutlass, pike, and pistol.  The port-lids however, were kept
carefully closed, so that the presence of the guns on board might not be
revealed until an action should have become inevitable.

Mr Bowen had, in the midst of all his work, been watching the approach
of the _Aurora_ with grim satisfaction, gradually developing into a
condition of supreme exhilaration.  He rubbed his hands gleefully,
laughed softly to himself, and exhibited, in short, all the outward
characteristics of a thoroughly gratified man.  Then he would draw a
pistol from his belt, and carefully inspect the priming, pass his thumb
meditatively along the edge of his cutlass, or casually test with his
finger the sharpness of a pike-head, and at these times the expression
of his countenance boded no good to the approaching enemy.

The _Virginie's_ crew were kept carefully out of sight, except some
three or four hands, who were ostentatiously posted on the forecastle,
with orders to assume an appearance of deep interest in the approach of
the barque; but Bowen had carefully placed each man exactly where he
wanted him, and as the _Aurora_ came sweeping down upon the brig,
invisible hands on board the latter gradually tautened up halliard,
brace, tack, sheet, and bowline, until by the time that the two ships
were within a mile of each other, every trace of slovenliness on board
the _Virginie_ had vanished, every sail was standing as flat as a board,
and the brig was once more in a condition to be worked to the best
advantage.  This done, the men were ordered to their guns, and all was
ready for the commencement of the struggle.

When within a distance of about three-quarters of a mile from the brig,
the studding-sails of the _Aurora_ were seen to suddenly collapse, and
in a few seconds they had entirely disappeared, being taken in, all at
once, man-o'-war fashion.  This showed George, not only that his old
craft was heavily manned, but also that she was in the command of a man
who knew how to handle her.  But the sight did not greatly disturb him;
he had had time to discover that his own crew was a good one; he had
studied the brig, and mastered her little peculiarities; and he awaited
with perfect calmness the conflict which was now inevitable.

As the _Aurora's_ studding-sails fluttered out of sight, she sheered
broadly to port; a flash, accompanied by a puff of white smoke, issued
from her side, and in another instant a nine-pound shot skipped along
the water and across the _Virginie's_ bow.

George decided to take no notice of this hint, and the brig held
steadily on her course.  Another shot followed, with a like result; and
the pirates then decided apparently to waste no more powder and shot
upon so contumacious a craft, but to make short work of the affair by
simply running alongside and taking possession.  The _Aurora_ was
accordingly steered in such a way as would admit of her making a wide
sweep and shooting up alongside on the brig's weather quarter.  She was
handled magnificently, there was no doubt of that; and presently, with a
graceful sweep, she came surging up alongside, with the water spouting
up in a clear transparent sheet under her sharp bows, her yards swinging
simultaneously to meet her change of course, her white canvas gleaming
in the brilliant sunlight, six long nine-pounders grinning through her
bulwarks, and her deck crowded with men, as fair, yet as evil, a sight
of its kind as the eye of man ever rested upon.  At the same moment a
blood-red flag streamed out over the taffrail and soared away aloft,
until it fluttered out from the gaff-end--a fit emblem of rapine and
murder.

"Red this time, by way of a change," remarked Bowen to George, in
allusion to their encounter with the pirate schooner, which fought under
a _black_ flag.  "Well, a change is good sometimes," he added
philosophically.  "Shall we give her a taste of our quality now, cap'n;
she's just shooting into the right position to get the full benefit of
the dose of `round' and `grape' I've prepared for her?"

"Yes, give it her," answered George, drawing his cutlass with one hand,
and a pistol with the other.

"Throw open your ports, lads!" commanded Bowen; and at the word the
port-lids flew apart, six twelve-pounders were run out on each side,
and, as the barque was in the very act of sheering alongside, the
_Virginie's_ starboard broadside was poured into her with murderous
effect, as was evidenced by the frightful outburst of yells, groans, and
imprecations which at once arose on board her.  The broadside was
returned, but without inflicting much damage, the pirates evidently
having been taken completely by surprise by the sudden and unexpected
unmasking of the brig's guns.

The next moment the two vessels collided with a crash.

"Now look alive with your grappling-irons, and _heave_!  Boarders,
follow me!" cried George, dashing to the rail, and making a spring
thence in upon the _Aurora's_ deck, Mr Bowen at the same time leading
his detachment on board by way of the fore-rigging.

The Englishmen were met by a very formidable party, which had evidently
been told off to board the brig, and in an instant a fierce and
sanguinary _melee_ arose on the _Aurora's_ deck.  The Spaniards--for
such they proved to be--though taken by surprise, and greatly
disconcerted by the unexpectedly warm reception which they had met with
from the brig, fought with the fury and desperation of demons, and for
perhaps five minutes the crew of the _Virginie_ had all their work cut
out to maintain their position on the deck of the barque.  The pirates,
with that sanguinary symbol floating over their heads, and believing
that they had been entrapped into attacking a man-o'-war, felt that the
halter was already about their necks, and that there was literally no
alternative but victory or death for them; and they pressed forward with
such recklessness and ferocity that the deck speedily assumed the aspect
of a human shambles, and the planking grew so slippery with blood that
it became difficult to retain one's footing upon it.  There was one
Spaniard in particular who appeared to possess the gift of ubiquity; he
seemed to be in all parts of the ship at the same time, notwithstanding
the crowded state of the confined space wherein the fight was raging,
and in him George speedily recognised the truculent-looking individual
who had led the pirates on the eventful night of the _Aurora's_ capture,
and who had so brutally ill-used poor Bowen on the morning of the sale
in the square at Havana.  There could be no possible doubt as to his
identity.  There was the same ferocious cast of countenance, the same
mahogany-brown skin, even the same filthy red handkerchief--now more
filthy than ever--bound about his ragged locks, apparently the same
broad-brimmed straw hat, in short, every mark of identification; nothing
was wanting.  This individual dashed from point to point, apparently by
a mere effort of his will, encouraging here, chiding there, and helping
everywhere.  The mere fact of his presence, the mere sound of his voice,
appeared to endue the pirates with renewed life and courage, and George
speedily saw that there would be little hope of victory until this man
could be placed _hors de combat_.  He therefore pressed in toward him,
plying his cutlass vigorously with one hand, and laying manfully about
him with the butt of his empty pistol with the other, and calling upon
the fellow by every despicable epithet he could think of to turn and
meet him.  He had very nearly reached him--there were only some
half-a-dozen people between the two--when another voice, that of Bowen,
was heard, and the next instant the chief mate, his eyes literally
blazing with fury, appeared, forcing his way into the thickest of the
throng.  With the strength of a madman he seized and dashed aside all
who ventured to bar his path, and in a single moment, so it seemed to
George, forced himself within reach of his especial enemy.

"At last--at last--you bloodthirsty scoundrel--you white-livered
coward--you who were not ashamed to strike a chained man--at last we
meet again, as I told you we should!--and the time has come for me to
pay off part of the debt I owe you--no, you don't,"--skilfully guarding
a savage down-stroke from the Spaniard's cutlass, "and take that," he
added, launching out a terrific blow with his left fist, catching the
Spaniard fairly between the eyes, and felling him to the deck senseless,
as neatly as a butcher fells an ox.  In another moment George was at
Bowen's side, and, placing themselves back to back, these two managed to
successfully defend themselves until the crew of the _Virginie_,
inspired by their leader's example, had pressed in to their assistance,
when the pirates, becoming scattered, were driven irresistibly to
opposite ends of the ship, and some were actually driven overboard.
Then recognising that they were defeated, and suddenly losing heart,
they threw down their weapons, and cried for quarter.  But the worst
passions of the _Virginia's_ crew were by this time fully aroused; they
thought of nothing but the fact that their enemies _were pirates_, men
steeped to the lips in crime of the vilest description, and guilty of
unnumbered deeds of blood-curdling atrocity, and many of the Spaniards
were ruthlessly slaughtered before George and Bowen could induce them to
stay their hands.  Then, when order and authority were once more
restored, heads were counted, and it was found that, out of a crew of
over eighty, twenty-three pirates only--their leader included--remained
alive, and these were promptly clapped in irons and bundled
unceremoniously below.  Strange to say, notwithstanding the desperate
character of the fighting, the _Virginie's_ crew had suffered but
slightly in comparison--nine killed and thirteen wounded being the total
of the casualties.  A short breathing-space was allowed the men to
recover themselves after their extraordinary exertions, and then all
hands set to work to clear the decks of the sickening evidences of the
contest; the crew were next divided equally between the two ships, and,
with Mr Bowen in command of the _Aurora_, both craft then made sail to
windward in company.

The third craft--the full-rigged ship--meanwhile was still in sight from
aloft, dodging about under easy canvas, and evidently waiting for the
_Aurora_ to rejoin.  There could be little doubt, therefore, that she
was in the possession of a prize-crew of the pirates, and George
earnestly hoped he might be able to reach her in time to save the lives
of some at least of those to whom she rightfully belonged.

A couple of hours later they were alongside--the _Virginie_ on the
weather and the _Aurora_ on the lee quarter--with ports open, guns run
out, and the English ensign flying at the peak, the red flag having been
allowed to remain aloft on board the _Aurora_ until ranging alongside
the strange ship, when it was hauled down, and the English flag run up
on board the barque and the brig simultaneously.

The pirates in possession were completely paralysed by the turn events
had taken; they had evidently been under the impression that the
_Aurora_, and not the _Virginie_ had proved victorious; and now that
they found themselves under the guns of both ships their mistake was
past rectification.

Accordingly, at George's order, they backed the main-yard and hove-to
the ship, upon which a strong party, armed to the teeth, proceeded on
board and took possession.

The ship proved to be the _Vulcan_, of and from Liverpool, bound to
Kingston with a valuable general cargo and several passengers.  She was
a noble ship, being of nearly a thousand tons register, and a regular
clipper.

On boarding her, George found the state of affairs pretty much what it
had been on board the _Aurora_ after her capture by these same pirates,
her crew and the male passengers being discovered scattered about the
deck, lashed helplessly neck and heels together, or chained to
ring-bolts in the deck and bulwarks, whilst the pirates had taken
possession of the cabin and had held a regular saturnalia there, in the
progress of which the unfortunate lady passengers had been subjected to
the vilest outrages, and one poor little child had been cruelly murdered
before its distracted mother's face.  The captain and the chief mate of
the ship were both found in the cabin in a dying condition, they having
been mutilated in a most cruel and horrible manner in an ineffectual
effort to wring from them the secret of the hiding-place of a large
amount of specie which the pirates had somehow ascertained was on board.
A tall and burly negro, the identical one who had acted as lieutenant
to the Spaniard in charge of the _Aurora_ on the occasion of her first
capture, was at the head of the gang, and had been the instigator and
chief perpetrator in the many outrages which had followed the capture of
the _Vulcan_.

No time was lost in freeing the passengers and crew from their
exceedingly unpleasant situation; and this done, the pirates, ten in
number, heavily ironed, were transferred to the _Virginie_ and stowed
carefully away below.  The _Vulcan_ then proceeded on her voyage, in
charge of her second mate, by whom George forwarded a letter to the
admiral at Jamaica, informing him of the capture of the now notorious
_Aurora_.

George now felt that, with two ships and so many desperate men to look
after, he had his hands full, and he therefore decided to make the best
of his way to England forthwith.  He accordingly hailed Bowen,
requesting him to give the _Aurora's_ stores an overhaul, and to
ascertain whether her provisions and water were sufficient in quantity
to justify them in making a push across the Atlantic.  In about an hour
an answer was returned to the effect that not only was there an
abundance of everything, but that the ship herself was more than half
full of a varied and very rich cargo, the spoils, doubtless, from many a
missing vessel.  Upon the receipt of this intelligence, orders were at
once given for both ships to fill and make the best of their way to the
northward in company, and by nightfall they were clear of the Caycos
Passage and standing to the northward on a taut bowline under a heavy
press of canvas.

The _Virginie_ and _Aurora_ made an excellent passage across the
Atlantic.  They stood to the northward until the Trades were cleared,
when they fell in with fresh westerly winds, which carried them all the
way across; and, as the weather was fine, they had no difficulty in
keeping each other in sight during the whole passage, the two craft
regulating their spread of canvas so that neither should outsail the
other.

The passage was consequently an uneventful one, nothing worthy of note
occurring until they were in the chops of the Channel.  Then, indeed, an
adventure befell them, which proved George to have been wise in his
determination that the two vessels should make the voyage in company.

It was the last week in October.  They had just struck soundings, when
the two craft ran into a dense, raw fog, which compelled all hands to
seek warmth and comfort in their thickest jackets, and necessitated, as
a matter of prudence, the immediate shortening of sail.

The fog lasted a couple of hours, and when it cleared up the _Aurora_
was discovered about two miles astern of the brig, and a large ship was
at the same moment made out directly ahead.  The stranger was hove-to
under single-reefed topsails, with her head to the northward, her
topsail-yards being just visible from the deck.  The fact of her being
hove-to in such a position seemed to point to the conclusion that she
was a man-o'-war, and this supposition was confirmed when George took a
look at her through his glass from the fore-topgallant-yard.  She was a
frigate, and French apparently, from the cut of her canvas; but of
course it was quite possible that she might be in English hands, the
English often taking French prizes into their own navy, and sending them
to sea again with little or no alteration.  Still, George thought it
best to be on the safe side, and he accordingly at once ordered the
_Virginie_ to clear for action, the _Aurora_ being signalled to do the
same, his intention being to attack the frigate, if an enemy, since, as
far as he could make out, she carried only twenty-four guns.

In the meantime, however, the brig and the barque had been discovered by
the frigate, which at once made sail, and manoeuvred in such a manner as
to intercept them.

Bowen, on the other hand, guessing at once what was in the wind, crowded
sail upon the _Aurora_, and soon recovered his position alongside the
_Virginie_, approaching the latter vessel within hailing distance, in
order the better to concert plans for the possible coming engagement.
These were soon arranged, but not before it had become pretty evident,
from the comparatively clumsy handling of the stranger, that she was
indeed French.  Their doubts, such as they were, were set at rest when
the frigate had approached within a mile of them, by her hoisting a
tricolour at her gaff-end, and soon afterwards she sent a shot across
their fore-foot as a polite intimation that they would oblige her by
heaving-to.

They, however, did nothing of the kind; a piece of discourtesy which
_so_ preyed upon the French captain's mind that, without more ado, he
bore down upon them, and opened fire from his starboard broadside.

The three ships at that moment formed the three angles of a nearly
equilateral triangle, the sides of which measured each about a quarter
of a mile; the _Virginie_ and the _Aurora_ occupying, as it were, the
two ends of the base, and the Frenchman being at the apex.  This allowed
both English ships to attack their enemy on the same side--the
starboard--and compelled the Frenchman to fight them both with only half
his battery.  He soon saw how great a disadvantage he laboured under by
this arrangement, and did all he could to get between them.  But it was
all to no purpose; George and Bowen were fully as wide-awake as he was,
and they successfully defeated every effort of his in this direction,
principally, it must be confessed, by some lucky shooting on their part,
whereby the Frenchman's spars and rigging were so cut up that the craft
soon became practically unmanageable.  At length, after a brisk fight of
about twenty minutes, the Frenchman's fore and main-topmasts both went
simultaneously over the side, the frigate luffed into the wind, and
obstinately remained there, and she was at George's mercy.  The
_Virginie_ at once made sail and took up a position across the enemy's
bows, the _Aurora_ placed herself across his stern, and from these two
advantageous positions a raking fire was opened, which, in less than
five minutes, caused the Frenchman to haul down his flag and surrender.

The prize--which proved to be the twenty-four-gun frigate _Cigne_--was
at once taken possession of by boats from both the _Virginie_ and the
_Aurora_, her crew secured, and her damages repaired; and about midnight
the three vessels made sail in company, arriving without further
adventure at Spithead on the day but one following.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

"ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL."

The anchors were no sooner on the bottom than George found himself a
busy man.  There were certain authorities to be communicated with as to
the disposal of the French prisoners, other authorities to be consulted
as to the disposal of the pirates, and still others, again, to be seen
and arranged with as to the disposal of the prizes.  Then there were the
owners of the _Vulcan_ to be dealt with in the matter of the salvage of
that vessel, so that, altogether, he was kept going to and fro from
morning until night.

Then there was Lucy to be called upon.  But knowing--or thinking he
knew--that the sad news he had to communicate would go far toward
breaking the heart of the poor girl, he eagerly availed himself of every
excuse which offered, to defer his visit; and so it happened that whilst
Lucy--who had heard, with astonishment and joy unspeakable, the news of
his strange reappearance and good fortune--waited impatiently for the
longed-for visit, George was postponing it day after day, until nearly a
fortnight had passed.

And in truth he was so worried and harassed with unexpected difficulties
that, even if he could have found the time, he lacked the heart for such
a call.  To his intense surprise, he learned that, though he had arrived
at Spithead with three ships, neither of them belonged to him.  To begin
with, the _Virginie_, having been captured whilst her captors were under
the protection of a convoying squadron, was claimed as being actually
the prize of that squadron, though not one of the ships belonging to it
had fired a shot or struck a blow to aid in the capture.  Then, as to
the _Aurora_, having not only bought and paid, but _also fought_, for
her, George was strongly of opinion that _she_ at least was his.  But,
here again, it appeared that he was mistaken.  She had been taken from
him by pirates, and had been out of his possession more than twenty-four
hours: she was therefore, _de facto_, a pirate, and the lawful prize of
the _Virginie_, or rather, of the _Virginie's_ owners, namely, the
convoying fleet aforesaid.  And the same reasoning applied with equal
effect to the _Cigne_.  The naval authorities certainly were good enough
to admit that George and his crew were, in virtue of their having been
the actual captors of these vessels, entitled to a certain moderate
share of the prize-money accruing therefrom, but further than that they
would not go.

But if George found himself a busy man, he also found himself--outside
the circle ruled by official jealousy--famous.  The story, not only of
his gallant achievements, but also of his misfortunes, leaked out, as
such stories will; and he soon found himself a much-sought-after man,
quite a lion, in fact.  To such an extent, indeed, was this the case,
that even the curiosity of royalty itself was aroused, and in the very
midst of all his perplexities Leicester received a summons to present
himself at court.  This summons George of course dutifully and promptly
obeyed, and whilst there not only told the whole story of his
adventures, but also laid before his most gracious Majesty the
grievances from which he considered himself to be suffering.  He was
well rewarded for his pains; for, when the king came to be fully
informed of the details of the case, he took the matter in hand himself,
with the result that a speedy and, on the whole, fairly satisfactory
settlement was arrived at.  He was also offered a commission in the
navy, his Majesty sagely remarking that so good a man ought to be
serving his country in some better way than by commanding a mere
merchant-ship, and this time George was sensible enough to accept the
offer.  At his suggestion a commission was also offered to and accepted
by Bowen.

All this business being at length satisfactorily concluded, George had
no further excuse for shunning Sea View, and accordingly, on the first
opportunity, he set out with considerable perturbation of spirit for
Alverstoke.

It was about seven o'clock in the evening, and quite dark when George
reached the house, and, passing through the gate, strode up the
well-remembered pathway, and administered a sounding _rat-tat_ at the
door.  A smart, fresh-looking maid-servant answered the summons, and, on
his inquiry for Miss Walford, showed him into the familiar parlour, and
asked for his name.

"Captain Leicester," answered George.

"Yes, sir, certainly, sir," said the girl, eyeing George with such
undisguised curiosity and admiration as showed that she had undoubtedly
heard some portion at least of his story.  "Missus 'll be down in a
minute, sir.  Please to take a seat, sir."

George settled himself comfortably in a chair near the fire, and,
looking round at the well-remembered pictures and "curios" which still
adorned the room, fell into a reverie in which his mind travelled
backward and took him again in imagination through all that had happened
to him since he last sat in that room.  From this he was brought back
abruptly to the present by the opening of the door and the entrance of
Lucy.

Ah! how George's heart leapt within his bosom as he looked at her.  She
was just the same charming girl as when he had seen her last, and yet
there was a subtle difference.  She was a trifle more womanly, her form
was more fully developed, and if she was a shade paler, it only made her
loveliness more distractingly bewitching than ever.

"Lucky Ned!" thought George.  "To have been the chosen lover of such a
woman as this--ay, though only for a few short hours, how willingly
would I change places with you!"

"So you have come at last, captain," said Lucy, offering her delicate
little hand.  "I was beginning to think that, with all the honours which
have been showered upon you, you had quite forgotten your former
friends."

"No, Lucy, I have not," answered George; "I have not forgotten one of
them--least of all have I forgotten you.  Forgotten!  Why, I have never
ceased to remember you; I do not believe a single waking hour has passed
over my head since we last met, that I have not thought of you."

Lucy laughed blithely; she saw by the earnestness of his manner that he
was speaking the literal truth; he had _not_ forgotten her, and all
would yet be well.

"Fie, fie, captain," said she, "it is easily to be seen that you have
been to court; you have learned so thoroughly the art of flattery."

"Ha!" exclaimed George, "have you heard of my visit to his Majesty,
then?"

"Yes, indeed," answered Lucy, "I have heard not only that, but, I
believe, your whole story.  Is it possible you are ignorant of the fact
that your name is in everybody's mouth, and that your story is public
property?"

"So you have heard _all_ about me?" remarked George.  "Then I hope to
Heaven that you have also already heard the sad news which I came over
to break to you this evening.  I see you are in black."

"Yes," said Lucy, growing very grave at once, "I am in mourning for poor
mother; she died nearly a year ago.  But what is the sad news of which
you have to speak to me?"

"You have _not_ heard, then?" said George.  "Well, it is about your
cousin Edward.  I regret to say that I bring you bad news of him."

"Are you referring to his death?" asked Lucy with just the faintest
suspicion of a tremor in her voice.  "Because, if so, I have already
heard of it, and of all your noble, self-sacrificing behaviour on his
behalf.  And as a relative, as indeed his _only_ surviving relative, let
me here and now thank you, George, in all earnestness and sincerity, for
your devotion to my unfortunate cousin."

"By Jove, she bears it well; she can't have cared so _very_ much for
him, after all," thought George.

"No thanks are necessary, I assure you," was the reply.  "I only did for
him what I would have done with equal readiness for a stranger.  But I
had vowed that I would be a protector to him, and that I would--if God
willed it--restore him to your arms; and I am grieved that I failed to
keep my vow.  Believe me, it was through no fault of mine that I failed,
Lucy; I did the best I could, but God willed it otherwise."

"Yes--yes," answered Lucy in a dazed sort of way; "yes, God willed it
otherwise.  But--whatever do you mean, George, by talking about
restoring him to my arms?  Any one would think, to hear you speak, that
I was married to him."

"Well," said George, "betrothal _is_ a sort of marriage, is it not?"

"Betrothal!" exclaimed Lucy, looking more bewildered than ever.  "Pray
explain yourself, Captain Leicester; I assure you I have not the
_slightest_ idea of what you mean."

It was now George's turn to look mystified.

"No idea of what I mean?" he stammered.  "Why--why--you were engaged to
your cousin, Edward Walford, _were you_ not?"

A new light suddenly flashed into Lucy's mind.  All along she had been
convinced that there was some reason for George's failure to visit her
on the occasion of his previous arrival in port, and now the matter was
assuredly on the eve of explanation.  So she looked up into George's
face, and said quietly--

"No, George, I never was engaged to my cousin.  He proposed to me, but I
refused him, explicitly and in most unmistakable terms."

"You did?" panted George, his heart throbbing tumultuously.  "When was
that?"

"On the evening of the day when you last arrived in Portsmouth harbour
in the _Industry_."

Then, all in a moment, a suspicion of the truth dawned upon George.

"And it was on that same evening that I met him out there, close to the
church, and he confided to me, as a great secret, the circumstance that
you had just accepted him."

"You were so near as that, and yet you never called?  For shame,
George!" exclaimed Lucy.

"Well, you see--I--that is--in fact I could not.  The--the plain truth
is that I--I was on my way to you at the time, to try my own fortune
with you, and when I was told that you had accepted your cousin, I--
well, I felt that I couldn't meet you just then," stammered George with
desperate energy.

"Poor George!" murmured Lucy.  "How well my cousin understood your
unsuspicious character!  He _knew_ it would never occur to you to doubt
his word, and he told you that tale to keep you away from--from--"

"From what? from whom?" asked George.  "Oh Lucy! is it possible that, if
I had carried out my original resolution that night, you would have
accepted me?"

"Yes, George, I would indeed," was the murmured reply.  "I have loved
you, and you only, for a long time.  But not longer than you have loved
me," she added roguishly, as George took her in his arms and--

But, avast there! whither are we running?  It is high time that we
should 'bout ship and haul off on the opposite tack, if we would not be
regarded as impertinent intruders.  Love-making is a most delightful
pastime, particularly when it comes in at the end of a long period of
suffering, hardship, and misunderstanding; but it loses all its piquant
charm if it has to be performed in the presence of strangers, no matter
how sympathetic.  So we will leave it to the lively imagination of the
intelligent reader to picture for him, or herself, according to his, or
her, particular fancy, the way in which the remainder of the evening was
spent, merely mentioning that the lovers found time to come to a
thoroughly and mutually satisfactory understanding, and that, when
George left Sea View that evening, he was--to make use of a somewhat
hackneyed expression--"the happiest of men."

My story is now ended, or nearly so, the intelligent reader aforesaid
having doubtless already anticipated the little that remains to be told.

The pirates were tried, found guilty, and executed, as a matter of
course; the evidence of the crew of the _Virginie_ alone being
sufficient to insure their conviction.  Captain Bowen went, at
considerable personal inconvenience, to witness the execution, being
desirous, as he said, of assuring himself with his own eyes that the
wretches were so effectually dealt with as to render any further trouble
from them an absolute impossibility.

George Leicester did not accompany his friend, being, in fact, more
agreeably engaged at the time in spending with Mrs Leicester--_nee_;
Walford--a brief honeymoon in London, prior to taking command of the
frigate _Cigne_, which had been purchased into the navy, and was then
undergoing the process of refitting at Portsmouth.

In this ship, and in others, George afterwards fought many gallant
actions, greatly distinguishing himself, and eventually retiring from
the service, at an advanced age, with a wooden leg, a baronetcy, and the
title of rear-admiral.  His wife Lucy, with most commendable liberality,
presented him with no fewer than seven sons, all of whom grew up to be
fine stalwart fellows, and, entering the navy one after the other,
followed worthily in the footsteps of their gallant father.

THE END.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Voyage of the Aurora, by Harry Collingwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VOYAGE OF THE AURORA ***

***** This file should be named 27906.txt or 27906.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/9/0/27906/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
