The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Transfiguration of Miss Philura, by
Florence Morse Kingsley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Transfiguration of Miss Philura

Author: Florence Morse Kingsley

Release Date: February 17, 2009 [EBook #28102]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSFIGURATION OF MISS PHILURA ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








THE TRANSFIGURATION

OF MISS PHILURA




[Illustration: Mrs. Smart's Theme was Thought Forces and the Infinite

[_See page 18_]




THE TRANSFIGURATION
OF
MISS PHILURA


_By_
FLORENCE MORSE KINGSLEY


_THIRTEENTH EDITION_
FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON

COPYRIGHT, 1901, BY
FLORENCE M. KINGSLEY
_Registered at Stationers' Hall, London, England_
[PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA]
Hour-Glass Stories Edition. Published March, 1902

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER ONE


Miss Philura Rice tied her faded bonnet-strings under her faded chin
with hands that trembled a little; then she leaned forward and gazed
anxiously at the reflection which confronted her. A somewhat pinched and
wistful face it was, with large, light-lashed blue eyes, arched over
with a mere pretense at eyebrows. More than once in her twenties Miss
Philura had ventured to eke out this scanty provision of Nature with a
modicum of burned match stealthily applied in the privacy of her virgin
chamber. But the twenties, with their attendant dreams and follies, were
definitely past; just how long past no one knew exactly--Miss Philura
never informed the curious on this point.

As for the insufficient eyebrows, they symbolized, as it were, a meagre
and restricted life, vaguely acknowledged as the dispensation of an
obscurely hostile but consistent Providence; a Providence far too awful
and exalted--as well as hostile--to interest itself benignantly in so
small and neutral a personality as stared back at her from the large,
dim mirror of Cousin Maria Van Deuser's third-story back bedroom. Not
that Miss Philura ever admitted such dubious thoughts to the select
circle of her conscious reflections; more years ago than she cared to
count she had grappled with her discontent, had thrust it resolutely
out of sight, and on the top of it she had planted a big stone marked
Resignation. Nevertheless, at times the stone heaved and trembled
ominously.

       *       *       *       *       *

At sound of a brisk tap at her chamber door the lady turned with a
guilty start to find the fresh-colored, impertinent face of the French
maid obtruding itself into the room.

"Ze madame waits," announced this individual, and with a coldly
comprehensive eye swept the small figure from head to foot.

"Yes, yes, my dear, I am quite ready--I am coming at once!" faltered
Miss Philura, with a propitiatory smile, and more than ever painfully
aware that the skirt of her best black gown was irremediably short and
scant, that her waist was too flat, her shoulders too sloping, her
complexion faded, her forehead wrinkled, and her bonnet unbecoming.

As she stepped uncertainly down the dark, narrow stairway she rebuked
herself severely for these vain and worldly thoughts. "To be a church
member, in good and regular standing, and a useful member of society,"
she assured herself strenuously, "should be and _is_ sufficient for me."

Ten minutes later, Miss Philura, looking smaller and more insignificant
than usual, was seated in the carriage opposite Mrs. J. Mortimer Van
Deuser--a large, heavily upholstered lady of majestic deportment, paying
diligent heed to the words of wisdom which fell from the lips of her
hostess and kinswoman.

"During your short stay in Boston," that lady was remarking
impressively, "you will, of course, wish to avail yourself of those
means of culture and advancement so sadly lacking in your own
environment. This, my dear Philura, is pre-eminently the era of
progressive thought. We can have at best, I fear, but a faint
conception of the degree to which mankind will be able, in the years of
the coming century, to shake off the gross and material limitations of
sense."

Mrs. Van Deuser paused to settle her sables preliminary to recognizing
with an expansive smile an acquaintance who flashed by them in a
victoria; after which she adjusted the diamonds in her large, pink ears,
and proceeded with unctuous tranquillity. "On this occasion, my dear
Philura, you will have the pleasure of listening to an address by Mrs.
B. Isabelle Smart, one of our most advanced thinkers along this line.
You will, I trust, be able to derive from her words aliment which will
influence the entire trend of your individual experience."

"Where--in what place will the lady speak--I mean, will it be in the
church?" ventured Miss Philura in a depressed whisper. She sighed
apprehensively as she glanced down at the tips of her shabby gloves.

"The lecture will take place in the drawing-room of the Woman's
Ontological Club," responded Mrs. Van Deuser, adding with austere
sweetness of tone: "The club deals exclusively with those conceptions or
principles which lie at the base of all phenomena; including being,
reality, substance, time, space, motion, change, identity, difference,
and cause--in a word, my dear Philura, with ultimate metaphysical
philosophy." A majestic and conclusive sweep of a perfectly gloved hand
suggested infinity and reduced Miss Philura into shrinking silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Mrs. B. Isabelle Smart began to speak she became almost directly
aware of a small, wistful face, with faded blue eyes and a shabby,
unbecoming bonnet, which, surrounded as it was on all sides by tossing
plumes, rich velvets and sparkling gems, with their accompaniments of
full-fleshed, patrician countenances, took to itself a look of positive
distinction. Mrs. Smart's theme, as announced by the President of the
Ontological Club, was Thought Forces and the Infinite, a somewhat
formidable-sounding subject, but one which the pale, slight, plainly
dressed but singularly bright-eyed lady, put forward as the speaker of
the afternoon, showed no hesitancy in attacking.

Before three minutes had passed Miss Philura Rice had forgotten that
such things as shabby gloves, ill-fitting gowns, unbecoming bonnets and
superfluous birthdays existed. In ten minutes more she was leaning
forward in breathless attention, the faded eyes aglow, the unbecoming
bonnet pushed back from a face more wistful than ever, but flushed with
a joyful excitement.

       *       *       *       *       *

"This unseen Good hems us about on every side," the speaker was saying,
with a comprehensive sweep of her capable-looking hands. "It presses
upon us, more limitless, more inexhaustible, more free than the air that
we breathe! Out of it _every_ need, _every_ want, _every_ yearning of
humanity can be, must be, supplied. To you, who have hitherto led
starved lives, hungering, longing for the good things which you believe
a distant and indifferent God has denied you--to you I declare that in
this encircling, ever-present, invisible, exhaustless Beneficence is
already provided a lavish abundance of everything which you can possibly
want or think! Nay, desire itself is but God--Good--Love, knocking at
the door of your consciousness. It is impossible for you to desire
anything that is not already your own! It only remains for you to bring
the invisible into visibility--to take of the everlasting substance what
you will!

"And how must you do this? Ask, and _believe that you have_! You have
asked many times, perhaps, and have failed to receive. Why? You have
failed to _believe_. Ask, then, for what you will! Ask, and at once
return thanks for what you have asked! In the asking and _believing_ is
the thing itself made manifest. Declare that it is yours! Expect it!
Believe it! Hold to it without wavering--no matter how empty your hands
may seem! _It is yours_, and God's infinite creation shall lapse into
nothingness; His stars shall fall from high Heaven like withered leaves
sooner than that you shall fail to obtain all that you have asked!"

When, at the close of the lecture, Mrs. B. Isabelle Smart became the
center of a polite yet insistent crush of satins, velvets and
broadcloths, permeated by an aroma of violets and a gentle hum of
delicate flattery, she was aware of a timid hand upon her arm, and
turned to look into the small, eager face under the unfashionable
bonnet.

"You--you meant religious gifts, did you not?" faltered the faint,
discouraged voice; "faith, hope and--and--the--the being resigned to
God's will, and--and endeavoring to bear the cross with patience."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I meant _everything_ that _you_ want," answered the bright-eyed one
with deliberate emphasis, the bright eyes softening as they took in more
completely the pinched outlines and the eager child's look shining from
out the worn and faded woman's face.

"But--but there is so much! I--I never had anything that I really
wanted--things, you know, that one could hardly mention in one's
prayers."

"Have them now. Have them all. God is all. All is God. You are God's.
God is yours!"

Then the billowing surges of silk and velvet swept the small, inquiring
face into the background with the accustomed ease and relentlessness of
billowing surges.

Having partaken copiously of certain "material beliefs" consisting of
salads and sandwiches, accompanied by divers cups of strong coffee, Mrs.
J. Mortimer Van Deuser had become pleasantly flushed and expansive. "A
most unique, comprehensive and uplifting view of our spiritual
environment," she remarked to Miss Philura when the two ladies found
themselves on their homeward way. Her best society smile still lingered
blandly about the curves and creases of her stolid, high-colored visage;
the dying violets on her massive satin bosom gave forth their sweetest
parting breath.

The little lady on the front seat of the carriage sat very erect; red
spots glowed upon her faded cheeks. "I think," she said tremulously,
"that it was just--wonderful! I--I am so very happy to have heard it.
Thank you a thousand times, dear Cousin Maria, for taking me."

Mrs. Van Deuser raised her gold-rimmed glasses and settled them under
arching brows, while the society smile faded quite away. "Of course,"
she said coldly, "one should make due and proper allowance for facts--as
they exist. And also--er--consider above all what interpretation is best
suited to one's individual station in life. Truth, my dear Philura,
adapts itself freely to the needs of the poor and lowly as well as to
the demands of those upon whom devolve the higher responsibilities of
wealth and position; our dear Master Himself spoke of the poor as always
with us, you will remember. A lowly but pious life, passed in humble
recognition of God's chastening providence, is doubtless good and proper
for many worthy persons."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Philura's blue eyes flashed rebelliously for perhaps the first time
in uncounted years. She made no answer. As for the long and presumably
instructive homily on the duties and prerogatives of the lowly, lasting
quite up to the moment when the carriage stopped before the door of Mrs.
Van Deuser's residence, it fell upon ears which heard not. Indeed, her
next remark was so entirely irrelevant that her august kinswoman stared
in displeased amazement. "I am going to purchase some--some necessaries
to-morrow, Cousin Maria; I should like Fifine to go with me."

Miss Philura acknowledged to herself, with a truthfulness which she felt
to be almost brazen, that her uppermost yearnings were of a wholly
mundane character.

During a busy and joyous evening she endeavored to formulate these
thronging desires; by bedtime she had even ventured--with the aid of a
stubbed lead-pencil--to indite the most immediate and urgent of these
wants as they knocked at the door of her consciousness. The list, hidden
guiltily away in the depths of her shabby purse, read something as
follows:

"I wish to be beautiful and admired. I want two new dresses; a hat with
plumes, and a silk petticoat that rustles. I want some new kid gloves
and a feather boa (a long one made of ostrich feathers). I wish----" The
small, blunt pencil had been lifted in air for the space of three
minutes before it again descended; then, with cheeks that burned, Miss
Philura had written the fateful words: "I wish to have a lover and to
be married."

"There, I have done it!" she said to herself, her little fingers
trembling with agitation. "He must already exist in the encircling Good.
He is mine. I am engaged to be married at this very moment!"

To lay this singular memorandum before her Maker appeared to Miss
Philura little short of sacrilegious; but the thought of the mysterious
Abundance of which the seeress had spoken, urging itself, as it were,
upon her acceptance, encouraged her. She arose from her evening orisons
with a glowing face. "I have asked," she said aloud, "and I _believe_ I
shall have."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mademoiselle Fifine passed a very enjoyable morning with Miss Philura.
To choose, to purchase, and above all to transform the ugly into the
beautiful, filled the French woman's breast with enthusiasm. Her glance,
as it rested upon her companion's face and figure, was no longer coldly
critical, but cordially appreciative. "Ze madame," she declared, showing
her white teeth in a pleasant smile, "has very many advantage. _Voila_,
ze hair--_c'est admirable_, as any one may perceive! Pardon, while for
one little minute I arrange! Ah--_mon dieu!_ Regard ze difference!"

The two were at this moment in a certain millinery shop conducted by a
discreet and agreeable compatriot of Fifine's. This individual now
produced a modest hat of black, garnished with plumes, which, set
lightly on the loosened bands of golden-brown hair, completed the effect
"_delicieusement!_" declared the French women in chorus.

With a beating heart Miss Philura stared into the mirror at her changed
reflection. "It is quite--quite true!" she said aloud. "It is all true."

Fifine and the milliner exchanged delighted shrugs and grimaces. In
truth, the small, erect figure, in its perfectly fitting gown, bore
no resemblance to the plain, elderly Miss Philura of yesterday.
As for the face beneath the nodding plumes, it was actually
radiant--transfigured--with joy and hope.

Mrs. J. Mortimer Van Deuser regarded the apparition which greeted her at
luncheon with open disapproval. This new Miss Philura, with the prettily
flushed cheeks, the bright eyes, the fluff of waving hair, and--yes,
actually a knot of fragrant violets at her breast, had given her an
unpleasant shock of surprise. "I am sure I hope you can _afford_ all
this," was her comment, with a deliberate adjustment of eyebrows and
glasses calculated to add mordant point and emphasis to her words.

"Oh, yes," replied Miss Philura tranquilly, but with heightened color;
"I can afford whatever I like now."

Mrs. Van Deuser stared hard at her guest. She found herself actually
hesitating before Philura Rice. Then she drew her massive figure to its
full height, and again bent the compelling light of her gold-rimmed
glasses full upon the small person of her kinswoman. "What--er--I do not
understand," she began lamely. "_Where_ did you obtain the money for all
this!"

Miss Philura raised her eyebrows ever so little--somehow they seemed to
suit the clear blue eyes admirably today.

"The money?" she repeated, in a tone of surprise. "Why, out of the
bank, of course."

Upon the fact that she had drawn out and expended in a single morning
nearly the whole of the modest sum commonly made to supply her meager
living for six months Miss Philura bestowed but a single thought. "In
the all-encircling Good," she said to herself serenely, "there is plenty
of money for me; why, then, should I not spend this?"




CHAPTER TWO


The village of Innisfield was treated to a singular surprise on the
Sunday morning following, when Miss Philura Rice, newly returned from
her annual visit to Boston, walked down the aisle to her accustomed
place in the singers' seat. Whispered comment and surmise flew from pew
to pew, sandwiched irreverently between hymn, prayer and sermon.
Indeed, the last-mentioned portion of the service, being of unusual
length and dullness, was utilized by the female members of the
congregation in making a minute inventory of the amazing changes which
had taken place in the familiar figure of their townswoman.

"Philury's had money left her, I shouldn't wonder;" "Her Cousin Van
Deuser's been fixin' her up;" "She's a-goin' to be married!" were some
of the opinions, wholly at variance with the text of the discourse,
which found their way from mouth to mouth.

Miss Electa Pratt attached herself with decision to her friend, Miss
Rice, directly the service was at an end. "I'm just _dying_ to hear all
about it!" she exclaimed, with a fond pressure of the arm linked within
her own--this after the two ladies had extricated themselves from the
circle of curious and critical faces at the church door.

Miss Philura surveyed the speaker with meditative eyes; it seemed to her
that Miss Pratt was curiously altered since she had seen her last.

"_Have_ you had a fortune left you?" went on her inquisitor, blinking
enviously at the nodding plumes which shaded Miss Philura's blue eyes.
"Everybody _says_ you have; and that you are going to get married soon.
I'm sure you'll tell _me_ everything!"

Miss Philura hesitated for a moment. "I haven't exactly had money left
me," she began; then her eyes brightened. "I have all that I need," she
said, and straightened her small figure confidently.

"And _are_ you going to be married, dear?"

"Yes," said Miss Philura distinctly.

"Well, I _never_--Philura Rice!" almost screamed her companion. "Do tell
me _when_; and _who_ is it?"

"I can not tell you that--now," said Miss Philura simply. "He is in----"
She was about to add "the encircling Good," but she reflected that Miss
Pratt might fail to comprehend her. "I will introduce you to
him--later," she concluded with dignity.

To follow the fortunes of Miss Philura during the ensuing weeks were a
pleasant though monotonous task; the encircling Good proved itself
wholly adequate to the demands made upon it. Though there was little
money in the worn purse, there were numerous and pressing invitations
to tea, to dinner, and to spend the day, from hosts of friends who had
suddenly become warm, affectionate, and cordially appreciative; and not
even the new Methodist minister's wife could boast of such lavish
donations, in the shape of new-laid eggs, frosted cakes, delicate
biscuit, toothsome crullers and choice fruits as found their way to Miss
Philura's door.

       *       *       *       *       *

The recipient of these manifold favors walked, as it were, upon air.
"For unto every one that hath shall be given," she read in the privacy
of her own shabby little parlor, "and he shall have abundance."

"Everything that I want is mine!" cried the little lady, bedewing the
pages of Holy Writ with happy tears. The thought of the lover and
husband who, it is true, yet lingered in the invisible, brought a
becoming blush to her cheek. "I shall see him soon," she reflected
tranquilly. "He is mine--mine!"

At that very moment Miss Electa Pratt was seated in the awe-inspiring
reception-room of Mrs. J. Mortimer Van Deuser's residence in Beacon
Street. The two ladies were engaged in earnest conversation.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What you tell me with regard to Philura fills me with surprise and
alarm," Mrs. Van Deuser was remarking with something more than her
accustomed majesty of tone and mien. "Philura Rice certainly did _not_
become engaged to be married during her stay in Boston. Neither has she
been the recipient of funds from myself, nor, to the best of my
knowledge, from any other member of the family. Personally, I have
always been averse to the encouragement of extravagance and vanity in
those destined by a wise Providence to pass their lives in a humble
station. I fear exceedingly that Philura's visits to Boston have failed
to benefit her as I wished and intended."

"But she _said_ that she had money, and that she was going to get
married," persisted Miss Pratt. "You don't suppose"--lowering her
strident tones to a whisper--"that the poor thing is going crazy?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Van Deuser had concentrated her intellectual and penetrating orbs
upon a certain triangular knob that garnished the handle of her
visitor's umbrella; she vouchsafed no reply. When she did speak, after
the lapse of some moments, it was to dismiss that worthy person with a
practiced ease and adroitness which permitted of nothing further, either
in the way of information or conjecture.

"Philura is, after all, a distant relative of my own," soliloquized Mrs.
Van Deuser, "and _as such_ is entitled to consideration."

Her subsequent cogitations presently took shape to themselves and
became a letter, dispatched in the evening mail and bearing the address
of the Rev. Silas Pettibone, Innisfield. Mrs. Van Deuser recalled in
this missive Miss Philura's "unfortunate visit" to the Ontological Club,
and the patent indications of its equally unfortunate consequences. "I
should be inclined to take myself severely to task in the matter," wrote
the excellent and conscientious lady, "if I had not improved the
opportunity to explain at length, in the hearing of my misguided
relative, the nature and scope of God's controlling providence, as
signally displayed in His dealings with the humbler classes of society.
As an under-shepherd of the lowly flock to which Miss Rice belongs, my
dear Mr. Pettibone, I lay her spiritual state before you, and beg that
you will at once endeavor to set right her erroneous views of the
overruling guidance of the Supreme Being. I shall myself intercede for
Philura before the Throne of Grace."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Rev. Silas Pettibone read this remarkable communication with
interest; indeed, after returning it to its envelope and bestowing it in
his most inaccessible coat-pocket, the under-shepherd of the lowly flock
of Innisfield gave himself the task of resurrecting and reperusing the
succinct yet weighty words of Mrs. Van Deuser.

If the Rev. Silas had been blessed with a wife, to whose nimbler wits he
might have submitted the case, it is probable that he would not have sat
for so long a time in his great chair brooding over the contents of the
violet-tinted envelope from Boston. But unfortunately the good minister
had been forced to lay his helpmate beneath the rough sods of the
village churchyard some three years previous. Since this sad event, it
is scarcely necessary to state, he had found it essential to his peace
of mind to employ great discretion in his dealings with the female
members of his flock. He viewed the matter in hand with vague
misgivings. Strangely enough, he had not heard of Miss Philura's good
fortune, and to his masculine and impartial vision there had appeared no
especial change in the aspect or conduct of the the little woman.

"Let me think," he mused, passing his white hand through the thick, dark
locks, just touched with gray, which shaded his perplexed forehead. He
was a personable man, was the Rev. Silas Pettibone. "Let me think: Miss
Philura has been very regular in her attendance at church and
prayer-meeting of late. No, I have observed nothing wrong--nothing
blameworthy in her walk and conversation. But I can not approve of
these--ah--clubs." He again cast his eye upon the letter. "Ontology,
now, is certainly not a fit subject for the consideration of the female
mind."

       *       *       *       *       *

Having delivered himself of this sapient opinion, the reverend gentleman
made ready for a round of parochial visits. Foremost on his list
appeared the name of Miss Philura Rice. As he stood upon the door-step,
shaded on either side by fragrant lilac plumes, he resolved to be
particularly brief, though impressive, in his pastoral ministrations.
If this especial member of his flock had wandered from the straight and
narrow way into forbidden by-paths, it was his manifest duty to restore
her in the spirit of meekness; but he would waste no unnecessary time or
words in the process.

The sunshine, pleasantly interrupted by snowy muslin curtains, streamed
in through the open windows of Miss Philura's modest parlor, kindling
into scarlet flame the blossoms of the thrifty geranium which stood
upon the sill, and flickered gently on the brown head of the little
mistress of the house, seated with her sewing in a favorite
rocking-chair. Miss Philura was unaffectedly glad to see her pastor. She
told him at once that last Sunday's sermon was inspiring; that she felt
sure that after hearing it the unconverted could hardly fail to be
convinced of the error of their ways.

The Rev. Silas Pettibone seated himself opposite Miss Philura and
regarded her attentively. The second-best new dress was undeniably
becoming; the blue eyes under the childish brows beamed upon him
cordially. "I am pleased to learn--ah--that you can approve the
discourse of Sabbath morning," he began in somewhat labored fashion. "I
have had occasion to--that is--er, my attention has been called of late
to the fact that certain members of the church have--well, to put it
briefly, some have fallen grievously away from the faith."

Miss Philura's sympathy and concern were at once apparent. "I do not
see," she said simply, "how one can fall away from the faith. It is so
beautiful to believe!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The small, upturned face shone with so sweet and serene a light that the
under-shepherd of the Innisfield flock leaned forward and fixed his
earnest brown eyes on the clear blue eyes of the lady. In treatises
relating to the affections this stage of the proceedings is generally
conceded to mark a crisis. It marked a crisis on this occasion; during
that moment the Rev. Silas Pettibone forgot at once and for all time the
violet-tinted envelope in his coat-tail pocket. It was discovered six
month's later and consigned to oblivion by--but let us not anticipate.

"God is so kind, _so generous_!" pursued Miss Philura softly. "If we
once know Him as our Father we can never again be afraid, or lonely, or
poor, or lacking for any good thing. How is it possible to fall away? I
do not understand. Is it not because they do not know Him?"

It is altogether likely that the pastor of the Innisfield Presbyterian
Church found conditions in the spiritual state of Miss Philura which
necessitated earnest and prolonged admonition; at all events, the sun
was sinking behind the western horizon when the reverend gentleman
slowly and thoughtfully made his way toward the parsonage. Curiously
enough, this highly respectable domicile had taken on during his absence
an aspect of gloom and loneliness unpleasantly apparent. "A scarlet
geranium in the window might improve it," thought the vaguely
dissatisfied proprietor, as he put on his dressing-gown and thrust his
feet into his newest pair of slippers. (Presented by Miss Electa Pratt
"to my pastor, with grateful affection.")

"I believe I failed to draw Miss Philura's attention to the obvious
relation between faith and works," cogitated the reverend Silas, as he
sat before his lonely hearth, placidly scorching the soles of his new
slippers before the cheerful blaze. "It will be altogether advisable, I
think, to set her right on that point without delay. I will--ah--just
look in again for a moment to-morrow afternoon."

       *       *       *       *       *

  "God's purposes will ripen fast,
    Unfolding every hour.
  The bud may have a bitter taste,
    But sweet will be the flower!"

sang the choir of the Innisfield Presbyterian Church one Sunday morning
a month later. And Miss Philura Rice--as was afterward remarked--sang
the words with such enthusiasm and earnestness that her high soprano
soared quite above all the other voices in the choir, and this despite
the fact that Miss Electa Pratt was putting forth her nasal contralto
with more than wonted insistence.

The last-mentioned lady found the sermon--on the text, "Little children,
love one another, for love is of God"--so extremely convincing, and her
own subsequent spiritual state in such an agitated condition, that she
took occasion to seek a private conversation with her pastor in his
study on that same Sunday afternoon.

"I don't know _when_ I've been so wrought up!" declared Miss Pratt, with
a preliminary display of immaculate handkerchief. "I cried _and cried_
after I got home from church this morning. Ma she sez to me, sez she,
'What ails you Lecty?' And I sez to ma, sez I, 'Ma, it was that
_blessed_ sermon. I don't know _when_ I ever heard anything like it!
That dear pastor of ours is just ripening for a better world!'" Miss
Electa paused a moment to shed copious tears over this statement. "It
does seem to me, _dear_ Mr. Pettibone," she resumed, with a tender
glance and a comprehensive sniff, "that you ain't looking as well as
usual. I said so to Philura Rice as we was coming out of church, and I
really hate to tell you how she answered me; only I feel as though it
was my duty. 'Mr. Pettibone is perfectly well!' she says, and tossed
those feathers of hers higher'n ever. Philura's awful worldly, I _do
grieve_ to say--_if not worse_. I've been a-thinking for some time that
it was my Christian duty (however painful) to tell you what Mis' Van
Deuser, of Boston, said about----"

The Rev. Silas Pettibone frowned with awful dignity. He brought down his
closed fist upon his open Bible with forensic force and suddenness.
"Miss Philura Rice," he said emphatically, "is one of the most
spiritual--the most lovely and consistent--Christian characters it has
ever been my privilege to know. Her faith and unworldliness are
absolutely beyond the comprehension of--of--many of my flock. I must
further tell you that I hope to have the great happiness of leading
Miss Rice to the matrimonial altar in the near future."

Miss Electa Pratt sank back in her chair petrified with astonishment.
"Well, I _must say_!" she gasped. "And she was engaged to you _all this
time_ and I never knew it!"

The Rev. Pettibone bent his eyes coldly upon his agitated parishioner.
"I am at a loss to comprehend your very strange comment, Miss Pratt," he
said; "the engagement has been of such very short duration that I can
not regard it as surprising that you should not have heard of it.
It--ah--took place only yesterday."

Miss Electa straightened her angular shoulders with a jerk. "Yesterday!"
she almost screamed. "Well! I can tell _you_ that Philura Rice told _me_
that she was engaged to be married more than three months ago!"

"You are certainly mistaken, madam," began the minister in a somewhat
perturbed tone, which did not escape the notice of the now flushed and
triumphant spinster.

"More than three months ago!" she repeated with incisive emphasis.
"_Now_ maybe you'll listen to me while I tell you what I know about
Philura Rice!"

But the lady had reckoned without her host. The Rev. Silas arose to his
feet with decision. "I certainly will _not_ listen to anything
derogatory to Miss Rice," he said sternly. "She is my promised wife,
you will remember." With that the prudent minister beat a hasty retreat,
to entrench himself without apology or delay in the inner fastnesses of
the parsonage.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Electa rolled her greenish orbs about the chamber of learning with
a thoughtful smile. "If Philura Rice ain't crazy," she said aloud; "an'
I guess she ain't far from it. She's told a wicked lie! In either case,
it's my Christian duty to see this thing put a stop to!"

That evening after service Miss Philura, her modest cheeks dyed with
painful blushes, confessed to her promised husband that she had indeed
announced her intentions of matrimony some three months previous. "I
wanted somebody to--to love me," she faltered; "somebody in particular,
you know; and--and I asked God to give me--a--a husband. After I had
asked, of course I _believed_ that _I had_. He--he was already in the
encircling Good, you know, or I should not have wanted him! When Electa
asked me point blank, what could I say without--without denying--_God_?"

The brave voice faltered more than once during this recital; and finally
broke down altogether when the Rev. Silas Pettibone, his brown eyes
shining, exclaimed in joyful yet solemn tones, "and God sent me!"

The encircling Good was perfectly manifest at that moment in the shape
of two strong arms. Miss Philura rested in them and was glad.




THE

HOUR-GLASS

STORIES


       *       *       *       *       *

THE COURTSHIP OF SWEET ANNE PAGE

By ELLEN V. TALBOT. A brisk little love story incidental to "The Merry
Wives of Windsor," full of fun and frolic, and telling of the Courtship
of Sweet Anne Page by three rivals lovers chosen by her father, her
mother, and herself.

THE SANDALS

By REV. ZELOTES GRENELL. A beautiful little idyl of sacred story dealing
with the sandals of Christ.

THE TRANSFIGURATION OF MISS PHILURA

By FLORENCE MORSE KINGSLEY. This clever story is based on the theory
that every physical need and every desire of the human heart can be
claimed and received from the "Encircling Good" by the true believer.

THE HERR DOCTOR

By ROBERT MACDONALD. A novelette of artistic literary merit, narrating
the varied experiences of an American girl in her effort toward
capturing a titled husband.

ESARHADDON

By COUNT LEO TOLSTOY. Three allegorical stories illustrating Tolstoy's
theories of non-resistance, and the essential unity of all forms of
life.

THE CZAR'S GIFT

By WILLIAM ORDWAY PARTRIDGE. How freedom was obtained for an exiled
brother.

THE EMANCIPATION OF MISS SUSANA

An entrancing love story that ends in a most romantic marriage.

THE OLD DARNMAN

By CHARLES L. GOODELL, D.D. A character known to many a New England boy
and girl, in which the "lost bride" is the occasion for a lifelong
search from door to door.

BALM IN GILEAD

By FLORENCE MORSE KINGSLEY. A very touching story of a mother's grief
over the loss of her child of tender years, and her search for comfort,
which she finds at last in her husband's loyal Christian faith.

MISERERE

By MABEL WAGNALLS. The romantic story of a sweet voice that thrilled
great audiences in operatic Paris, Berlin, etc.

PARSIFAL

By H. R. HAWEIS. An intimate study of the great operatic masterpiece.

THE TROUBLE WOMAN

By CLARA MORRIS. A pathetic little story full of heart interest.

THE RETURN OF CAROLINE

By FLORENCE MORSE KINGSLEY. Companion story to the "Transfiguration of
Miss Philura," by the same author.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Small l2mo, Dainty Cloth Binding, Illustrated._

_40 cents each_

FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, Pubs.

NEW YORK AND LONDON





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Transfiguration of Miss Philura, by
Florence Morse Kingsley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSFIGURATION OF MISS PHILURA ***

***** This file should be named 28102.txt or 28102.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/0/28102/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
