The Project Gutenberg EBook of Attack, by Edward G. D. Liveing

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Attack
       An Infantry Subaltern's Impression of July 1st, 1916

Author: Edward G. D. Liveing

Release Date: February 20, 2009 [EBook #28145]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ATTACK ***




Produced by Jeannie Howse and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For     |
    | a complete list, please see the end of this document.     |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




  ATTACK




  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  NEW YORK . BOSTON . CHICAGO . DALLAS
  ATLANTA . SAN FRANCISCO

  MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED
  LONDON . BOMBAY . CALCUTTA
  MELBOURNE

  THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.
  TORONTO




  ATTACK

  AN INFANTRY SUBALTERN'S IMPRESSIONS
  OF JULY 1ST, 1916

  BY
  EDWARD G.D. LIVEING


  WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
  JOHN MASEFIELD


  New York

  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  1918

  _All rights reserved_




  COPYRIGHT, 1918
  BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  Set up and electrotyped. Published, April, 1918




  TO

  THE N.C.O.s

  AND

  MEN OF No. 5 PLATOON

  Of a Battalion of the County of London
  Regiment, whom I had the good
  fortune to command in France
  during 1915-1916, and in
  particular to the
  memory of
  RFN. C.N. DENNISON
  My Platoon Observer, who fell in action
  July 1st, 1916, in an attempt
  to save my life




INTRODUCTION


The attack on the fortified village of Gommecourt, which Mr. Liveing
describes in these pages with such power and colour, was a part of the
first great allied attack on July 1, 1916, which began the battle of
the Somme. That battle, so far as it concerns our own troops, may be
divided into two sectors: one, to the south of the Ancre River, a
sector of advance, the other, to the north of the Ancre River, a
containing sector, in which no advance was possible. Gommecourt
itself, which made a slight but important salient in the enemy line in
the containing sector, was the most northern point attacked in that
first day's fighting.

Though the Gommecourt position is not impressive to look at, most of
our soldiers are agreed that it was one of the very strongest points
in the enemy's fortified line on the Western Front. French and Russian
officers, who have seen it since the enemy left it, have described it
as "terrible" and as "the very devil." There can be no doubt that it
was all that they say.

The country in that part is high-lying chalk downland, something like
the downland of Berkshire and Buckinghamshire, though generally barer
of trees, and less bold in its valleys. Before the war it was
cultivated, hedgeless land, under corn and sugar-beet. The chalk is
usually well-covered, as in Buckinghamshire, with a fat clay. As the
French social tendency is all to the community, there are few lonely
farms in that countryside as there would be with us. The inhabitants
live in many compact villages, each with a church, a market-place, a
watering-place for stock, and sometimes a chateau and park. Most of
the villages are built of red brick, and the churches are of stone,
not (as in the chalk countries with us) of dressed flint. Nearly all
the villages are planted about with orchards; some have copses of
timber trees. In general, from any distance, the villages stand out
upon the downland as clumps of woodland. Nearly everywhere near the
battlefield a clump of orchard, with an occasional dark fir in it, is
the mark of some small village. In time of peace the Picardy farming
community numbered some two or three hundred souls. Gommecourt and
Hebuterne were of the larger kind of village.

A traveller coming towards Gommecourt as Mr. Liveing came to it, from
the west, sees nothing of the Gommecourt position till he reaches
Hebuterne. It is hidden from him by the tilt of the high-lying chalk
plateau, and by the woodland and orchards round Hebuterne village.
Passing through this village, which is now deserted, save for a few
cats, one comes to a fringe of orchard, now deep in grass, and of
exquisite beauty. From the hedge of this fringe of orchard one sees
the Gommecourt position straight in front, with the Gommecourt salient
curving round on slightly rising ground, so as to enclose the left
flank.

At first sight the position is not remarkable. One sees, to the left,
a slight rise or swelling in the chalk, covered thickly with the
remains and stumps of noble trees, now mostly killed by shell-fire.
This swelling, which is covered with the remains of Gommecourt Park,
is the salient of the enemy position. The enemy trenches here jut out
into a narrow pointing finger to enclose and defend this slight rise.

Further to the right, this rise becomes a low, gentle heave in the
chalk, which stretches away to the south for some miles, becoming
lower and gentler in its slope as it proceeds. The battered woodland
which covers its higher end contains the few stumps and heaps of brick
that were once Gommecourt village. The lower end is without trees or
buildings.

This slight wooded rise and low, gentle heave in the chalk make up the
position of Gommecourt. It is nothing but a gentle rise above a gentle
valley. From a mile or two to the south of Gommecourt, this valley
appearance becomes more marked. If one looks northward from this point
the English lines seem to follow a slight rise parallel with the
other. The valley between the two heaves of chalk make the No Man's
Land or space between the enemy trenches and our own. The salient
shuts in the end of the valley and enfilades it.

The position has changed little since the attack of July 1. Then, as
now, Gommecourt was in ruins, and the trees of the wood were mostly
killed. Then, as now, the position looked terrible, even though its
slopes were gentle and its beauty not quite destroyed, even after two
years of war.

The position is immensely strong in itself, with a perfect glacis and
field of fire. Every invention of modern defensive war helped to make
it stronger. In front of it was the usual system of barbed wire,
stretched on iron supports, over a width of fifty yards. Behind the
wire was the system of the First Enemy Main Line, from which many
communication-trenches ran to the central fortress of the salient,
known as the Kern Redoubt, and to the Support or Guard Line. This
First Main Line, even now, after countless bombardments and nine
months of neglect, is a great and deep trench of immense strength. It
is from twelve to fifteen feet deep, very strongly revetted with
timberings and stout wicker-work. At intervals it is strengthened with
small forts or sentry-boxes of concrete, built into the parapet. Great
and deep dug-outs lie below it, and though many of these have now been
destroyed, the shafts of most of them can still be seen. At the mouths
of some of these shafts one may still see giant-legged periscopes by
which men sheltered in the dug-out shafts could watch for the coming
of an attack. When the attack began and the barrage lifted, these
watchers called up the bombers and machine-gunners from their
underground barracks, and had them in action within a few seconds.

Though the wire was formidable and the trench immense, the real
defences of the position were artillery and machine-guns. The
machine-guns were the chief danger. One machine-gun with ample
ammunition has concentrated in itself the defensive power of a
battalion. The enemy had not less than a dozen machine-guns in and in
front of the Kern Redoubt. Some of these were cunningly hidden in
pits, tunnels and shelters in (or even outside) the obstacle of the
wire at the salient, so that they could enfilade the No Man's Land, or
shoot an attacking party in the back after it had passed. The sites of
these machine-gun nests were well hidden from all observation, and
were frequently changed. Besides the machine-guns outside and in the
front line, there were others, mounted in the trees and in the higher
ground above the front line, in such position that they, too, could
play upon the No Man's Land and the English front line. The artillery
concentrated behind Gommecourt was of all calibres. It was a greater
concentration than the enemy could then usually afford to defend any
one sector, but the number of guns in it is not known. On July 1 it
developed a more intense artillery fire upon Hebuterne, and the
English line outside it, than upon any part of the English attack
throughout the battlefield.

In the attack of July 1, Gommecourt was assaulted simultaneously from
the north (from the direction of Fonquevillers) and from the south
(from the direction of Hebuterne). Mr. Liveing took part in the
southern assault, and must have "gone in" near the Hebuterne-Bucquoy
Road. The tactical intention of these simultaneous attacks from north
and south was to "pinch off" and secure the salient. The attack to the
north, though gallantly pushed, was unsuccessful. The attack to the
south got across the first-line trench and into the enemy position
past Gommecourt Cemetery almost to the Kern Redoubt. What it faced in
getting so far may be read in Mr. Liveing's account. Before our men
left the trenches outside Hebuterne they were in a heavy barrage, and
the open valley of the No Man's Land hissed, as Mr. Liveing says, like
an engine, with machine-gun bullets. Nevertheless, our men reached
the third line of enemy trenches and began to secure the ground which
they had captured.

During the afternoon the enemy counter-attacked from the south, and,
later in the day, from the north as well. Our men had not enough bombs
to hold back the attackers, and were gradually driven back, after very
severe hand-to-hand fighting in the trenches, to an evil little bend
in the front line directly to the south of Gommecourt Cemetery. At
about 11 P.M., after sixteen hours of intense and bitter fighting,
they were driven back from this point to their own lines.

Mr. Liveing's story is very well told. It is a simple and most vivid
account of a modern battle. No better account has been written in
England since the war began. I hope that so rare a talent for
narrative may be recognised. I hope, too, that Mr. Liveing may soon be
able to give us more stories as full of life as this.

                                                  JOHN MASEFIELD.


The Author wishes to thank Messrs. Blackwood and Sons for their kind
permission to republish this article, which appeared in _Blackwood's
Magazine_, December, 1917, under the title of "Battle."




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                      PAGE

  I. GATHERING FOR ATTACK                                      23

 II. EVE OF ATTACK                                             28

III. ATTACK                                                    54

 IV. TOLL OF ATTACK                                            93




ATTACK

CHAPTER I

GATHERING FOR ATTACK


The roads were packed with traffic. Column after column of lorries
came pounding along, bearing their freight of shells, trench-mortar
bombs, wire, stakes, sandbags, pipes, and a thousand other articles
essential for the offensive, so that great dumps of explosives and
other material arose in the green wayside places. Staff cars and
signallers on motor-bikes went busily on their way. Ambulances hurried
backwards and forwards between the line and the Casualty Clearing
Station, for the days of June were hard days for the infantry who dug
the "leaping-off" trenches, and manned them afterwards through rain
and raid and bombardment. Horse transport and new batteries hurried to
their destinations. "Caterpillars" rumbled up, towing the heavier
guns. Infantrymen and sappers marched to their tasks round and about
the line.

Roads were repaired, telephone wires placed deep in the ground, trees
felled for dug-outs and gun emplacements, water-pipes laid up to the
trenches ready to be extended across conquered territory, while
small-gauge and large-gauge railways seemed to spring to being in the
night.

Then came days of terror for the enemy. Slowly our guns broke forth
upon them in a tumult of rage. The Germans in retaliation sprayed our
nearer batteries with shrapnel, and threw a barrage of whizz-bangs
across the little white road leading into the village of Hebuterne.
This feeble retaliation was swallowed up and overpowered by the
torrent of metal that now poured incessantly into their territory.
Shells from the 18-pounders and trench-mortars cut their wire and
demoralised their sentries. Guns of all calibres pounded their system
of trenches till it looked for all the world like nothing more than a
ploughed field. The sky was filled with our aeroplanes wheeling about
and directing the work of batteries, and with the black and white
bursts of anti-aircraft shells. Shells from the 9.2 howitzers crashed
into strong points and gun emplacements and hurled them skywards.
Petrol shells licked up the few remaining green-leaved trees in
Gommecourt Wood, where observers watched and snipers nested: 15-inch
naval guns, under the vigilant guidance of observation balloons,
wrought deadly havoc in Bapaume and other villages and billets behind
their lines.

Thrice were the enemy enveloped in gas and smoke, and, as they
stood-to in expectation of attack, were mown down by a torrent of
shells.

The bombardment grew and swelled and brought down showers of rain. Yet
the ground remained comparatively dry and columns of dust arose from
the roads as hoof and wheel crushed their broken surfaces and
battalions of infantry, with songs and jests, marched up to billets
and bivouacs just behind the line, ready to give battle.




CHAPTER II

EVE OF ATTACK


Boom! Absolute silence for a minute. Boom! followed quickly by a more
distant report from a fellow-gun. At each bellowing roar from the 9.2
near by, bits of the ceiling clattered on to the floor of the billet
and the wall-plaster trickled down on to one's valise, making a sound
like soot coming down a chimney.

It was about three o'clock in the morning. I did not look at my watch,
as its luminous facings had faded away months before and I did not
wish to disturb my companions by lighting a match. A sigh or a groan
came from one part of the room or another, showing that our
bombardment was troublesome even to the sleepers, and a rasping noise
occasionally occurred when W----k, my Company Commander, turned round
uneasily on his bed of wood and rabbit-wire.

I plunged farther down into the recesses of my flea-bag, though its
linings had broken down and my feet stuck out at the bottom. Then I
pulled my British Warm over me and muffled my head and ears in it to
escape the regularly-repeated roar of the 9.2. Though the whole house
seemed to be shaking to bits at every minute, the noise was muffled to
a less ear-splitting fury and I gradually sank into a semi-sleep.

About six o'clock I awoke finally, and after an interval the battery
stopped its work. At half-past seven I hauled myself out of my valise
and sallied forth into the courtyard, clad in a British Warm, pyjamas,
and gum-boots, to make my toilet. I blinked as I came into the light
and felt very sleepy. The next moment I was on my hands and knees,
with every nerve of my brain working like a mill-stone. A vicious
"swish" had sounded over my head, and knowing its meaning I had turned
for the nearest door and slipped upon the cobbled stones of the yard.
I picked myself up and fled for that door just as the inevitable
"crash" came. This happened to be the door to the servants' quarters,
and they were vastly amused. We looked out of the window at the
_debris_ which was rising into the air. Two more "crumps" came
whirling over the house, and with shattering explosions lifted more
_debris_ into the air beyond the farther side of the courtyard.
Followed a burst of shrapnel and one more "crump," and the enemy's
retaliation on the 9.2 and its crew had ceased. The latter, however,
had descended into their dug-out, while the gun remained unscathed.
Not so some of our own men.

We were examining the nose-cap of a shell which had hit the wall of
our billet, when a corporal came up, who said hurriedly to W----k,
"Corporal G----'s been killed and four men wounded."

The whole tragedy had happened so swiftly, and this sudden
announcement of the death of one of our best N.C.O.s had come as such
a shock, that all we did was to stare at each other with the words:

"My God! Corporal G---- gone! It's impossible."

One expects shells and death in the line, but three or four miles
behind it one grows accustomed, so to speak, to live in a fool's
paradise. We went round to see our casualties, and I found two of my
platoon, bandaged in the leg and arm, sitting in a group of their
pals, who were congratulating them on having got "soft Blighty ones."
The Company Quartermaster-Sergeant showed me a helmet, which was lying
outside the billet when the shells came over, with a triangular gash
in it, into which one could almost place one's fist. At the body of
Corporal G---- I could not bring myself to look. The poor fellow had
been terribly hit in the back and neck, and, I confess it openly, I
had not the courage, and felt that it would be a sacrilege, to gaze on
the mangled remains of one whom I had valued so much as an N.C.O. and
grown to like so much as a man during the last ten months.

Dark clouds were blowing over in an easterly direction; a cheerless
day added to the general gloom. We had a Company Officers' final
consultation on the plans for the morrow, after which I held an
inspection of my platoon, and gave out some further orders. On my
return to the billet W----k told me that the attack had been postponed
for two days owing to bad weather. Putting aside all thought of orders
for the time being, we issued out rum to the men, indulged in a few
"tots" ourselves, and settled down to a pleasant evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a little courtyard on the evening of June 30 I called the old
platoon to attention for the last time, shook hands with the officers
left in reserve, marched off into the road, and made up a turning to
the left on to the Blue Track. We had done about a quarter of the
ground between Bayencourt and Sailly-au-Bois when a messenger hurried
up to tell me to halt, as several of the platoons of the L----
S---- had to pass us. We sat down by a large shell-hole, and the men
lit up their pipes and cigarettes and shouted jokes to the men of the
other regiment as they passed by.

It was a very peaceful evening--remarkably peaceful, now that the
guns were at rest. A light breeze played eastward. I sat with my face
towards the sunset, wondering a little if this was the last time that
I should see it. One often reads of this sensation in second-rate
novels. I must say that I had always thought it greatly "overdone";
but a great zest in the splendour of life swept over me as I sat there
in the glow of that setting sun, and also a great calmness that gave
me heart to do my uttermost on the morrow. My father had enclosed a
little card in his last letter to me with the words upon it of the
prayer of an old cavalier of the seventeenth century--Sir Jacob
Astley--before the battle of Newbury:--"Lord, I shall be very busy
this day. I may forget Thee, but do not Thou forget me." A peculiar
old prayer, but I kept on repeating it to myself with great comfort
that evening. My men were rather quiet. Perhaps the general calmness
was affecting them with kindred thoughts, though an Englishman never
shows them. On the left stood the stumpy spire of Bayencourt Church
just left by us. On the right lay Sailly-au-Bois in its girdle of
trees. Along the side of the valley which ran out from behind
Sailly-au-Bois, arose numerous lazy pillars of smoke from the wood
fires and kitchens of an artillery encampment. An English aeroplane,
with a swarm of black puffs around it betokening German shells, was
gleaming in the setting sun. It purred monotonously, almost drowning
the screech of occasional shells which were dropping by a distant
chateau. The calm before the storm sat brooding over everything.

The kilted platoons having gone on their way, we resumed our journey,
dipping into the valley behind Sailly-au-Bois, and climbing the
farther side, as I passed the officers' mess hut belonging to an
anti-aircraft battery, which had taken up a position at the foot of
the valley, and whence came a pleasant sound of clinking glass, a wild
desire for permanent comfort affected me.

Bounding the outskirts of Sailly-au-Bois, we arrived in the midst of
the battery positions nesting by the score in the level plain behind
Hebuterne. The batteries soon let us know of their presence. Red
flashes broke out in the gathering darkness, followed by quick
reports.

To the right one could discern the dim outlines of platoons moving up
steadily and at equal distances like ourselves. One could just catch
the distant noise of spade clinking on rifle. When I turned my gaze to
the front of these troops, I saw yellow-red flashes licking upon the
horizon, where our shells were finding their mark. Straight in front,
whither we were bound, the girdle of trees round Hebuterne shut out
these flashes from view, but by the noise that came from beyond those
trees one knew that the German trenches were receiving exactly the
same intensity of fire there. Every now and then this belt of trees
was being thrown into sharp relief by German star-shells, which
rocketed into the sky one after the other like a display of fireworks,
while at times a burst of hostile shrapnel would throw a weird, red
light on the twinkling poplars which surrounded the cemetery.

As we marched on towards the village (I do not mind saying it) I
experienced that unpleasant sensation of wondering whether I should be
lying out this time to-morrow--stiff and cold in that land beyond the
trees, where the red shrapnel burst and the star-shells flickered. I
remember hoping that, if the fates so decreed, I should not leave too
great a gap in my family, and, best hope of all, that I should instead
be speeding home in an ambulance on the road that stretched along to
our left. I do not think that I am far wrong when I say that those
thoughts were occurring to every man in the silent platoon behind me.
Not that we were downhearted. If you had asked the question, you would
have been greeted by a cheery "No!" We were all full of determination
to do our best next day, but one cannot help enduring rather an
unusual "party feeling" before going into an attack.

Suddenly a German shell came screaming towards us. It hurtled overhead
and fell behind us with muffled detonation in Sailly-au-Bois. Several
more screamed over us as we went along, and it was peculiar to hear
the shells of both sides echoing backwards and forwards in the sky at
the same time.

We were about four hundred yards from the outskirts of Hebuterne, when
I was made aware of the fact that the platoon in front of me had
stopped. I immediately stopped my platoon. I sat the men down along a
bank, and we waited--a wait which was whiled away by various
incidents. I could hear a dog barking, and just see two gunner
officers who were walking unconcernedly about the battery positions
and whistling for it. The next thing that happened was a red flash in
the air about two hundred yards away, and a pinging noise as bits of
shrapnel shot into the ground round about. One of my men, S---- (the
poor chap was killed next day), called to me: "Look at that fire in
Sailly, sir!" I turned round and saw a great yellow flare illuminating
the sky in the direction of Sailly, the fiery end of some barn or
farm-building, where a high explosive had found its billet.

We remained in this spot for nearly a quarter of an hour, after which
R----d's platoon began to move on, and I followed at a good distance
with mine. We made our way to the clump of trees over which the
shrapnel had burst a few minutes before. Suddenly we found ourselves
floundering in a sunken road flooded with water knee-deep. This was
not exactly pleasant, especially when my guide informed me that he was
not quite certain as to our whereabouts. Luckily, we soon gained dry
ground again, turned off into a bit of trench which brought us into
the village, and made for the dump by the church, where we were to
pick up our materials. When we reached the church--or, rather, its
ruins--the road was so filled with parties and platoons, and it was
becoming so dark, that it took us some time before we found the dump.
Fortunately, the first person whom I spotted was the Regimental
Sergeant-Major, and I handed over to him the carrying-party which I
had to detail, also despatching the rum and soup parties--the latter
to the company cooker.

Leaving the platoon in charge of Sergeant S----l, I went with my guide
in search of the dump. In the general _melee_ I bumped into W----k. We
found the rabbit wire, barbed wire, and other material in a
shell-broken outhouse, and, grabbing hold of it, handed the stuff out
to the platoon.

As we filed through the village the reflections of star-shells threw
weird lights on half-ruined houses; an occasional shell screamed
overhead, to burst with a dull, echoing sound within the shattered
walls of former cottages; and one could hear the rat-tat-tat of
machine-guns. These had a nasty habit of spraying the village with
indirect fire, and it was, as always, a relief to enter the recesses
of Wood Street without having any one hit. This communication trench
dipped into the earth at right angles to the "Boulevard" Street. We
clattered along the brick-floored trench, whose walls were overhung
with the dewy grass and flowers of the orchard--that wonderful orchard
whose aroma had survived the horror and desolation of a two years'
warfare, and seemed now only to be intensified to a softer fragrance
by the night air.

Arriving at the belt of trees and hedge which marked the confines of
the orchard, we turned to the right into Cross Street, which cut along
behind the belt of trees into Woman Street.

Turning to the left up Woman Street, and leaving the belt of trees
behind, we wound into the slightly undulating ground between Hebuterne
and Gommecourt Wood. "Crumps" were bursting round about the
communication trench, but at a distance, judging by their report, of
at least fifty yards. As we were passing Brigade Headquarters'
Dug-out, the Brigade-Major appeared and asked me the number of my
platoon. "Number 5," I replied; and he answered "Good," with a touch
of relief in his voice--for we had been held up for some time on the
way, and my platoon was the first or second platoon of the company to
get into the line.

It was shortly after this that "crumps" began to burst dangerously
near. There was suddenly a blinding flash and terrific report just to
our left. We kept on, with heads aching intolerably. Winding round a
curve, we came upon the effects of the shells. The sides of the trench
had been blown in, while in the middle of the _debris_ lay a dead or
unconscious man, and farther on a man groaning faintly upon a
stretcher. We scrambled over them, passed a few more wounded and
stretcher-bearers, and arrived at the Reserve Line.

Captain W----t was standing at the juncture of Woman Street and the
Reserve Line, cool and calm as usual. I asked him if New Woman Street
was blocked, but there was no need for a reply. A confused noise of
groans and stertorous breathing, and of some one sobbing, came to my
ears, and above it all, M---- W----'s voice saying to one of his men:
"It's all right, old chap. It's all over now." He told me afterwards
that a shell had landed practically in the trench, killing two men in
front of him and one behind, and wounding several others, but not
touching himself.

It was quite obvious to me that it was impossible to proceed to the
support trench via New Woman Street, and at any rate my Company
Commander had given me orders to go over the top from the reserve to
the support line, so, shells or no shells, and leaving Sergeant S----l
to bring up the rear of the platoon, I scaled a ladder leaning on the
side of the trench and walked over the open for about two hundred
yards. My guide and I jumped into New Woman Street just before it
touched the support line, and we were soon joined by several other men
of the platoon. We had already suffered three casualties, and going
over the top in the darkness, the men had lost touch. The ration party
also had not arrived yet. I despatched the guide to bring up the
remainder, and proceeded to my destination with about six men. About
fifteen yards farther up the trench I found a series of shell-holes
threading their way off to the left. By the light of some German
star-shells I discerned an officer groping about these holes, and I
stumbled over mounds and hollows towards him.

"Is this the support line?" I asked, rather foolishly.

"Yes," he replied, "but there isn't much room in it." I saw that he
was an officer of the Royal Engineers.

"I'm putting my smoke-bombers down here," he continued, "but you'll
find more room over towards the sunken road."

He showed me along the trench--or the remains of it--and went off to
carry out his own plans. I stumbled along till I could just
distinguish the outlines of the sunken road. The trench in this
direction was blown in level with the ground. I returned to W----k,
whose headquarters were at the juncture of New Woman Street and the
support line, telling him that the trench by the sunken road was
untenable, and that I proposed placing my platoon in a smaller length
of trench, and spreading them out fanwise when we started to advance.
To this he agreed, and putting his hand on my shoulder in his
characteristic fashion, informed me in a whisper that the attack was
to start at 7.30 A.M. As far as I can remember it was about one
o'clock by now, and more of my men had come up. I ensconced them by
sections. No. 1 section on the left and No. 4 on the right in
shell-holes and the remains of the trench along a distance of about
forty yards, roughly half the length of the trench that they were to
have occupied. At the same time I gave orders to my right-and
left-hand guides to incline off to the right and left respectively
when the advance started. I was walking back to my headquarters, a bit
of trench behind a traverse, when a German searchlight, operating from
the direction of Serre Wood, turned itself almost dead on me. I was in
my trench in a second.

Shortly afterwards Sergeant S----r arrived with No. 8 platoon. I
showed him one or two available portions of trench, but most of his
men had to crowd in with mine. The Lewis-gunners, who arrived last,
found only a ruined bit of trench next to my "headquarters," while
they deposited their guns and equipment in a shell-hole behind.

It was somewhere about four or half-past when I made my last
inspection. I clambered over the back of the trench and stood still
for a moment or so. Everything was uncannily silent. There was just a
suspicion of whiteness creeping into the sky beyond the rising ground
opposite. Over towards the left rose the remains of Gommecourt Wood.
Half its trees had gone since the last time that I had seen it, and
the few that remained stood, looking like so many masts in a harbour,
gaunt and charred by our petrol shells.

The men in the left fire-bay seemed quite comfortable. But, standing
and looking down the trench, it suddenly dawned upon me that I was
gazing right into a line of chalky German trenches, and consequently
that the enemy in those trenches could look straight into this trench.
I left instructions with the corporal in charge of that section to
build up a barricade in the gap before daybreak. As I went along the
rest of our frontage, Sergeant S----l doled out the rum.

I retired to my "headquarters," but not so Sergeant S----l, who seemed
not to bother a bit about the increasing light and the bullets which
came phitting into the ground in rather an unpleasant quantity. I was
glad when I had finally got him down into the trench. W----k had also
told him to get in, for he remarked--

"Captain W----k, 'e says to me, 'Get into the trench, S----l, you
b---- fool!' so I've got in."

He was just in time. A prelude of shrapnel screamed along, bursting
overhead, and there followed an hour's nerve-racking bombardment.




CHAPTER III

ATTACK


Dawn was breaking. The morning was cool after a chill night--a night
of waiting in blown-down trenches with not an inch to move to right or
left, of listening to the enemy's shells as they left the guns and
came tearing and shrieking towards you, knowing all the time that they
were aimed for your particular bit of trench and would land in it or
by it, of awaiting that sudden, ominous silence, and then the
crash--perhaps death.

I, for my part, had spent most of the night sitting on a petrol tin,
wedged between the two sides of the trench and two human beings--my
sergeant on the left and a corporal on the right. Like others, I had
slept for part of the time despite the noise and danger, awakened now
and then by the shattering crash of a shell or the hopeless cry for
stretcher-bearers.

But morning was coming at last, and the bombardment had ceased. The
wind blew east, and a few fleecy clouds raced along the blue sky
overhead. The sun was infusing more warmth into the air. There was the
freshness and splendour of a summer morning over everything. In fact,
as one man said, it felt more as if we were going to start off for a
picnic than for a battle.

"Pass it down to Sergeant H---- that Sergeant S----l wishes him the
top o' the mornin'," said my sergeant. But Sergeant H----, who was in
charge of the company's Lewis-guns, and had been stationed in the next
fire-trench, was at present groping his way to safety with a lump of
shrapnel in his back.

An occasional shell sang one way or the other. Otherwise all was
quiet. We passed down the remains of the rum. Sergeant S----l pressed
me to take some out of a mess-tin lid. I drank a very little--the
first and last "tot" I took during the battle. It warmed me up. Some
time after this I looked at my watch and found it was a minute or two
before 6.25 A.M. I turned to the corporal, saying--

"They'll just about start now."

The words were not out of my mouth before the noise, which had
increased a trifle during the last twenty minutes, suddenly swelled
into a gigantic roar. Our guns had started. The din was so deafening
that one could not hear the crash of German shells exploding in our
own lines.

Sergeant S----l was standing straight up in the trench and looking
over to see the effects of our shells. It was a brave thing to do, but
absolutely reckless. I pulled him down by the tail of his tunic. He
got up time and again, swearing that he would "take on the whole
b----German army." He gave us pleasing information of the effects of
our bombardment, but as I did not want him to lose his life
prematurely, I saw to it that we kept him down in the trench till the
time came for a display of bravery, in which he was not lacking.

We had been told that the final bombardment that day would be the most
intense one since the beginning of the war. The attack was to encircle
what was almost generally considered the strongest German "fortress"
on the Western Front, the stronghold of Gommecourt Wood. There was
need of it, therefore.

Just over the trenches, almost raising the hair on one's head (we were
helmeted, I must say, but that was the feeling), swished the smaller
shells from the French .75 and English 18-pounder batteries. They gave
one the sensation of being under a swiftly rushing stream. The larger
shells kept up a continuous shrieking overhead, falling on the enemy's
trenches with the roar of a cataract, while every now and then a noise
as of thunder sounded above all when our trench-mortar shells fell
amongst the German wire, blowing it to bits, making holes like mine
craters, and throwing dirt and even bits of metal into our own
trenches.

I have often tried to call to memory the intellectual, mental and
nervous activity through which I passed during that hour of hellish
bombardment and counter-bombardment, that last hour before we leapt
out of our trenches into No Man's Land. I give the vague recollection
of that ordeal for what it is worth. I had an excessive desire for the
time to come when I could go "over the top," when I should be free at
last from the noise of the bombardment, free from the prison of my
trench, free to walk across that patch of No Man's Land and opposing
trenches till I got to my objective, or, if I did not go that far, to
have my fate decided for better or for worse. I experienced, too,
moments of intense fear during close bombardment. I felt that if I was
blown up it would be the end of all things so far as I was concerned.
The idea of after-life seemed ridiculous in the presence of such
frightful destructive force. Again the prayer of that old cavalier
kept coming to my mind. At any rate, one could but do one's best, and
I hoped that a higher power than all that which was around would not
overlook me or any other fellows on that day. At one time, not very
long before the moment of attack, I felt to its intensest depth the
truth of the proverb, "Carpe diem." What was time? I had another
twenty minutes in which to live in comparative safety. What was the
difference between twenty minutes and twenty years? Really and truly
what was the difference? I was living at present, and that was enough.
I am afraid that this working of mind will appear unintelligible. I
cannot explain it further. I think that others who have waited to "go
over" will realise its meaning. Above all, perhaps, and except when
shells falling near by brought one back to reality, the intense
cascade-like noise of our own shells rushing overhead numbed for the
most part of the time one's nervous and mental system. Listening to
this pandemonium, one felt like one of an audience at a theatre and
not in the least as if one was in any way associated with it oneself.

Still, the activity of a man's nerves, though dulled to a great
extent inwardly, were bound to show externally. I turned to the
corporal. He was a brave fellow, and had gone through the Gallipoli
campaign, but he was shaking all over, and white as parchment. I
expect that I was just the same.

"We must be giving them hell," I said. "I don't think they're sending
much back."

"I don't think much, sir," he replied.

I hardly think we believed each other. Looking up out of the trench
beyond him, I saw huge, black columns of smoke and _debris_ rising up
from our communication trench. Then, suddenly, there was a blinding
"crash" just by us. We were covered in mud which flopped out of the
trench, and the evil-smelling fumes of lyddite. The cry for
stretcher-bearers was passed hurriedly up the line again. Followed
"crash" after "crash," and the pinging of shrapnel which flicked into
the top of the trench, the purring noise of flying nose-caps and soft
thudding sounds as they fell into the parapet.

It was difficult to hear one another talking. Sergeant S----l was
still full of the "get at 'em" spirit. So were we all. The men were
behaving splendidly. I passed along the word to "Fix swords."

We could not see properly over the top of the trench, but smoke was
going over. The attack was about to begin--it was beginning. I passed
word round the corner of the traverse, asking whether they could see
if the second wave was starting. It was just past 7.30 A.M. The third
wave, of which my platoon formed a part, was due to start at 7.30 plus
45 seconds--at the same time as the second wave in my part of the
line. The corporal got up, so I realised that the second wave was
assembling on the top to go over. The ladders had been smashed or used
as stretchers long ago. Scrambling out of a battered part of the
trench, I arrived on top, looked down my line of men, swung my rifle
forward as a signal, and started off at the prearranged walk.

A continuous hissing noise all around one, like a railway engine
letting off steam, signified that the German machine-gunners had
become aware of our advance. I nearly trod on a motionless form. It
lay in a natural position, but the ashen face and fixed, fearful eyes
told me that the man had just fallen. I did not recognise him then. I
remember him now. He was one of my own platoon.

To go back for a minute. The scene that met my eyes as I stood on the
parapet of our trench for that one second is almost indescribable.
Just in front the ground was pitted by innumerable shell-holes. More
holes opened suddenly every now and then. Here and there a few bodies
lay about. Farther away, before our front line and in No Man's Land,
lay more. In the smoke one could distinguish the second line
advancing. One man after another fell down in a seemingly natural
manner, and the wave melted away. In the background, where ran the
remains of the German lines and wire, there was a mass of smoke, the
red of the shrapnel bursting amid it. Amongst it, I saw Captain
H----and his men attempting to enter the German front line. The Boches
had met them on the parapet with bombs. The whole scene reminded me of
battle pictures, at which in earlier years I had gazed with much
amazement. Only this scene, though it did not seem more real, was
infinitely more terrible. Everything stood still for a second, as a
panorama painted with three colours--the white of the smoke, the red
of the shrapnel and blood, the green of the grass.

If I had felt nervous before, I did not feel so now, or at any rate
not in anything like the same degree. As I advanced, I felt as if I
was in a dream, but I had all my wits about me. We had been told to
walk. Our boys, however, rushed forward with splendid impetuosity to
help their comrades and smash the German resistance in the front line.
What happened to our materials for blocking the German communication
trench, when we got to our objective, I should not like to think. I
kept up a fast walking pace and tried to keep the line together. This
was impossible. When we had jumped clear of the remains of our front
line trench, my platoon slowly disappeared through the line stretching
out. For a long time, however, Sergeant S----l, Lance-corporal M----,
Rifleman D----, whom I remember being just in front of me, raising his
hand in the air and cheering, and myself kept together. Eventually
Lance-corporal M---- was the only one of my platoon left near me, and
I shouted out to him, "Let's try and keep together." It was not long,
however, before we also parted company. One thing I remember very well
about this time, and that was that a hare jumped up and rushed towards
and past me through the dry, yellowish grass, its eyes bulging with
fear.

We were dropping into a slight valley. The shell-holes were less few,
but bodies lay all over the ground, and a terrible groaning arose from
all sides. At one time we seemed to be advancing in little groups. I
was at the head of one for a moment or two, only to realise shortly
afterwards that I was alone.

I came up to the German wire. Here one could hear men shouting to one
another and the wounded groaning above the explosions of shells and
bombs and the rattle of machine-guns. I found myself with J----, an
officer of "C" company, afterwards killed while charging a machine-gun
in the open. We looked round to see what our fourth line was doing. My
company's fourth line had no leader. Captain W----k, wounded twice,
had fallen into a shell-hole, while Sergeant S----r had been killed
during the preliminary bombardment. Men were kneeling and firing. I
started back to see if I could bring them up, but they were too far
away. I made a cup of my mouth and shouted, as J---- was shouting. We
could not be heard. I turned round again and advanced to a gap in the
German wire. There was a pile of our wounded here on the German
parapet.

Suddenly I cursed. I had been scalded in the left hip. A shell, I
thought, had blown up in a water-logged crump-hole and sprayed me with
boiling water. Letting go of my rifle, I dropped forward full length
on the ground. My hip began to smart unpleasantly, and I left a
curious warmth stealing down my left leg. I thought it was the boiling
water that had scalded me. Certainly my breeches looked as if they
were saturated with water. I did not know that they were saturated
with blood.

So I lay, waiting with the thought that I might recover my strength (I
could barely move) and try to crawl back. There was the greater
possibility of death, but there was also the possibility of life. I
looked around to see what was happening. In front lay some wounded;
on either side of them stakes and shreds of barbed wire twisted into
weird contortions by the explosions of our trench-mortar bombs. Beyond
this nothing but smoke, interspersed with the red of bursting bombs
and shrapnel.

From out this ghastly chaos crawled a familiar figure. It was that of
Sergeant K----, bleeding from a wound in the chest. He came crawling
towards me.

"Hallo, K----," I shouted.

"Are you hit, sir?" he asked.

"Yes, old chap, I am," I replied.

"You had better try and crawl back," he suggested.

"I don't think I can move," I said.

"I'll take off your equipment for you."

He proceeded very gallantly to do this. I could not get to a kneeling
position myself, and he had to get hold of me, and bring me to a
kneeling position, before undoing my belt and shoulder-straps. We
turned round and started crawling back together. I crawled very slowly
at first. Little holes opened in the ground on either side of me, and
I understood that I was under the fire of a machine-gun. In front
bullets were hitting the turf and throwing it four or five feet into
the air. Slowly but steadily I crawled on. Sergeant K---- and I lost
sight of one another. I think that he crawled off to the right and I
to the left of a mass of barbed wire entanglements.

I was now confronted by a danger from our own side. I saw a row of
several men kneeling on the ground and firing. It is probable that
they were trying to pick off German machine-gunners, but it seemed
very much as if they would "pot" a few of the returning wounded into
the bargain.

"For God's sake, stop firing," I shouted.

Words were of no avail. I crawled through them. At last I got on my
feet and stumbled blindly along.

I fell down into a sunken road with several other wounded, and crawled
up over the bank on the other side. The Germans had a machine-gun on
that road, and only a few of us got across. Some one faintly called my
name behind me. Looking round, I thought I recognised a man of "C"
company. Only a few days later did it come home to me that he was my
platoon observer. I had told him to stay with me whatever happened.
He had carried out his orders much more faithfully than I had ever
meant, for he had come to my assistance, wounded twice in the head
himself. He hastened forward to me, but, as I looked round waiting,
uncertain quite as to who he was, his rifle clattered on to the
ground, and he crumpled up and fell motionless just behind me. I felt
that there was nothing to be done for him. He died a hero, just as he
had always been in the trenches, full of self-control, never
complaining, a ready volunteer. Shortly afterwards I sighted the
remains of our front line trench and fell into them.

At first I could not make certain as to my whereabouts. Coupled with
the fact that my notions in general were becoming somewhat hazy, the
trenches themselves were entirely unrecognisable. They were filled
with earth, and about half their original depth. I decided, with that
quick, almost semi-conscious intuition that comes to one in moments of
peril, to proceed to the left (to one coming from the German lines).
As I crawled through holes and over mounds I could hear the vicious
spitting of machine-gun bullets. They seemed to skim just over my
helmet. The trench, opening out a little, began to assume its old
outline. I had reached the head of New Woman Street, though at the
time I did not know what communication trench it was--or trouble, for
that matter. The scene at the head of that communication trench is
stamped in a blurred but unforgettable way on my mind. In the remains
of a wrecked dug-out or emplacement a signaller sat, calmly
transmitting messages to Battalion Headquarters. A few bombers were
walking along the continuation of the front line. I could distinguish
the red grenades on their arms through the smoke. There were more of
them at the head of the communication trench. Shells were coming over
and blowing up round about.

I asked one of the bombers to see what was wrong with my hip. He
started to get out my iodine tube and field dressing. The iodine tube
was smashed. I remembered that I had a second one, and we managed to
get that out after some time. Shells were coming over so incessantly
and close that the bomber advised that we should walk farther down the
trench before commencing operations. This done, he opened my breeches
and disclosed a small hole in the front of the left hip. It was
bleeding fairly freely. He poured in the iodine, and put the bandage
round in the best manner possible. We set off down the communication
trench again, in company with several bombers, I holding the bandage
to my wound. We scrambled up mounds and jumped over craters (rather a
painful performance for one wounded in the leg); we halted at times in
almost open places, when machine-gun bullets swept unpleasantly near,
and one felt the wind of shells as they passed just over, blowing up a
few yards away. In my last stages across No Man's Land my chief
thought had been, "I must get home now for the sake of my people."
Now, for I still remember it distinctly, my thought was, "Will my
name appear in the casualty list under the head of 'Killed' or
'Wounded'?" and I summoned up a mental picture of the two alternatives
in black type.

After many escapes we reached the Reserve Line, where a military
policeman stood at the head of Woman Street. He held up the men in
front of me and directed them to different places. Some one told him
that a wounded officer was following. This was, perhaps, as well, for
I was an indistinguishable mass of filth and gore. My helmet was
covered with mud, my tunic was cut about with shrapnel and bullets and
saturated with blood; my breeches had changed from a khaki to a purple
hue; my puttees were in tatters; my boots looked like a pair of very
muddy clogs.

The military policeman consigned me to the care of some excellent
fellow, of what regiment I cannot remember. After walking, or rather
stumbling, a short way down Woman Street, my guide and I came upon a
gunner Colonel standing outside his dug-out and trying to watch the
progress of the battle through his field-glasses.

"Good-morning," he said.

"Good-morning, sir," I replied.

This opening of our little conversation was not meant to be in the
least ironical, I can assure you. It seemed quite natural at the time.

"Where are you hit?" he asked.

"In the thigh, sir. I don't think it's anything very bad."

"Good. How are we getting on?"

"Well, I really can't say much for certain, sir. But I got nearly to
their front line."

Walking was now becoming exceedingly painful and we proceeded slowly.
I choked the groans that would rise to my lips and felt a cold
perspiration pouring freely from my face. It was easier to get along
by taking hold of the sides of the trench with my hands than by being
supported by my guide. A party of bombers or carriers of some
description passed us. We stood on one side to let them go by. In
those few seconds my wound became decidedly stiffer, and I wondered if
I would ever reach the end of the trenches on foot. At length the
communication trench passed through a belt of trees, and we found
ourselves in Cross Street.

Here was a First Aid Post, and R.A.M.C. men were hard at work. I had
known those trenches for a month past, and I had never thought that
Cross Street could appear so homelike. Hardly a shell was falling and
the immediate din of battle had subsided. The sun was becoming hot,
but the trees threw refreshing shadows over the wide, shallow
brick-floored trenches built by the French two years before. The
R.A.M.C. orderlies were speaking pleasant words, and men not too badly
wounded were chatting gaily. I noticed a dresser at work on a man near
by, and was pleased to find that the man whose wounds were being
attended to was my servant L----. His wound was in the hip, a nasty
hole drilled by a machine-gun bullet at close quarters. He showed me
his water-bottle, penetrated by another bullet, which had inflicted a
further, but slight, wound.

There were many more serious cases than mine to be attended to. After
about five or ten minutes an orderly slit up my breeches.

"The wound's in the front of the hip," I said.

"Yes, but there's a larger wound where the bullets come out, sir."

I looked and saw a gaping hole two inches in diameter.

"I think that's a Blighty one, isn't it?" I remarked.

"I should just think so, sir!" he replied.

"Thank God! At last!" I murmured vehemently, conjuring up visions of
the good old homeland.

The orderly painted the iodine round both wounds and put on a larger
bandage. At this moment R----, an officer of "D" company, came limping
into Cross Street.

"Hallo, L----," he exclaimed, "we had better try and get down to
hospital together."

We started in a cavalcade to walk down the remaining trenches into the
village, not before my servant, who had insisted on staying with me,
had remarked--

"I think I should like to go up again now, sir," and to which proposal
I had answered very emphatically--

"You won't do anything of the sort, my friend!"

R---- led the way, with a man to help him, next came my servant, then
two orderlies carrying a stretcher with a terribly wounded Scottish
private on it; another orderly and myself brought up the rear--and a
very slow one at that!

Turning a corner, we found ourselves amidst troops of the battalion in
reserve to us, all of them eager for news. A subaltern, with whom I
had been at a Divisional School, asked how far we had got. I told him
that we were probably in their second line by now. This statement
caused disappointment. Every one appeared to believe that we had taken
the three lines in about ten minutes. I must confess that the night
before the attack I had entertained hopes that it would not take us
much longer than this. As a matter of fact my battalion, or the
remains of it, after three hours of splendid and severe fighting,
managed to penetrate into the third line trench.

Loss of blood was beginning to tell, and my progress was getting
slower every minute. Each man, as I passed, put his arm forward to
help me along and said a cheery word of some kind or other. Down the
wide, brick-floored trench we went, past shattered trees and battered
cottages, through the rank grass and luxuriant wild flowers, through
the rich, unwarlike aroma of the orchard, till we emerged into the
village "boulevard."

The orderly held me under the arms till I was put on a wheeled
stretcher and hurried along, past the "boulevard pool" with its
surrounding elms and willows, and, at the end of the "boulevard," up a
street to the left. A short way up this street on the right stood the
Advanced Dressing Station--a well-sandbagged house reached through the
usual archway and courtyard. A dug-out, supplied with electric light
and with an entrance of remarkable sandbag construction, had been
tunnelled out beneath the courtyard. This was being used for
operations.

In front of the archway and in the road stood two "padres" directing
the continuous flow of stretchers and walking wounded. They appeared
to be doing all the work of organisation, while the R.A.M.C. doctors
and surgeons had their hands full with dressings and operations.
These were the kind of directions:

"Wounded Sergeant? Right. Abdominal wound? All right. Lift him
off--gently now. Take him through the archway into the dug-out."

"Dead? Yes! Poor fellow, take him down to the Cemetery."

"German? Dug-out No. 2, at the end of the road on the right."

Under the superintendence of the R.C. "padre," a man whose sympathy
and kindness I shall never forget, my stretcher was lifted off the
carrier and I was placed in the archway. The "padre" loosened my
bandage and looked at the wound, when he drew in his breath and asked
if I was in much pain.

"Not an enormous amount," I answered, but asked for something to
drink.

"Are you quite sure it hasn't touched the stomach?" he questioned,
looking shrewdly at me.

I emphatically denied that it had, and he brought a blood-stained mug
with a little tea at the bottom of it. I can honestly say that I never
enjoyed a drink so much as that one.

Shells, high explosives and shrapnel, were coming over every now and
then. I kept my helmet well over my head. This also served as a shade
from the sun, for it was now about ten o'clock and a sultry day. I was
able to obtain a view of events round about fairly easily. From time
to time orderlies tramped through the archway, bearing stretcher-cases
to the dug-out. Another officer had been brought in and placed on the
opposite side of the archway. The poor fellow, about nineteen, was
more or less unconscious. His head and both hands were covered in
bandages crimson with blood. So coated was he with mud and gore that I
did not at first recognise him as an officer. At the farther end of
the arch a young private of about eighteen was lying on his side,
groaning in the agony of a stomach wound and crying "Mother." The
sympathetic "padre" did the best he could to comfort him. Out in the
road the R.A.M.C. were dressing and bandaging the ever-increasing flow
of wounded. Amongst them a captive German R.A.M.C. man, in green
uniform, with a Red Cross round his sleeve, was visible, hard at
work. Everything seemed so different from the deadly strife a
thousand or so yards away. There, foe was inflicting wounds on foe;
here were our men attending to the German wounded and the Germans
attending to ours. Both sides were working so hard now to save life.
There was a human touch about that scene in the ruined village street
which filled one with a sense of mingled sadness and pleasure. Here
were both sides united in a common attempt to repair the ravages of
war. Humanity had at last asserted itself.

It was about eleven o'clock, I suppose, when the "padre" came up again
to my stretcher and asked me if I should like to get on, as there was
a berth vacant in an ambulance. The stretcher was hoisted up and slid
into the bottom berth of the car. The berth above was occupied by an
unconscious man. On the other side of the ambulance were four sitting
cases--a private, a sergeant, a corporal, and a rifleman, the last
almost unconscious. Those of us who could talk were very pleased with
life, and I remember saying: "Thank God, we're out of that hell,
boys!"

"What's wrong with him?" I asked the corporal, signifying the
unconscious man.

"Hit in the lungs, sir. They've set him up on purpose."

The corporal, pulling out his cigarette case, offered cigarettes all
round, and we started to smoke. The last scene that I saw in Hebuterne
was that of three men dressing a tall badly wounded Prussian officer
lying on the side of the road. The ambulance turned the corner out of
the village. There followed three "crashes" and dust flew on to the
floor of the car.

"Whizz-bangs," was the corporal's laconical remark.

We had passed the German road barrage, and were on our way to peace
and safety.




CHAPTER IV

TOLL OF ATTACK


We climbed the little white road which led through the battery
positions now almost silent, topped the crest, and dipped into
Sailly-au-Bois. The village had been very little shelled since the
night before, and appeared the same as ever, except that the intense
traffic, which had flowed into it for the past month, had ceased.
Limbers and lorries had done their work, and the only objects which
filled the shell-scarred streets were slow-moving ambulances, little
blood-stained groups of "walking wounded," and the troops of a new
division moving up into the line.

Though we were all in some pain as the ambulance jolted along through
the ruts in the side of the road, we felt rather sorry for those poor
chaps as they peered inside the car. Our fate was decided, theirs
still hung in the balance. How often on the march one had looked back
oneself into a passing ambulance and wished, rather shamefully, for a
"Blighty" one. Sunburnt and healthy they looked as they shouted after
us: "Good luck, boys, give our love to Blighty."

At the end of the village the ambulance swung off on a road leading to
the left. It must have crossed the track by which my platoon and I had
gone up the night before. About 11.30 A.M. we arrived at Couin, the
headquarters of the First Field Ambulance.

A hum of conversation and joking arose from every side, and, with some
exceptions, you could not have found such a cheery gathering anywhere.
The immediate strain of battle had passed, and friends meeting friends
compared notes of their experiences in the "show." Here a man with a
bandaged arm was talking affectionately to a less fortunate "pal" on a
stretcher, and asking him if he could do anything for him; it is
extraordinary how suffering knits men together, and how much sympathy
is brought out in a man at the sight of a badly wounded comrade:
yonder by the huts an orderly assisted a "walking case," shot through
the lungs and vomiting blood freely.

Near by I recognised E----'s servant of the L---- S----. When he had
finished giving some tea or water to a friend, I hailed him and asked
him if Mr. E---- was hit. Mr. E----, he told me, had been laid up for
some days past, and had not taken part in the attack. He was, however,
going round and writing letters for the men. Would I like to see him?
We were fairly good acquaintances, so I said that I should. Presently
he arrived.

"Bad luck, old chap. Where have you caught it?" he asked.

"In the thigh," I replied.

He wrote two post-cards home for me, one home and another to
relatives, and I did my best to sign them. I remember that on one of
them was inscribed: "This is to let you know that E---- has been
caught bending," and wondering what my grandfather, a doctor, would
make out of that!

The sun was beating down on us now, and since, after I had been duly
labelled "G.S.W. (gun-shot wound) Back," a Medical Staff Officer
advised that I should be transferred into the officers' hut, I entered
its cooler shades with much gladness.

Captain W----t came in soon afterwards. In the second line German
trench he had looked over the parados to see if any opposition was
coming up from the third line trench, and had been hit by a
machine-gun bullet in the shoulder. In making his way home he had been
hit twice again in the shoulder. H---- also put in an appearance with
a bullet wound in the arm. He had taken a party of "walking wounded"
up to Sailly-au-Bois, and got a car on. A doctor brought round the
familiar old beverage of tea, which in large quantities, and in
company with whisky, had helped us through many an unpleasant day in
the trenches. Captain W----t refused it, and insisted on having some
bread and jam. I took both with much relish, and, having appeased an
unusually large appetite, got an orderly to wash my face and hands,
which were coated with blood.

"I dare say you feel as you was gettin' back to civilisation again,
sir," he said. Much refreshed, and quietly looking at a new number of
_The Tatler_, I certainly felt as if I was, though, in spite of an air
ring, the wound was feeling rather uncomfortable. At the end of the
hut two or three poor fellows were dying of stomach wounds. It was a
peculiar contrast to hear two or three men chatting gaily just outside
my end of the hut. I could only catch fragments of the conversation,
which I give here.

"When Mr. A---- gave the order to advance, I went over like a bird."

"The effect of the rum, laddie!"

"Mr A---- was going strong too."

"What's happened to Mr. A----, do you know?"

"Don't know. I didn't see 'im after that."

"'E's all right. Saw him just now. Got a wound in the arm."

"Good. Isn't the sun fine here? Couldn't want a better morning for an
attack, could you?"

The hut was filling rapidly, and the three stomach cases being quite
hopeless were removed outside. A doctor brought in an officer of the
K----'s. He was quite dazed, and sank full length on a bed, passing
his hand across his face and moaning. He was not wounded, but had been
blown up whilst engaged in cutting a communication trench across No
Man's Land, they told me. It was not long, however, before he
recovered his senses sufficiently enough to walk with help to an
ambulance. A "padre" entered, supporting a young officer of the ----,
a far worse case of shell shock, and laid him out on the bed. He had
no control over himself, and was weeping hysterically.

"For God's sake don't let me go back, don't send me back!" he cried.

The "padre" tried to comfort him.

"You'll soon be in a nice hospital at the Base, old chap, or probably
in England."

He looked at the padre blankly, not understanding a word that he was
saying.

A more extraordinary case of shell shock was that of an officer lying
about three beds down from me. In the usual course of events an
R.A.M.C. corporal asked him his name.

"F----," he replied in a vague tone.

The corporal thought that he had better make certain, so with as
polite a manner as possible looked at his identification disc.

"It puts Lt. B---- here," he said.

There followed a lengthy argument, at the end of which the patient
said--

"Well, it's no use. You had better give it up. I don't know what my
name is!"

A Fusilier officer was carried in on a stretcher and laid next to me.
After a time he said--

"Is your name L----?"

I replied affirmatively.

"Don't you recognise me?" he questioned.

I looked at him, but could not think where I had seen him before.

"My name's D----. I was your Company Quartermaster-Sergeant in the
Second Battalion." Then I remembered him, though it had been hard to
recognise him in officer's uniform, blood-stained and tattered at
that. We compared notes of our experiences since I had left the second
line of my battalion in England nearly a year before, until, soon
afterwards, he was taken out to an ambulance.

At the other end of the hut it was just possible to see an officer
tossing to and fro deliriously on a stretcher. I use the word
"deliriously," though he was probably another case of shell shock. He
was wounded also, judging by the bandages which swathed the middle
part of his body. The poor fellow thought that he was still fighting,
and every now and again broke out like this--

"Keep 'em off, boys. Keep 'em off. Give me a bomb, sergeant. Get down!
My God! I'm hit. Put some more of those sandbags on the barricade.
These damned shells! Can I stand it any longer? Come on, boys. Come
along, sergeant! We must go for them. Oh! my God! I must stick it!"

After a time the cries became fainter, and the stretcher was taken
out.

About three o'clock I managed to get a doctor to inject me with
anti-tetanus. I confess that I was rather anxious about getting this
done, for in crawling back across No Man's Land my wound had been
covered with mud and dirt. The orderly, who put on the iodine, told me
that the German artillery was sending shrapnel over the ridge. This
was rather disconcerting, but, accustomed as I had become to shrapnel
at close quarters, the sounds seemed so distant that I did not bother
more about them.

It must have been about four o'clock when my stretcher was picked up
and I passed once again into the warm sunlight. Outside an orderly
relieved me of my steel and gas helmets, in much the same way as the
collector takes your ticket when you pass through the gates of a
London terminus in a taxi. Once more the stretcher was slid into an
ambulance, and I found myself in company with a young subaltern of the
K----'s. He was very cheery, and continued to assert that we should
all be in "Blighty" in a day or two's time. When the A.S.C. driver
appeared at the entrance of the car and confirmed our friend's
opinion, I began to entertain the most glorious visions of the
morrow--visions which I need hardly say did not come true.

"How were you hit?" I asked the officer of the K----'s.

"I got a machine-gun bullet in the pit of the stomach while digging
that communication trench into No Man's Land. It's been pretty bad,
but the pain's going now, and I think I shall be all right."

Then he recognised the man on the stretcher above me.

"Hullo, laddie," he said. "What have they done to you?"

"I've been hit in the left wrist and the leg, sir. I hope you aren't
very bad."

The engine started, and we set off on our journey to the Casualty
Clearing Station. For the last time we passed the villages, which we
had come to know so intimately in the past two months during rest from
the trenches. There was Souastre, where one had spent pleasant
evenings at the Divisional Theatre; St. Amand with its open square in
front of the church, the meeting-place of the villagers, now deserted
save for two or three soldiers; Gaudiempre, the headquarters of an
Army Service Corps park, with its lines of roughly made stables. At
one part of the journey a 15-inch gun let fly just over the road. We
had endured quite enough noise for that day, and I was glad that it
did not occur again. From a rather tortuous course through bye-lanes
we turned into the main Arras to Doullens road--that long, straight,
typical French highway with its avenue of poplars. Shortly afterwards
the ambulance drew up outside the Casualty Clearing Station.

The Casualty Clearing Station was situated in the grounds of a
chateau. I believe that the chateau itself was used as a hospital for
those cases which were too bad to be moved farther. We were taken into
a long cement-floored building, and laid down in a line of stretchers
which ran almost from the doorway up to a screen at the end of the
room, behind which dressings and operations were taking place. On my
right was the officer of the K----'s, still fairly cheery, though in a
certain amount of pain; on my left lay a rifleman hit in the chest,
and very grey about the face; I remember that, as I looked at him, I
compared the colour of his face with that of the stomach cases I had
seen. A stomach case, as far as I can remember, has an ashen pallor
about the face; a lung case has a haggard grey look. Next to him a boy
of about eighteen was sitting on his stretcher; he was hit in the jaw,
the arms, and the hands, but he calmly took out his pipe, placed it in
his blood-stained mouth, and started smoking. I was talking to the
officer of the K----'s, when he suddenly fell to groaning, and rolled
over on to my stretcher. I tried to comfort him, but words were of no
avail. A doctor came along, asked a few questions, and examined the
wound, just a small hole in the pit of the stomach; but he looked
serious enough about it. The stretcher was lifted up and its tortured
occupant borne away behind the screen for an operation. That was the
last I saw of a very plucky young fellow. I ate some bread and jam,
and drank some tea doled out liberally all down the two lines of
stretchers, for another line had formed by now.

My turn came at last, and I was carried off to a table behind the
screen, where the wound was probed, dressed, and bandaged tightly, and
I had a foretaste of the less pleasant side of hospital life. There
were two Army nurses at work on a case next to mine--the first English
women I had seen since I returned from leave six months before. My
wound having been dressed, I was almost immediately taken out and put
into a motor-lorry. There must have been about nine of us, three rows
of three, on the floor of that lorry. I did not find it comfortable,
though the best had been done under the circumstances to make it so;
neither did the others, many of whom were worse wounded than myself,
judging by the groans which arose at every jolt.

We turned down a road leading to the station. Groups of peasants were
standing in the village street and crying after us: "Ah! les pauvres
blesses! les pauvres Anglais blesses!" These were the last words of
gratitude and sympathy that the kind peasants could give us. We drew
up behind other cars alongside the hospital train, and the
engine-driver looked round from polishing his engine and watched us
with the wistful gaze of one to whom hospital train work was no longer
a novelty. Walking wounded came dribbling up by ones and twos into the
station yard, and were directed into sitting compartments.

The sun was in my eyes, and I felt as if my face was being scorched. I
asked an R.A.M.C.N.C.O., standing at the end of the wagon, to get me
something to shade my eyes. Then occurred what I felt was an extremely
thoughtful act on the part of a wounded man. A badly wounded
lance-corporal, on the other side of the lorry, took out his
handkerchief and stretched it over to me. When I asked him if he was
sure that he did not want it, he insisted on my taking it. It was
dirty and blood-stained, but saved me much discomfort, and I thanked
him profusely. After about ten minutes our stretchers were hauled out
of the lorry. I was borne up to the officers' carriage at the far end
of the train. It was a splendidly equipped compartment; and when I
found myself between the sheets of my berth, with plenty of pillows
under me, I felt as if I had definitely got a stage nearer to England.
Some one behind me called my name, and, looking round, I saw my old
friend M---- W----, whose party I had nearly run into the night before
in that never-to-be-forgotten communication trench, Woman Street. He
told me that he had been hit in the wrist and leg. Judging by his
flushed appearance, he had something of a temperature.

More wounded were brought or helped in--men as well as officers--till
the white walls of the carriage were lined with blood-stained,
mud-covered khaki figures, lying, sitting, and propped up in various
positions.

The Medical Officer in charge of the train came round and asked us
what we should like to drink for dinner.

"Would you like whisky-and-soda, or beer, or lemonade?" he questioned
me. This sounded pleasant to my ears, but I only asked for a lemonade.

As the train drew out of the station, one caught a last glimpse of
warfare--an aeroplane, wheeling round in the evening sky amongst a
swarm of tell-tale smoke-puffs, the explosions of "Archie" shells.




       *       *       *       *       *

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

       *       *       *       *       *




The following pages contain advertisements of a few of
the Macmillan books on kindred subjects.




Ambulance 464: Encore des Blesses

BY JULIEN H. BRYAN

                                      _Illustrated. Cloth, 12mo._

     Here we have the story of the experiences of a Princeton
     Junior--a boy of seventeen, who went to the war and drove an
     ambulance car in the Verdun and Champagne sectors. He tells
     exactly what he saw and heard in the American Ambulance
     Corps, bringing his story down to August, 1917. His accounts
     are modest, interesting, sometimes amusing--always vivid.

     War books by soldiers are very popular these days. The
     author-fighter has contributed some of the most informing
     volumes that have been issued on the great conflict. Of all
     of those who have been to the front and have returned to
     write about it, no one, perhaps, has had more unusual
     experiences than fell to the lot of this youth. He has
     written a book in which he tells what happened to him and his
     immediate associates; a book that is remarkable for the
     thrilling character of its narrative, the spirit of good
     humor, of adventure and excitement which runs through it.

     Mr. Bryan had his kodak with him and his text is illustrated
     with many altogether unusual pictures, giving a new and clear
     idea as to the war and its method of prosecution.


  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  Publishers   64-66 Fifth Avenue   New York




_MASEFIELD'S NEW WAR BOOK_

The Old Front Line

BY JOHN MASEFIELD

                                _Illustrated. Cloth, 12mo. $1.00_

     What Mr. Masefield did for the Gallipoli Campaign, he now
     does for the Campaign in France. His subject is the old front
     line as it was when the battle of the Somme began. His
     account is vivid and gripping--a huge conflict seen through
     the eyes of a great poet, this is the book.

     Of the importance of the battle, Mr. Masefield writes:

     "The old front line was the base from which the battle
     proceeded. It was the starting place. The thing began there.
     It was the biggest battle in which our people were ever
     engaged, and so far it has led to bigger results than any
     battle of this war since the Battle of the Marne. It caused a
     great falling back of the enemy armies. It freed a great
     tract of France, seventy miles long, by from ten to
     twenty-five miles broad. It first gave the enemy the
     knowledge that he was beaten."

  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  Publishers   64-66 Fifth Avenue   New York




A War Nurse's Diary

                                      _Illustrated, Cloth, $1.25_

     High courage, deep sympathy without sentimentality, and an
     all-saving sense of humor amid dreadful and depressing
     conditions are the salient features of this little book. The
     author, who preserves her anonymity, has been "over the top"
     in the fullest sense. She has faced bombardments and aerial
     raids, she has calmly removed her charges under fire, she has
     tended the wounded and dying amid scenes of carnage and
     confusion, and she has created order and comfort where but a
     short time before all was chaos and suffering. And all the
     while she marvels at the uncomplaining fortitude of others,
     never counting her own. Many unusual experiences have
     befallen this "war nurse" and she writes of them all in a
     gripping, vivid fashion.


  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  Publishers   64-66 Fifth Avenue   New York




Victor Chapman's Letters from France

                                             _Illustrated, $2.00_

     Victor Chapman was studying architecture in Paris when the
     war broke out and at once he joined the French Foreign
     Legion. A year later he was transferred to the Aviation Corps
     and went to the front as pilot in the American Escadrille.
     This volume comprises his letters written to his family,
     covering the full period of his service from September, 1914,
     to a few days before his death. "They are," says the _New
     York Times_ in commenting on them, "graphic letters that show
     imaginative feeling and unusual faculty for literary
     expression and they are filled with details of his daily life
     and duties and reflect the keen satisfaction he was taking in
     his experiences. He knew many of those Americans who have won
     distinction, and some of them death, in the Legion and the
     Aviation Service, and there is frequent reference to one or
     another of them.... In few of the memorials to those who have
     laid down their lives in this war is it possible to find
     quite such a sense of a life not only fulfilled but crowned
     by its sacrifice, notwithstanding its youthfulness, as one
     gets from this tribute to Victor Chapman."


  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  Publishers   64-66 Fifth Avenue   New York


       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page  36: Bazencourt replaced with Bayencourt             |
    | Page  45: fraggrance replaced with fragrance              |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Attack, by Edward G. D. Liveing

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ATTACK ***

***** This file should be named 28145.txt or 28145.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/4/28145/

Produced by Jeannie Howse and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
