The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of a Squirrel, Supposed to
be Related by Himself, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Adventures of a Squirrel, Supposed to be Related by Himself

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: February 23, 2009 [EBook #28165]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES OF A SQUIRREL ***




Produced by C. St. Charleskindt and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









Transcriber's Note

The spelling, grammar and punctuation in this ebook are variable and
unusual. These oddities have been preserved to match the original
1807 document.

A few minor corrections have been made where typographical errors were
suspected. Details of these changes can be found in a Transcriber's
Note at the end of this text.




[Illustration: _FRONTISPIECE._

_After having seated himself._

_preface IV._]




THE

_ADVENTURES_

OF A

SQUIRREL,

_SUPPOSED TO BE_

RELATED BY HIMSELF.




London:

PRINTED BY AND FOR DARTON AND HARVEY
GRACECHURCH-STREET.


1807.
_Price Sixpence._




PREFACE.


To MISS ANNE S*****.

_My dear Anne,_

_When I was upon a visit at your good mamma's, I promised to make
you a present. Now a present for a girl of your age (if I only
considered your age) is easy enough to find; but when I think on
your good sense, I cannot reconcile myself to buy for you what
I otherwise should. Not to keep you in suspense, I have at last
found out a present, which I hope will be agreeable to you. Attend
to the following adventure: I was walking, about a week ago, in
the fields adjoining my house at Croydon. The evening was so
delightful, I wandered insensibly much farther than I at first
intended to go. The prospect was so charming, and the hay smelt so
agreeably, that I never thought of returning, till I found myself
rather tired, so sat down by one of the haycocks to rest myself.
After having sufficiently rested, I made the best of my way
towards home; when, (guess my surprise!) putting my hand in my
pocket, I felt something soft, which seemed as if it moved, and
pulling it out, I found it to be as pretty a Squirrel as you would
wish to see. He ran round the table several times, and giving a
good spring, seated himself on the dumb waiter. I immediately
said to one of my servants: "I wonder how this squirrel got in my
pocket," when my surprise was greatly increased by hearing it say,
"If you will use me kindly, I will relate my history, and then
you will learn what made me get into your pocket." My dear Anne
immediately came in my mind, for I thought nothing would be more
agreeable to her than, "The Adventures of a Squirrel, related by
himself." "Come and sit nearer to me," said I, "that I may hear
better all you are going to relate." After having seated himself
once more, he began as follows._




_ADVENTURES_

OF A

SQUIRREL, &c.




_CHAPTER I._


I was born in Caen Wood, near Hampstead. Being taken out of the
nest, (in which were my mother and my brother,) very young, I
shall begin by telling you, I was carried to the house of him that
stole me, which was at Hackney. Here I was tied to a long pole,
till he could procure a cage, which was not till the end of three
weeks; when (what he termed) a very nice one came home, with a
chain to fasten round my neck, with a padlock, when I came out of
the cage. The chain he fastened on me directly, and it remained
on, till my house was properly aired. When he thought I might with
safety enter my house, he took off the chain, and carried me,
exulting in his prize, to his sister; for he had kept me quite
secure, till he could present me to her politely. She thanked him
for his kind present, and then proposed making a trial of my
abilities in the exercising way. You, perhaps, may wonder what
this exercise was. My cage was made to go round upon wires, so
that whenever I moved it went round, and caused a tinkling with
some bells that were fixed for that purpose. At this exercise I
remained nearly half an hour, and whenever I attempted to stand
still, they pricked me with a pin. Luckily the dinner bell rang,
or they might have kept me at it half an hour more.

I will now give you some account of my master and his family.
His name was Thomas Howard, upon the whole, I believe, a very
good-natured boy. His sister's name was Sophia; and he had a
father and mother. While my master and the family were at dinner,
I made the best use of my time, and devoured every thing that I
found in my cage. Having finished my repast, I was alarmed at
hearing the voice of Thomas, (whom I wished at York,) bawling to
his sister, "Shall I bring him down;" and still more alarmed by
hearing her squeaking voice (which I wished at Dover) pronounce,
"Yes." I sat in my cage trembling, every minute expecting to be
taken down and exercised; but was relieved by hearing Tom fall
almost from the top of the stairs to the bottom. In a minute the
whole house was in an uproar. Mr. and Mrs. Howard came running
out: she applied the hartshorn to his nose and temples; the
servants were running some one way, some another. Sophia, too,
was not silent. At last, when poor Thomas was lifted up, and his
wounds examined, there was nothing found but a great bump on the
back part of his head; which, when he found out, he gave a loud
laugh, and ran up stairs as fast as he did before. Now I was more
alarmed than ever, imagining that, as he had fell down in coming
to fetch me, he might look upon me as the cause of his fall, and
might therefore use me with greater violence. When he came up, he
took me in my cage into the parlour. Here I had an opportunity
of seeing the company: at the top sat Mrs. Howard; on her right
hand Miss Sophia Howard; next to her sat Tom Wilkins, one of Tom
Howard's schoolfellows; at the bottom sat Mr. Howard, next to him
Miss Eliza Wilkins, and next to her Tom Howard. I was now made to
exercise again, for the amusement of the company; who, in return,
very generously gave me cherries, and any other nice thing I chose
to eat. At last they ventured to let me out, and Tom Howard forgot
to put my chain on. The love of liberty being too strong in me,
I jumped off the table without farther ceremoney. All the company
rose up, (which, by the bye, had they not done, they might have
caught me much sooner than they did,) and ran after me. The room
not being quite wide enough to admit so many as tried to pass
by the table at once, Eliza Wilkins tumbled and tripped up Tom
Howard, who was behind her, and could not stop himself. Sophia was
very near down, but saved herself at the expence of young Wilkins,
whose waistcoat she caught hold of, by which he fell on young
Howard and Eliza. While they were in this confusion, I jumped upon
a pier-glass which hung in the room, where I sat all the time.
When they had all scrambled up they began to look for me again,
but in a more cautious manner than they had done before. At last
Wilkins spied me, and winked at young Howard, who, mounting the
table which stood under the glass, made me once more his prisoner.
I was then put into my cage and exercised, but presently taken
out again, and my chain fastened on, to hinder my escape if I
attempted it a second time. Mr. Howard told Tom that he was sure,
by having me out so soon after my fright, I should certainly get
loose; however, Tom began to play with me, till a lucky accident
put an end to his joy, and gave me my liberty. A nice plate of
apples was placed between young Howard and Wilkins. Now there
happened to be one among them much finer than the rest; on this
apple they had both fixed their eyes, and both tried which could
finish eating what they had begun, that they might take the fine
one, which had so charmed them only by looking at it. But Miss
Wilkins, who had likewise seen it, and most likely longed for it
as much as they did, asked her brother to hand her the plate. He
seized, (or tried to seize, for Howard was as quick as he,) the
favourite apple, and a skirmish ensued; in which glorious skirmish
I was knocked off the table. The maid coming in at the very
moment, I ran down stairs and out at the street door, where the
milkman was standing; which was, I suppose, the reason the maid
came up stairs. I continued running as fast as I could, (for my
chain sadly hindered me,) till I came to some fields, where I
climbed a tree and stayed in it all night.




_CHAPTER II._


When night came I found myself very hungry, so ventured to come
down. My chain rattling at my heels, hindered me from running;
but, however I got, on a good way, when I felt myself stopped,
and found I was entangled in a gooseberry bush, in a very handsome
garden. Fortunately, the owner used to walk in it every morning
before breakfast; I saw her pass me once or twice, (for I waited
very patiently till morning,) but one time, as she was walking by,
I made an effort to get loose, which made her turn, and perceiving
me, she called her servant to extricate me. She then carried me
into the parlour, and put me into a cage; not such a one as I had
inhabited before, it was a very nice one, without any bells. In
the parlour was a young lady about fourteen years old; between
whom and the lady I heard the following dialogue.

[Illustration: _I made an effort to get loose._]

_Niece._ Dear, aunt! what have you got another squirrel? What a
pretty one it is! where did you get it?

_Aunt._ I found it in the garden, entangled in a bush. If I had
not been walking in the garden, very likely he might have died.
I should have been very sorry to have found him dead.

_Niece._ How fortunate this is: but I cannot help pitying poor
Tom--what a pretty fellow he was, and how sad a death it was to
be devoured by the cat. I think he was the prettiest squirrel I
ever saw.

_Aunt._ Well, now really, I think this much prettier. Poor fellow!
how he trembles.

_Niece._ What a pretty chain. I dare say some young lady has lost
him, by his having such a nice chain.

_Aunt._ Well, then all we have to do, is to feed him well, and,
if we find the owner, return him.

_Niece._ I hope we may never find out who it belongs to.

_Aunt._ You should not say so, my dear. Now suppose, Nancy, you
had a squirrel and it ran away from you, how should you like
never to see it again? and should not you think it wrong, if any
body had found it, and knew who it belonged to, and would not
return it? To be sure you would.

_Niece._ True, madam, but I did not think of that. But Aunt, very
likely he is hungry: shall I get him something to eat?

_Aunt._ Do, my love.--Nancy then ran, but presently returned with
a nice mess of bread and milk, which I eat very heartily. She then
put some clean hay, and a handful of nuts into my cage. A knock at
the door called off the attention of Nancy, and presently entered
two young ladies and a young gentleman. One of the young ladies
was Miss Fanny Hudson; the other was Miss Kitty Bell; and the
young gentleman, Master Henry Hudson, brother to Fanny. As soon
as they entered the room, they paid the usual compliments to Mrs.
Greville, (which was the name of the good lady who found me,) but
had their eye upon me all the time. The following discourse I can
pretty well remember, as it began concerning me; and we usually
listen with greater attention when the conversation is concerning
ourselves.

_Fanny._ What a pretty squirrel you have got, Miss Greville: what
is become of the other?

_Nancy._ Oh dear, Fanny! if I have not told you, you have a
dreadful piece of news to hear. Oh dear! how my heart did jump
up and down for two hours after it. The cat had no dinner on
Thursday. I was playing with my squirrel, when the maid entered
the room, and did not see the cat till my poor Tom was in her
mouth; and what was almost as bad, I flung my work-bag at her in
a rage, it caught in the lock of the door, and tore this large
hole in it. I was so vexed.

_Kitty._ Enough to make you vexed, indeed. But you seem to have
got a squirrel just as pretty as Tom was.

_Nancy._ And we got it in the oddest manner. My aunt was walking
in the garden, and found it, with its chain on, entangled in the
bushes.

_Henry._ Exactly the way I found my dog. He was in the garden with
a great stick tied to his tail, all over mud and dirt; but I
cleaned him, and now I would not part with him for a guinea.

_Kitty._ Suppose, Nancy, we let him out: I think he seems very
tame.

_Nancy._ I really do not think he is very tame; we have not had
him a day yet.

_Fanny._ Well! but if he was to be let out, tame or not tame, what
do you think he would do?

_Henry._ Why jump off, and run away, to be sure. Are you such a
stupid creature, not to know that?

Here the conversation was interrupted by a squeak from the further
corner of the room. The case was this: Kitty, like an obstinate
girl, had come to my cage, and, while Nancy was looking another
way, opened my door; upon which I walked out very composedly, and
should have staid on the table, had she not screamed in such a
manner as quite startled me. I jumped off, and ran under her
chair. The whole company started up, and ran toward Kitty, who
began to cry, conscious of its being her fault; but presently
Nancy desired her not to cry, as there was no harm done; for I
had run into the dear girl's hand, the moment she stooped to try
to catch me. The young folks now departed. When I was put into
my cage again, (after having received two kisses from Nancy,
for being so tame,) she brought me some food, and let me take a
little rest after my fright. In short, I lived a fortnight in
the happiest manner I could have wished. But, alas! one day, as
Nancy was playing with me, (without my chain,) the murderer of my
predecessor entered. I was so shocked, that in two jumps I was out
of the window, which two jumps I shall regret as long as I live;
for I never was happier than at the good Mrs. Grevilles. I ran,
as fast as I possibly could, close by the wall, till I came to
some fields, where I climbed up a tree, and stayed in it till
night; when a company of thieves coming to divide their spoils,
laid a cloth and went to supper, which, when they had finished,
they went to sleep on their backs, all in a row. I then ventured
to come down, and see what I could find to eat; which was nothing
but a piece of bread, which I carried into the tree, and eat very
heartily.




_CHAPTER III._


When I had finished it, I amused myself with chucking nuts, (of
which there was plenty in the tree, though I did not notice them
before,) into the men's mouths, as they lay asleep. The nuts
rattling against their teeth awakened them: but I continued
these pranks too long; for day beginning to appear, they had an
opportunity of seeing who it was that thus tormented them. They
vowed revenge, which I did not mind, not being aware of traps;
but, however, the next morning, I found myself caught so fast, I
could not get loose. One of the men came and took me, and after
giving me two or three good blows, carried me to his little boy.
The boy luckily loved money better than squirrels, so went and
sold me at a shop where they buy and sell all sorts of birds and
animals. Here I led a quiet but stupid life, shut up in a cage,
till somebody chose to buy me. However, in about a week's time
after I had been there, a lady and her daughter went by the shop,
and seeing me, the little girl begged her mamma would ask the
price of me, which she did; and the man surprised me greatly, by
asking four shillings for me, as he only gave the boy sixpence,
who sold me to him. The lady said that was rather too much, and
that she would give him three shillings. Upon hearing this, as the
man made no answer, the little girl said, "Well then, mamma, if
you will give three shillings, I will give the other; so you will
send it home to my mamma's house, (giving him her direction,) and
there is your money." You may be sure she left me no less happy
than she seemed herself; for the thoughts of getting once more
into such hands as Mrs. Grevilles, made me forget all former
troubles. In about an hour I was sent home, where, as soon as my
former master was out of the house, I had the pleasure of hearing
the lady lay down the following conditions.

1st. That if any thing whatever should make her forget to give me,
twice a day, my victuals, I was to be sent away.

2nd. She was never to let me out, except Mrs. Dixon (her mamma)
was in the room, and gave her permission.

3rd. She was never to trust me with any body, till I had been in
the house three weeks; at which time the second condition would
be void.

To these conditions Sally cheerfully subscribed, and ran directly
to get me some food. I will give you some little account of her,
which, perhaps, may banish that wonder you otherwise might have
expressed at some few things you are going to hear. She was in
general very willing to learn, and sometimes to do as she was bid;
but still she was very subject to be giddy, (not to give it a
harsher name,) which often brought her into disgrace. She had
a brother about ten years old, who was so fond of mischief, he
often got a whipping. He went to school at Southampton. My young
mistress was no sooner well settled with me, than she wrote him
a letter, to acquaint him of it. I think I may as well give it
you, word for word, as I became acquainted with it as it lay by
my cage.

  "My dear George,

  "I have news to tell you, both good and bad; and I do not know
  which to tell you first. But the bad news I think will do
  better first, as, if that overcomes you, I may recover you by
  telling you the good news. Your pretty rabbit is dead: I went
  to give him his food yesterday morning, and found him dead.
  You don't know how sorry I was, but it cannot be helped now.
  Now for the good news: Mamma has bought me the prettiest
  squirrel, his name is Scug; you will be quite delighted with
  him. Mamma desires me to tell you, she hopes to see you next
  Wednesday. Having nothing more to say, I must now conclude
  this, from

  "Your affectionate sister,

  "Sarah Dixon."

I lived very happily this whole week, when Master George came
home, who, I suppose, thinking his sister had killed his rabbit,
he thought he would kill her squirrel, as will presently be made
known. He presented her with a chain of paper, which he said he
had made at school on purpose for her squirrel. She put it on me
directly, and presently Mrs. Dixon going out of the room, gave
him an opportunity of executing his wicked design. He ran to the
fire and lighted a piece of paper, which he held near my chain,
with a view (as he said) to find out a little hole, where the
padlock should go in. At last, while his sister was not looking,
he set fire to it, and alas! being filled with gunpowder, (which
his sister never had the least idea of,) it blew up with a violent
explosion, and singed me sadly. Sally burst into tears, and
catching up the inkhorn, which stood on the table, discharged its
contents in his face. The combined reports of the gunpowder, Sally
screaming, and George blubbering, soon brought Mrs. Dixon, who,
when she came into the room, stared with astonishment, as well she
might, at the confusion every thing was in. I all this time was in
a corner of the room, where the sudden explosion had made me jump,
not daring to move, terrified with the thoughts of a second shock;
Sally continued crying; and George was doing, nobody could tell
what, for his face was so black, you could not tell whether he was
laughing or crying. The first thing Mrs. Dixon did, was to take
me up and put me in my cage; she then called a servant, and told
him to take me to Miss Cummins, with Sally's love, and beg her
to accept me. Sally then fell on her knees and begged I might
not be sent away, saying it was all George's fault, which George
confessed it was, and that he only did it for a piece of fun!
"Fun," cried Mrs. Dixon with astonishment, "and did you really
think it fun! to burn and frighten a poor little animal. I wonder
at you, indeed, George." She then left them, hoping George would
mind what she said. I was now more caressed by little Sally than
ever, who always took care to give me plenty of food, and when she
had any cake or any other nice thing, she always let me partake of
it. So that I lived very happily all the rest of the time I was at
her house, and most probably should have lived as long again as
I did, had it not been for her brother. He was to go to school,
in about three days time, so was determined to have one more
good piece of fun (as he called it) before he went. He procured
a squirt, and filled it full of ink; he then bored a hole in the
wainscot of the room where he was, quite through into the room
where I was. All things being prepared, he waited till his sister
came to let me out, which, as soon as she had done, he let off
the whole in my face; at least attempted to do it, for I believe
Sally and I were pretty equal sharers. A violent scream, more from
surprise than hurt, soon brought Mrs. Dixon, who, upon coming in
and seeing Sally and myself all over ink, and nobody else in the
room, could not conceive what had made us so; till, supposing it
was one of George's tricks, she ordered him to be called. George
came in trembling, but his mamma would not suffer him to speak,
and as his fare clearly showed his guilt, she ordered his things
to be packed up, and him to be sent to school the next day. George
then cried sadly, but his mamma said she had had so many proofs
of his disposition, that she would trust him no longer. She then
went out of the room, which George perceiving, snatched me out of
my cage, and most probably would have killed me, had I not, by a
very great effort, bit his thumb in such a manner, that he let me
go, and roared enough to frighten any body. His sister and he then
went to fighting, and I jumped out of the window; for the fright I
was in made me not know what I did, or I should not have left such
a kind mistress, especially as my tormentor was going away; but it
was now too late to return.




_CHAPTER IV._


[Illustration: _She distinguished me._]

After running a great way, I heard a violent noise, which alarmed
me very much. I could not think what it was, but approaching
nearer and nearer, it proved to be a company of gipsies, making
merry as they were travelling. I took great care to avoid them, as
I knew, if I had once got into their hands, I should not have got
away very easily; so I climbed a tree and sat very quiet. I came
down as soon as they were gone, and ran till I came to the city
of London, which was not above half a mile from where I lived; for
Mrs. Dixon's house was at Islington, at least very near it. Here
I had no very great chance of hiding myself, so resolved to run
up one of the houses, and get in at the first window I found open,
and trust to the temper of some little boy or girl, rather than
starve. The house I chanced to ascend belonged to Alderman Bumble.
I happened to enter the window of Miss Henrietta Bumble's chamber;
so I crept into her cap, which was lying in a chair, and lay till
she wanted to put it on. I chanced to lay in such a manner, that
she distinguished me as she lay in bed; and bouncing out, she
took me up and ran down stairs undressed. The alderman and his
lady were waiting breakfast for her. As soon as she entered, the
alderman started up and said, "Bless me, Henny, what can you want
here in such a figure;" "O Papa," said she, "here is the prettiest
squirrel (but I should have told you I had found means to wash off
the ink I had received in my last abode,) and where do you think I
found him--lying in my cap, as snug as it was possible." "Well, my
love," said the alderman, "run up and dress yourself, and then
come and tell us about your squirrel." Henny then ran up stairs,
tied me to the bed-post, and began to dress. When she had done,
she untied me, and carried me down stairs. "Now," said the
alderman, "you look something more like a human creature: let us
hear your story." "Well then," said Henrietta, "this is the case:
I was just going to get up, when I saw this pretty squirrel in my
cap; and how it came there, I am sure I cannot tell. He never
offered to stir, but lay very quiet till I took him out. Do let
me have a cage for him." "Well, my dear," replied her mamma, "you
shall have a cage for him, and a very nice one too." "Look'ye,"
said the alderman, "she shall not have a cage: it would be
throwing money away." "I say she shall have a cage," said the
lady, "as sure as my name is Sukey Bumble, while I have a crown in
my pocket." "Well," said the alderman, "I see _I_ must yield: so I
am to get you money to spend in cages. Henny, my love, (continued
he,) let me look at it." Henny, however, kept it in her hand, in
which she was seconded by her mother, who said, "That's right, my
girl, do not part with it." Henrietta was standing so near the
alderman, he thought, with a little effort he might snatch it from
her; but being very bad with the gout, he overbalanced himself,
and down he came. Mrs. Bumble with great difficulty raised him,
which, as soon as she had done, he hobbled up to Henrietta, took
me from her by force, and barbarously cut off near half an inch
of my tail with a pair scissars. Henrietta burst into tears,
Mrs. Bumble began scolding him, when a servant came in, whom she
desired to go to Crooked-lane, and procure one of the very best
cages that could be got. The Alderman stormed; his lady raved; and
Henrietta cried. Mrs. Bumble said she would be minded, and giving
the man a guinea, told him, if it came to more, to pay it. "What,"
continued she, "would you have an alderman's lady send for a
sixpenny wicker cage, to keep a squirrel in. No, by no means in
the world; and you ought to be ashamed of yourself to have maimed
a poor defenceless creature, only because you fell out of the
chair." As there were a great many questions and answers, I think
it would be best to give them to you in the manner they were
delivered by the parties.

_Alderman._ Why now, was not the squirrel the cause of my fall.
Did I not, in attempting to get the squirrel, fall off my chair?
and therefore, was not the squirrel the cause of my fall.

_Lady._ Suppose it was: but what business had you to try to get
the squirrel, and then to revenge yourself in such a shameful
manner. I wish to my heart he had bit you.

_Alderman._ I am much obliged to you, however, for the wish, my
dear; but of the two, I would rather he had let it alone.

_Henrietta._ I am sure it would have served you right.

_Alderman._ Come here Henrietta, (pinching her ears) so you think
it would have served me right, do you? I like every body to be
served right, and I think I am now serving you right.

_Henrietta._ Oh!

_Alderman._ Pray, Miss, mind what you say another time, or you
will get into disgrace, depend upon it.

The servant coming in at this instant, put a stop to what Mrs.
Bumble was going to say. She had opened her mouth in the greatest
rage, but the servant giving her a shilling, as change out of
the guinea, and giving Henrietta the cage, she was forced to
shut it. I had now the sad fortune to be put into a cage, exactly
resembling that in which I lived at Mrs. Howard's. I had no sooner
entered my new habitation, than I was set to work, and kept at it
almost an hour; at which time the alderman pulled Henrietta away
by force. A coach stopping at the door, hindered any dispute that
might have arisen from the treatment of the alderman; for out
jumped four young ladies, and two young gentlemen, who had been
invited to spend the evening. Their names were, John and Emily
Shepherd, James and Caroline Churchill, Eliza Careful, and
Fanny Fairchild. The usual compliments being over, the following
conversation ensued.




_CHAPTER V._


_Emily._ Bless me, Henrietta, where did you get that pretty
squirrel.

_Henrietta._ Ay, where now do you think I got that pretty
squirrel? Why, Emily, if I was to tell you to guess a hundred
times, you would never find it out. I found it in my cap
yesterday morning, as I was going to dress.

_Caroline._ Where?

_Emily._ No, surely!

_James_ and _John_. In your cap?

_Henrietta._ Yes, I did, I assure you. I was going to put it on,
but I saw what was in it, and mamma was so kind as to buy me that
nice cage. You cannot think how prettily he goes round. You shall
see him presently.

_Fanny._ Oh dear, Henrietta, I have a sad tale to tell you. You
know the pretty canary bird the baker gave me; well, what do
you think William did? he cut off half its tail, and part of
its wings.

_Henrietta._ Why, that was nothing to what my papa did. He is
not in the room, so I can safely tell you; he cut off half my
squirrel's tail with his scissars, as coolly as if he had been
peeling an orange.

_All the party._ How cruel!

_Henrietta._ And all because he fell down, in endeavouring to
get it.

_Emily._ And so he revenged himself on the Squirrel, that was
not right.

_Fanny._ Right! indeed I think not; he deserved to have had his
great toe cut off, and then he might have been better able to
judge, by the pain he felt, how the squirrel liked the cutting
off his tail. I think I never heard any thing so barbarous.

_James._ I say, Jack, let us have some fun with this lop-tail
squirrel: while they are talking, they will not see us.

_John._ Ay, so we will.

They then proceeded to action. The young ladies were so busy,
they did not see these two mischievous boys, till they had set me
on Eliza's head; who giving a violent scream, alarmed the whole
company. Emily, in getting up in a hurry, overturned Fanny, who
was not sitting quite steadily in her chair; she gave her a blow,
which Emily returned, and confusion was the word for near an hour;
when peace was restored by the entrance of the alderman and his
lady, who, after having in vain tried to learn the cause of the
bustle, proposed a game at cards. James and Caroline desired to
set out, so, while the rest of the company were at cards, they
amused themselves by tormenting me. At last tired by constant
exercise, and irritated by James, who pricked me with his
toothpick whenever I attempted to rest, I waited for a good
opportunity, and as he laid his finger close to my cage, (while
he was talking to some of the card party) I gave him a bite he
has remembered ever since, I dare say. It so exasperated him,
that he pricked me now more than ever; and Caroline joined him in
persecuting me. I had once or twice attempted to bite her, which
she was aware of; but James dropping his toothpick into my cage,
made me watch well, as I knew one of them would try to take it
out. At last Caroline ventured, and just as she put her finger
in, somebody spoke to her, and she forgot to take it out, till
the pain she felt from one of my bites made her withdraw it rather
hastily. The scream she gave so startled the alderman, that he
overset the card table upon his lady; the girls jumped up, the
boys laughed, I went round and caused a violent ringing: so that
they, who before were so desirous that I should do it, were now
more desirous I should stand still. The alderman often attempted
to speak, but my ringing entirely drowned his voice; till at
length enraged, he came to my cage, and having pulled me out, and
flung me into a corner of the room, where I staid very quietly,
he began to pull off the bells, which hung over the cage; which,
when he had done, he tossed them, one by one, to the company,
telling them, if they were fond of the noise they might make it
themselves, and then the only difference would be, "it would be
made by monkeys instead of squirrels." The alderman then went out
of the room, Henrietta put me into my cage, and peace was once
more restored. And now all their proceedings were stopped, by the
arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Churchill, who were come to take their
young folks home, and offer a place in the coach to the rest of
the party. Away they went, to my great joy. Henrietta now bewailed
the loss of her bells in such violent terms, that the alderman
told her, if she did not cease, he would send the squirrel to Miss
Lee. Upon which Mrs. Bumble started up in a rage, "It shall not be
done:" said she, "it was a scandalous thing of you to break the
bells, but I shall take care to send for new ones." "Not while the
servants are mine," said the alderman. His lady made no reply, but
rang the bell, a servant appeared. "John," said she, "take this
where you bought it, and get new bells put on." "John," said the
alderman, "if you do, you may as well take your wages in your
hand. But you will receive them when you come back, so it is
the same thing." John then went, and contrived to get it done by
somebody else, so that he might oblige both master and mistress.
The alderman having found out it had been done, got up one morning
very early, packed me up in my cage, and sent me by the coach into
Lincolnshire, to a Miss Huntley, one of his relations. Here I
lived a short, but happy life; I was constantly fed, very seldom
exercised contrary to my inclinations, and, in short, lived so
happily, I thought it exceeded, if possible, the kind treatment
I met with at the good Mrs. Greville's.




_CHAPTER VI._


But soon was my happiness put an end to. Very near my mistress,
lived a young gentleman, whose name was Eaton, who, though nearly
fourteen years of age, and a very clever youth, delighted in
mischief; and though he did not mean it, he sometimes did things
very unworthy a gentleman.

[Illustration: _He admired me greatly._]

This young fellow no sooner found Miss Huntley kept a squirrel,
than he resolved to be possessed of me. I afterwards found his
reason for so doing, was only "because he thought, if he took it
to school with him, it might cause some fine sport." The next day
was fixed for his departure; and, as he was very intimate with
Miss Huntley, he said he would came and drink tea with her once
more before he went to school. He came, admired me greatly, and,
after tea, said he would play with me. The window happened to be
up, so, while they were talking, and not looking at him, he slily
put me into his pocket, buttoned it, and giving a great shriek,
said I had jumped out of the window. Poor Isabella Huntley was
very much vexed. He said there was no hopes of getting it, as it
travelled at such a rate, he supposed it would be ten or twelve
miles off by the next day. He told truth, for, as he was going
the next day, he would be much farther than twelve miles; and so
should I also, as I went in his pocket. He soon after took his
leave, leaving Isabella very sorrowful, little thinking where
her squirrel was. He went to school very early the next day, and
I travelled all the way in his pocket. Luckily I found a few
cherries and a cake, or most probably I should not have lived to
my journey's end. We arrived at the Rev. Mr. Clarkson's academy, I
cannot tell at what time; let it suffice, that when he got there,
he took me out, and tied a piece of string round my neck, while he
showed me to his schoolfellows! He then asked, if any body had a
cage to sell. They none of them had one, except one boy, who came
and said he would sell his, but that it would put him to a great
inconvenience, as he had a bird in it at present, and could not
sell it under three shillings; for he knew Eaton would buy it, let
it cost what it would. He therefore tried to make the most of it.
Eaton paid him the money, and put me in it. Here I had to perform
my tricks before all the boys, four or five times a day, and was
liable to all the insults they chose to bestow upon me. Indeed,
a boy did once hit me a terrible blow with an apple. In about a
week, the money Eaton had brought with him to school, was all
gone; he then had recourse to selling me. He offered me in my cage
for two shillings. Nobody would give it. At last a boy came to him
and offered tenpence for me. Eaton, in a rage, hit him a box on
the ear, and sent the boy away crying. At last, finding nobody
would give more, he went to the boy he had struck, whose name
was Bentley, asked his pardon, and said he should have me for
tenpence. Bentley now refused, saying, that as he had been struck,
he would give no more than sixpence. At this time, the man who
used to come with cakes and apples for the boys to buy, came
into the play-ground. Eaton took up a tart, and holding his hand
out to Bentley, said: "Come, you may as well give me tenpence;"
but Bentley held out sixpence, and said he would give no more.
Eaton then tried to knock it out of his hand, but instead of his
succeeding, the tart fell and was broke to pieces. Eaton looked
red. "Come," said Bentley, "though you refused so often, perhaps
you may be inclined to take sixpence now." Eaton was not long
determining, but snatched the sixpence and gave me into Bentley's
hands. He carried me directly into his chamber, and having given
me some food, put me on his window seat. I lived very comfortably
with him for a few days; till one day a boy named Smart, who, I
afterwards learnt, was hired by Eaton, opened the window and put
me out. I ran along the tiles, trembling, a great way, before I
saw any window open where I might shelter myself. At last a boy
spied me, and getting up to me with a ladder, I surrendered
immediately. The boy, thinking he could sell me at the school
better than at any other place, went there; and Bentley seeing
me, before any of the boys said what they would give, offered the
boy eighteenpence for me, which he accepted, and left me once more
in good hands. He now took more care of me than ever, intending
to take me home with him at the holidays; but an accident which
happened soon after, made his good intention totally useless. One
of his schoolfellows, named Hawkins, who slept in his room, had,
it seems, long wished for me. He had tried various stratagems,
none of which had turned out to his advantage: at last he thought
of the following. He put his bottle and wash-hand bason in the way
of my cage, so that when Bentley came to take me out, he threw
them down, and broke them into a thousand pieces. Hawkins hearing
the noise came up, and the following dialogue I distinctly heard,
as I sat on Bentley's arm.

_Hawkins._ So, Bentley, you have broke my bason. How could you be
so careless.

_Bentley._ It was rather careless, I must own; but who would have
thought of a bottle and bason being so near a squirrel-cage, as
to be broken when I went to take out my squirrel.

_Hawkins._ Nobody could have thought it; but you should look
before you do things in such a hurry. I suppose you intend to
pay me for it.

_Bentley._ That I would very willingly do, if I had money. If you
will trust me, I will give you my week's pay till the whole debt
is paid.

_Hawkins._ And so I am to stay a month or more, while you pay me
at your leisure. It was all owing to your want of attention, and
I am to suffer for it.

_Bentley._ As to being owing to my want of attention, I don't see
it in the least. It certainly was not a proper place for a bottle
and bason. I think it must have been put there on purpose.

_Hawkins._ Pray, Sir, am I to be accountable to you for the place
where I choose to put my bottle and bason. Suppose I put it there
on purpose, have not I a right?

_Bentley._ A most undoubted one. But then, if it is broken, you
have no right to scold about it, as it was through your own means
it became so.

_Hawkins._ Well, I don't care, I will be paid for it. Come,
Bentley, give me your squirrel, and I'll think no more about it.

_Bentley._ A likely matter.

_Hawkins._ Well, then, I am resolved you shall pay me.

_Bentley._ Very well, I will pay you in the manner I mentioned.

_Hawkins._ Don't you believe it: if you can't pay me now, I will
take the Squirrel.

He then snatched me from him, and carried me down stairs, where
he met a boy named Lively, to whom he showed me; and both walking
up to a bench that was placed under the study window, where
Mr. Clarkson generally was, Hawkins began the conversation which
will be related in the next chapter.




_CHAPTER VII._


_Hawkins._ I told you I should get it. Poor Bentley!

_Lively._ Why how could you get it?

_Hawkins._ I put my bottle and bason close to the cage, so that
when he went to take out his squirrel, down they came, and broke
to pieces. I went up and demanded payment, which he not being able
to give me, I took his squirrel, which he held on his hand all
the time we talked.

_Lively._ Upon my word, I think you did wrong.

_Hawkins._ What! are you one of those fools who are afraid of
doing wrong. However, you see I have got something by doing
wrong.----

"And you shall get something more by doing wrong," cried a voice.
Hawkins turned round, and saw his master, who had been standing at
the window ever since they began to talk. "Give me that squirrel,"
continued Mr. Clarkson. Hawkins held me out to him with great
reluctance. Mr. Clarkson then carried me into the school-room, and
calling for Bentley, gave me to him, telling him, loud enough for
Hawkins to hear him, that Hawkins would get much more by doing
wrong, than he would by doing right, for he should get a very
hearty flogging that afternoon. He likewise commended Lively for
not agreeing with Hawkins. Bentley then carried me to his room
again, packed me up, (in my cage,) and sent me by the stage to
his sister, who lived at Stamford in Lincolnshire, and was very
intimate with Miss Huntley. My reception was a very good one.
Louisa Bentley was very fond of me, and always took care I should
have plenty of food. She had invited a party of young ladies to
see her that very afternoon: their names were, Miss Wilson, Miss
Clark, Miss Smith, Miss Newman, and Miss Huntley.

When these young ladies were all seated, their conversation was
as follows.

_Miss Bentley._ O, Miss Huntley, I had such a present made me
to-day. My good brother always sends me some present from school,
between the holidays; but this last, is the best he ever sent
me. Only look, what a pretty squirrel! What makes you sigh, Miss
Huntley?

_Miss Huntley._ Your squirrel puts me in mind of one I had lately.
Young Eaton came to drink tea with us before he went to school,
when he let the squirrel out, and it jumped out of the window.

_Miss Clark._ Were you not very angry?

_Miss Newman._ I am sure I should have been very angry indeed;
and, I think, not without a cause.

_Miss Smith._ He is always doing mischief, I think. It was but on
Friday, when he came to see us, that he killed my canary bird, by
putting a shot in the place where the seeds were, which stuck in
its throat, and it died in a few minutes.

_Miss Clark._ And what did he say, when he saw he had killed it?

_Miss Smith._ He only laughed, and said he did not know it could
not eat shot.

_Miss Wilson._ Perhaps he took it for an ostrich, and thought
it could eat lead and iron. I do not wonder at it; for, in my
opinion, he is foolish enough to think any thing.

[Illustration: _I have been looking at your squirrel._]

_Miss Huntley._ I have been looking at your squirrel, Miss Bentley,
for some time; will you be kind enough to tell me where you got
it? O, I remember, you said your brother sent it you, so it cannot
be the same; but every mark on it is exactly like mine.

_Miss Bentley._ Suppose I write to him, and ask him where he got
it. I assure you, if it is yours, you shall have it. I dare say
my brother got it fairly.

_Miss Huntley._ My dear Louisa, I would not take it from you on
any account: I only wish to know that it has not died a violent
death.

_Miss Newman._ Poor creature! I hope it has not. I would much
rather see any favourite bird or squirrel die, than that they
should escape.

_Miss Clark._ My brother never sends me such presents. Yes, once,
indeed, to do him justice, he sent me a present you would not
guess, if you were to try from morning till night. He goes to
school about two miles off, and the week before last, he sent me,
in the baker's cart, an ugly monkey: such a great creature. He
began clambering over the chairs and tables; so I sent it back,
with a letter, in which I told him, monkeys were not presents for
young ladies, and that he could better take care of his brother
than I could. Don't you think I was pretty severe upon him, Miss
Newman?

_Miss Newman._ Yes, indeed, I think you was. But, my dear girl,
you forget that you was just as severe upon yourself; for as you
are brother and sister, the monkey cannot be brother to one of
you, without being brother to the other.

_Miss Clark._ Miss Newman, I assure you I don't understand such
usage: I did not come here to be called names. I think my question
was not uncivil.

_Miss Newman._ And I think I answered you as civilly as I could,
Miss Smith, do you think I could have given a more civil answer?

_Miss Smith._ No, indeed, I do not.

_Miss Clark._ Well, ladies, I see you are all against me, so I had
better take my leave. Here Mrs. Bentley entering, put a stop to
Miss Clark's resolution, by proposing a game at forfeits, for she
readily consented to be of the party. I took the opportunity to
fall asleep, and when I awoke, the following letter was lying by
my cage.

  My dear Brother,

  I am so much obliged to you for your present, that I cannot
  express my thanks: I believe I shall best be able to do that
  when I see you. I had some young ladies to see me yesterday,
  among them was Miss Huntley, who has begged me to write to
  satisfy her curiosity. She would, therefore, take it as a
  favour, if you would tell me where you got it; as it is very
  like one she had, which made its escape. O, my dear brother,
  I wish you was at home. I have so many things to say to you, I
  don't know how to say them in letter; for, let people say what
  they will, it is easier to talk than to write a letter; so
  must conclude this, from

  Your affectionate sister,

  Louisa Bentley.




_CHAPTER VIII._


I shall pass over a few days, which I spent very comfortably, and
give you her brother's answer; for she took me out of my cage so
often, (seeing I was tame,) that I had frequent opportunities of
seeing and reading every thing I chose. It was as follows.

  "Dear Sister,

  "I am very glad my last present met with your approbation. I
  endeavoured to find who brought it into the school, as soon
  as I had read your letter. It appears to be young Eaton: I
  believe you know him. I bought it of him, and after several
  escapes from losing it, I resolved to send it you, which
  succeeded just as I could have wished. Present my duty to my
  papa and mamma, and I remain, dear sister,

  "Your's, affectionately,

  "Benjamin Bentley."

As soon as Louisa had received this letter, she invited Miss
Huntley; and I could clearly hear the following dialogue.

_Miss Bentley._ Well! I wrote to my brother, to enquire about
the squirrel, and here is his answer: read it.

_Miss Huntley._ (having read it.) My dear Louisa I am shocked. I
did not think William Eaton could have been guilty of an action
so mean. You know I told you, when I was here last, he opened the
cage and said the squirrel had jumped out of the window. Now he
went to school the next day, therefore he must have taken it. I
always thought he loved a little mischief, but had not an idea
he could do such a thing as this.

_Miss Bentley._ And very likely all this was for the gain of
a couple of shillings, or some such trifle. But, however, the
squirrel is your's, Miss Huntley, so I beg you will accept of it.

_Miss Huntley._ I think, Miss Bentley, I had better not take it,
as it will cause questions which may discover young Eaton's
guilt, and I should not wish to take away his character. I think
the best way will be to write him a letter; and tell him how sorry
I am at finding how I lost my squirrel, but that, as I know who
has it, I shall think no more of it.

_Miss Bentley._ My dear Miss Huntley, you will act nobly; and much
kinder, I am sure, than he deserves. Suppose you write it now,
here is every thing necessary.

Miss Huntley then wrote the letter, and when she had finished, she
read it aloud.

  "Sir,

  "When you favoured us with your company, the night before you
  went to school, had any body told me you had the least thought
  of doing what I have lately found you did, I should have
  thought it an impossibility. Believe me, the loss of the
  squirrel does not grieve me half so much as the manner in
  which I have lately heard I lost it. Miss Bentley, sister to
  one of your schoolfellows, has it, and would freely give it
  me; and as that is all I wished to know, (as I was afraid it
  might meet a violent death,) I shall very willingly let it
  remain with her; for if I should take it, it might breed
  questions which would not be quite agreeable. And now let me
  conclude this letter with assuring you, that, as I trust you
  have sense enough to be sorry for what you have done, I shall
  think no more of it, than if it never had happened.

  "Isabella Huntley."

This letter was then sent, and Miss Huntley look her leave.

I am now coming to that part of my life which I look back upon
with horror. Nothing particular happened till the time arrived
when young gentlemen leave school, to go and be merry by the
fireside for six weeks. William Eaton had not lost any of his
malice; and therefore, I suppose, thought me as proper an object
to vent it on as he could find. He thought, by killing me, (as I
heard him say,) to end all farther trouble, and put a stop to all
their enquiries, by bringing me home dead. For he had formed such
a design, I shudder when I think of it. I suppose he had bribed
the maid before, for early one morning he was at the door, which
the maid seeing, she took me out of my cage, and gave me to him,
after she had cut off a bit of my tail, to make it appear the cat
had eat me. He took me home, and called his dog into the garden,
where he let me go, and sent the dog after me. The dog presently
caught me, and lucky it was, he did not kill me the first gripe;
for his master (seeing he caught me so soon, as he wanted to have
had some fun, as he termed it) threw a stone at him, which hit
him on the head, and laid him flat on the ground. I seized the
opportunity, and ran up the garden wall, from whence I jumped,
frightened almost out my wits. I continued running till I came to
a very large orchard. I mounted a cherry tree, and eat one or two
cherries, which a little recovered me. After I had been in the
tree a little time, two men entered the orchard with sacks, which
they filled with what fruit came first to hand, and were going
away. The owner of the orchard happened to be riding by the place,
and called to them to know their business. At that instant the men
happened to lift up their eyes, and seeing me, answered, they came
to catch me, and asked if they might not climb the tree for that
purpose.

_Owner._ Yes, after you have emptied your sacks. So empty them
this minute.

The men then turned every thing out of their sacks.

_Owner._ Well, have you caught the squirrel? Hey-day! were you
going to catch the squirrel with two sacks full of fruit? Now,
gentlemen, you will both be kind enough to march out of this
orchard: and if ever you are caught in here again you shall
certainly go to gaol.

The men then went away, which recovered me from my second fright;
for I expected, every minute, they would climb and take me.
However, I was agreeably disappointed.

I then descended, and ran out of the orchard as fast as I could,
till I found myself so hungry, I determined to trust myself once
more to somebody that looked good-natured, if I could see any body
I thought looked so. While I was thinking, a stage came by, so (at
random) I gave a leap into the basket, where I found a few crumbs
of bread. I remained very quiet till the stage suddenly broke
down. I thought it high time to quit my seat, so jumped out, and
crept into an old lady's pocket, who was lying amongst the rest
on the road. Fortunately, nobody was hurt, and the coachman sent
somebody for a post chaise, which soon arrived. We all crowded in,
till it was full. My mistress happened to get an inside place, and
we went off laughing at the disaster. At last we came to London,
where I did not dare stir from the pocket of the lady, so kept my
place with great composure. My mistress, for so I shall call her,
was then put into another stage, and after a journey of about four
miles, she stopped at a very handsome house. My mistress being in
a great hurry to get out and compose herself, opened the coach
door herself, but not having sufficient power, her foot slipped
and she fell out. I was so alarmed at this, that I scrambled
out of her pocket, and made the best of my way towards the house
door, where I certainly should have entered, had I not heard the
different mews of half a dozen cats. Those sounds were not very
pleasing to me, so I ran off unperceived; for the confusion at
the garden door was not yet at an end. I had not run far, before
I met a man with a pair of very large boots in his hand. He
unfortunately spied me, and taking me up, put me into one of them,
and thrust me down into the foot. He had walked within a mile of
the fields where you were when you first became possessed of me,
when he set the boots down, and began fighting with a man he had
been quarrelling with some part of the way, I jumped out of my
place of confinement, and ran till I came to the place where you
were sitting, and being very hungry, I ventured to creep into
your pocket, and trust to your generosity. Here the pretty fellow
ceased. "And you shall find," said I, "I will endeavour to deserve
that trust, by making you as happy as I possibly can."

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, my dear Anne, I presume it will be unnecessary for me to
inform you, that the foregoing history is only an imaginary one
of my own invention; but such as we may suppose a squirrel might
relate, if he were endowed with reason and speech. Your good sense
will suggest to you that the amiable characters herein depicted
are meant as examples for imitation; and that the conduct of the
vicious is to be disapproved of and avoided.

I remain your affectionate friend,

R. S. S.


Printed by Darton and Harvey, Gracechurch-street.




[Illustration: _the end._

_I ventured to creep into your Pocket._]




Transcriber's Note

Illustrations within the main text of this ebook have been moved to
their appropriate page numbers, as referenced in the original text.

Spelling and grammar variations (for example: your's, scissars,
staid/stayed, bason, ceremoney, Mrs. Grevilles/Mrs. Greville's,
had fell down, was broke to pieces, had eat me, came and drink tea)
have been preserved to match the original 1807 text.

The following typographical corrections have been made in this ebook:

   Page 6: Removed duplicate word 'he' (he took off the chain)

  Page 22: Removed duplicate word 'and' (and singed me sadly)

  Page 23: Added missing period (thing Mrs. Dixon did)

  Page 26: Changed 'happenned' to 'happened' (happened to enter)

  Page 28: Changed 'Bummble' to 'Bumble' (Mrs. Bumble)

  Page 33: Changed 'beeen' to 'been' (had been peeling)

  Page 33: Removed duplicate word 'the' (The young ladies)

  Page 34: Added missing period (by tormenting me.)

  Page 37: Added missing end quotes (new bells put on.")

  Page 42: Added missing word 'I' (who, I afterwards learnt,)

  Page 51: Removed duplicate word 'to' (is easier to talk)

  Page 56: Changed 'runing' to 'running' (I continued running)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of a Squirrel, Supposed
to be Related by Himself, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES OF A SQUIRREL ***

***** This file should be named 28165.txt or 28165.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/6/28165/

Produced by C. St. Charleskindt and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
