The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Likely Story, by William Dean Howells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Likely Story

Author: William Dean Howells

Release Date: March 11, 2009 [EBook #28305]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LIKELY STORY ***




Produced by David Edwards, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from scans of public domain material
produced by Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)











A

LIKELY STORY

BY
W. D. HOWELLS.

HARPER'S
BLACK & WHITE
SERIES




A LIKELY STORY


[Illustration: "THE MOST EXCITING PART."]




A LIKELY STORY

Farce


BY

W. D. HOWELLS


ILLUSTRATED

[Illustration]

NEW YORK
HARPER AND BROTHERS
1894




Harper's "Black and White" Series.

Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, 50 cents each.


_LATEST ISSUES:_

     FIVE O'CLOCK TEA. Farce. By W. D. Howells.

     THE MOUSE-TRAP. Farce. By W. D. Howells.

     A LIKELY STORY. Farce. By W. D. Howells.

     THIS PICTURE AND THAT. A Comedy. By Brander Matthews.

     TRAVELS IN AMERICA 100 YEARS AGO. By Thomas Twining.

     MY YEAR IN A LOG CABIN. By William Dean Howells.

     EVENING DRESS. A Farce. By William Dean Howells.

     THE WORK OF WASHINGTON IRVING. By Charles Dudley Warner.

     EDWIN BOOTH. By Laurence Hutton.

     PHILLIPS BROOKS. By Rev. Arthur Brooks, D.D.

     THE DECISION OF THE COURT. A Comedy. By Brander Matthews.

     GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS. By John White Chadwick.

     THE UNEXPECTED GUESTS. A Farce. By William Dean Howells.

     SLAVERY AND THE SLAVE TRADE IN AFRICA. By Henry M. Stanley.

     THE RIVALS. By Francois Coppee.

     WHITTIER: NOTES OF HIS LIFE AND OF HIS FRIENDSHIPS. By Annie
     Fields.

     THE JAPANESE BRIDE. By Naomi Tamura.

     GILES COREY, YEOMAN. By Mary E. Wilkins.

     COFFEE AND REPARTEE. By John Kendrick Bangs.

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent by the publishers,
postage prepaid, on receipt of price._


Copyright, 1894, by HARPER & BROTHERS.

Copyright, 1885, by HARPER & BROTHERS.

Copyright, 1885, by W. D. HOWELLS.

_All rights reserved._




CONTENTS


Chapter                                                         Page

   I   MR. AND MRS. WILLIS CAMPBELL                                7

  II   MR. WELLING; MR. CAMPBELL                                  29

 III   MRS. CAMPBELL; MR. WELLING; MR. CAMPBELL                   34

  IV   JANE; MRS. CAMPBELL; WELLING; CAMPBELL                     39

   V   MRS. CAMPBELL; WELLING; CAMPBELL                           41

  VI   JANE; MRS. CAMPBELL; WELLING; CAMPBELL                     43

 VII   MRS. CAMPBELL; WELLING; CAMPBELL                           44

VIII   MISS RICE, MISS GREENWAY, and the OTHERS                   48

  IX   MISS GREENWAY; MR. WELLING                                 50

   X   MISS RICE; then MR. and MRS. CAMPBELL, and the OTHERS      53




ILLUSTRATIONS


"THE MOST EXCITING PART OF IT"                       _Frontispiece_

MR. WELLING EXPLAINS                               _Facing page 52_




A LIKELY STORY




I

_MR. AND MRS. WILLIS CAMPBELL_


Mrs. Campbell: "Now this, I think, is the most exciting part of the
whole affair, and the pleasantest." She is seated at breakfast in her
cottage at Summering-by-the-Sea. A heap of letters of various stylish
shapes, colors, and superscriptions lies beside her plate, and
irregularly straggles about among the coffee-service. Vis-a-vis with her
sits Mr. Campbell behind a newspaper. "How prompt they are! Why, I
didn't expect to get half so many answers yet. But that shows that where
people have nothing to do _but_ attend to their social duties they are
always prompt--even the men; women, of course, reply early anyway, and
you don't really care for them; but in town the men seem to put it off
till the very last moment, and then some of them call when it's over to
excuse themselves for not having come after accepting. It really makes
you wish for a leisure class. It's only the drive and hurry of American
life that make our men seem wanting in the _convenances_; and if they
had the time, with their instinctive delicacy, they would be perfect: it
would come from the heart: they're more truly polite now. Willis, just
_look_ at this!"

Campbell, behind his paper: "Look at what?"

Mrs. Campbell: "These replies. Why, I do believe that more than half the
people have answered already, and the invitations only went out
yesterday. That comes from putting on R.S.V.P. I knew I was right, and I
shall always do it, I don't care what _you_ say."

Campbell: "You didn't put on R.S.V.P. after all I said?" He looks round
the edge of his paper at her.

Mrs. Campbell: "_Yes_, I did. The idea of your setting up for an
authority in such a thing as that!"

Campbell: "Then I'm sorry I didn't ask you to do it. It's a shame to
make people say whether they'll come to a garden-party from four till
seven or not."

Mrs. Campbell: "A shame? How can you provide if you don't know how many
are coming? I should like to know that. But of course I couldn't expect
you to give in gracefully."

Campbell: "I should give in gracefully if I gave in at all, but I
don't." He throws his paper down beside his chair. "Here, hand over the
letters, and I'll be opening them for you while you pour out the
coffee."

Mrs. Campbell, covering the letters with her hands: "Indeed you won't!"

Campbell: "Well, pour out the coffee, then, anyway."

Mrs. Campbell, after a moment's reflection: "No, I shall not do it. I'm
going to open them every one before you get a drop of coffee--just to
punish you."

Campbell: "To punish me? For what?" Mrs. Campbell hesitates, as if at a
loss what to say. "There! you don't know."

Mrs. Campbell: "Yes, I do: for saying I oughtn't to have put on R.S.V.P.
Do you take it back?"

Campbell: "How can I till I've had some coffee? My mind won't work on an
empty stomach. Well--" He rises and goes round the table towards her.

Mrs. Campbell, spreading both arms over the letters: "Willis, if you
dare to touch them, I'll ring for Jane, and then she'll see you cutting
up."

Campbell: "Touch what? I'm coming to get some coffee."

Mrs. Campbell: "Well, I'll give you some coffee; but don't you touch a
single one of those letters--after what you've said."

Campbell: "All right!" He extends one hand for the coffee, and with the
other sweeps all the letters together, and starts back to his place. As
she flies upon him, "Look out, Amy; you'll make me spill this coffee all
over the table-cloth."

Mrs. Campbell, sinking into her seat: "Oh, Willis, how can you be so
base? _Give_ me my letters. _Do!_"

Campbell, sorting them over: "You may have half."

Mrs. Campbell: "No; I shall have all. I insist upon it."

Campbell: "Well, then, you may have all the ladies' letters. There are
twice as many of them."

Mrs. Campbell: "No; I shall have the men's, too. Give me the men's
first."

Campbell: "How can I tell which are the men's without opening them?"

Mrs. Campbell: "How could you tell which were the ladies'? Come, now,
Willis, don't tease me any longer. You know I hate it."

Campbell, studying the superscriptions, one after another: "I want to
see if I can guess who wrote them. Don't you like to guess who wrote
your letters before you open them?"

Mrs. Campbell, with dignity: "I don't like to guess who wrote other
people's letters." She looks down at the table-cloth with a menace of
tears, and Campbell instantly returns all the notes.

Campbell: "There, Amy; you may have them. I don't care who wrote them,
nor what's in them. And I don't want you to interrupt me with any
exclamations over them, if you please." He reaches to the floor for his
newspaper, and while he sips his coffee, Mrs. Campbell loses no time in
opening her letters.

Mrs. Campbell: "I shall do nothing _but_ exclaim. The Curwens accept, of
course--the very first letter. That means Mrs. Curwen; that is one, at
any rate. The New York Addingses do, and the Philadelphia Addingses
don't; I hardly expected they would, so soon after their aunt's death,
but I thought I ought to ask them. Mr. and Mrs. Roberts, naturally; it
was more a joke than anything, sending their invitation. Mrs. and the
Misses Carver regret very much; well, _I_ don't. Professor and Mrs.
Traine are very happy, and so am I; he doesn't go everywhere, and he's
awfully nice. Mr. and Mrs. Lou Bemis are very happy, too, and Dr. Lawton
is very happy. Mrs. Bridges Dear Mrs. Campbells me, and is very sorry in
the first person; she's always nice. Mr. Phillips, Mr. Rangeley, Mr.
Small, Mr. Peters, Mr. Staples, Mr. Thornton, _all_ accept, and they're
all charming young fellows."

Campbell, around his paper: "Well, what of that?"

Mrs. Campbell, with an air of busy preoccupation: "Don't eavesdrop,
please; I wasn't talking to you. The Merrills have the pleasure, and the
Morgans are sorrow-stricken; the--"

Campbell: "Yes, but why should you care whether those fellows are
charming or not? Who's going to marry them?"

Mrs. Campbell: "_I_ am. Mrs. Stevenson is bowed to the earth; Colonel
Murphree is overjoyed; the Misses Ja--"

Campbell, putting his paper down: "Look here, Amy. Do you know that you
have one little infinitesimal ewe-lamb of a foible? You think too much
of young men."

Mrs. Campbell: "_Younger_ men, you mean. And _you_ have a multitude of
perfectly mammoth peccadilloes. You interrupt." She goes on opening and
reading her letters. "Well, I didn't expect the Macklines _could_; but
everybody seems to be coming."

Campbell: "You pay them too much attention altogether. It spoils them;
and one of these days you'll be getting some of them in love with you,
and _then_ what will you do?"

Mrs. Campbell, with affected distraction: "What _are_ you talking about?
I'd refer them to you, and you could kill them. I suppose you killed
lots of people in California. That's what you always gave me to
understand." She goes on with her letters.

Campbell: "I never killed a single human being that I can remember; but
there's no telling what I might do if I were provoked. Now, there's that
young Welling. He's about here under my feet all the time; and he's got
a way lately of coming in through the window from the piazza that's very
intimate. He's a nice fellow enough, and sweet, as you say. I suppose he
has talent, too, but I never heard that he had set any of the adjacent
watercourses on fire; and I don't know that he could give the Apollo
Belvedere many points in beauty and beat him."

Mrs. Campbell: "_I_ do. Mrs. and Miss Rice accept, and her friend Miss
Greenway, who's staying with her, and--yes! here's one from Mr. Welling!
_Oh_, how glad I am! Willis, dearest, if I _could_ be the means of
bringing those two lovely young creatures together, I should be _so_
happy! _Don't_ you think, now, he _is_ the most delicate-minded, truly
refined, exquisitely modest young fellow that ever was?" She presses the
unopened note to her corsage, and leans eagerly forward entreating a
sympathetic acquiescence.

Campbell: "Well, as far as I can remember my own youth, no. But what
does he say?"

Mrs. Campbell, regarding the letter: "I haven't looked yet. He writes
the _most_ characteristic hand, for a man, that I ever saw. And he has
the divinest taste in perfumes! Oh, I wonder what _that_ is? Like a
memory--a regret." She presses it repeatedly to her pretty nose, in the
endeavor to ascertain.

Campbell: "Oh, hello!"

Mrs. Campbell, laughing: "Willis, you _are_ delightful. I should like to
see you really jealous once."

Campbell: "You won't, as long as I know my own incomparable charm. But
give me that letter, Amy, if you're not going to open it. I want to see
whether Welling is going to come."

Mrs. Campbell, fondly: "Would you _really_ like to open it? I've half a
mind to let you, just for a reward."

Campbell: "Reward! What for?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Oh, I don't know. Being so nice."

Campbell: "That's something I can't help. It's no merit. Well, hand over
the letter."

Mrs. Campbell: "I should have thought you'd insist on _my_ opening it,
after that."

Campbell: "Why?"

Mrs. Campbell: "To show your confidence."

Campbell: "When I haven't got any?"

Mrs. Campbell, tearing the note open: "Well, it's no use trying any
sentiment with you, or any generosity either. You're always just the
same; a teasing joke is your ideal. You can't imagine a woman's wanting
to keep up a little romance all through; and a character like Mr.
Welling's, who's all chivalry and delicacy and deference, is quite
beyond you. That's the reason you're always sneering at him."

Campbell: "I'm not sneering at him, my dear. I'm only afraid Miss Rice
isn't good enough for him."

Mrs. Campbell, instantly placated: "Well, she's the only girl who's
anywhere _near_ it. I don't say she's faultless, but she has a great
deal of character, and she's very practical; just the counterpart of his
dreaminess; and she _is_ very, _very_ good-looking, don't you think?"

Campbell: "Her bang isn't so nice as his."

Mrs. Campbell: "No; and aren't his eyes beautiful? And that high,
serious look! And his nose and chin are perfectly divine. He looks like
a young god!"

Campbell: "I dare say; though I never saw an old one. Well, is he
coming? I'm not jealous, but I'm impatient. Read it out loud."

Mrs. Campbell, sinking back in her chair for the more luxurious perusal
of the note: "Indeed I shall not." She opens it and runs it hastily
through, with various little starts, stares, frowns, smiles of arrested
development, laughs, and cries: "Why--why! What does it mean? Is he
crazy? Why, there's some mistake. No! It's his hand--and here's his
name. I can't make it out." She reads it again and again. "Why, it's
perfectly bewildering! Why, there must be some mistake. He couldn't have
meant it. Could he have imagined? Could he have dared? There never has
been the slightest thing that could be tortured into--But of course not.
And Mr. Welling, of all men! Oh, I can't understand it! Oh, Willis,
Willis, Willis! What _does_ it mean?" She flings the note wildly across
the table, and catching her handkerchief to her face, falls back into
her chair, tumultuously sobbing.

Campbell, with the calm of a man accustomed to emotional superabundance,
lifting the note from the toast-rack before him: "Well, let's see." He
reads aloud: "'Oh, my darling! How can I live till I see you? I will be
there long _before_ the hour! To think of your _asking_ me! You should
have said, "I permit you to come," and I would have flown from the ends
of the earth. The presence of others will be nothing. It will be sweet
to ignore them in my heart, and while I see you moving among them, and
looking after their pleasure with that beautiful thoughtfulness of
yours, to think, "She is mine, mine, mine!"

    "Oh, young lord lover, what sighs are those
    For one that can never be thine?"

I thank you, and thank you a thousand times over, for this proof of your
trust in me, and of your love--_our_ love. You shall be the sole keeper
of our secret--it is so sweet to think that no one even suspects
it!--and it shall live with you, and if you will, it shall die with me.
Forever yours, Arthur Welling.'" Campbell turns the note over, and
picking up the envelope, examines the address. "Well, _upon_ my word!
It's to you, Amy--on the outside, anyway. What do you suppose he
means?"

Mrs. Campbell, in her handkerchief: "Oh, I don't know; I _don't_ know
why he should address such language to me!"

Campbell, recurring to the letter: "_I_ never did. '_Oh, my
darling--live till I see you--ends of the earth--others will be
nothing--beautiful thoughtfulness--mine, mine, mine--our love--sweet to
think no one suspects it--forever yours._' Amy, these are pretty strong
expressions to use towards the wife of another, and she a married lady!
I think I had better go and solve that little problem of how he can live
till he sees you by relieving him of the necessity. It would be
disagreeable to him, but perhaps there's a social duty involved."

Mrs. Campbell: "Oh, Willis, _don't_ torment me! What do you suppose it
means? Is it some--mistake? It's for somebody else!"

Campbell: "I don't see why he should have addressed it to you, then."

Mrs. Campbell: "But don't you see? He's been writing to some other
person at the same time, and he's got the answers mixed--put them in
the wrong envelopes. Oh dear! I wonder who she is!"

Campbell, studying her with an air of affected abstraction: "Her
curiosity gets the better of her anguish. Look here, Amy! _I_ believe
you're _afraid_ it's to some one else."

Mrs. Campbell: "Willis!"

Campbell: "Yes. And before we proceed any further I must know just what
you wrote to this--this Mr. Welling of yours. Did you put on R.S.V.P.?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Yes; and just a printed card like all the rest. I did
want to write him a note in the first person, and urge him to come,
because I expected Miss Rice and Miss Greenway to help me receive; but
when I found Margaret had promised Mrs. Curwen for the next day, I knew
she wouldn't like to take the bloom off that by helping me first; so I
didn't."

Campbell: "Didn't what?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Write to him. I just sent a card."

Campbell: "Then these passionate expressions _are_ unprovoked, and my
duty is clear. I must lose no time in destroying Mr. Welling. Do you
happen to know where I laid my revolver?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Oh, Willis, what are you going to do? You see it's a
mistake."

Campbell: "Mr. Welling has got to prove that. I'm not going to have
young men addressing my wife as Oh their darling, without knowing the
reason why. It's a liberty."

Mrs. Campbell, inclined to laugh: "Ah, Willis, how funny you are!"

Campbell: "Funny? I'm furious."

Mrs. Campbell: "You know you're not. Give me the letter, dearest. I know
it's for Margaret Rice, and I shall see her, and just feel round and
find out if it isn't so, and--"

Campbell: "What an idea! You haven't the slightest evidence that it's
for Miss Rice, or that it isn't intended for you, and it's my duty to
find out. And nobody is authority but Mr. Welling. And I'm going to him
with the _corpus delicti_."

Mrs. Campbell: "But how can you? Remember how sensitive, how shrinking
he is. Don't, Willis; you mustn't. It will kill him!"

Campbell: "Well, that may save me considerable bother. If he will simply
die of himself, I can't ask anything better." He goes on eating his
breakfast.

Mrs. Campbell, admiring him across the table: "Oh, Willis, how perfectly
delightful you are!"

Campbell: "I know; but why?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Why, taking it in the nice, sensible way you do. Now,
some husbands would be so stupid! Of course you _couldn't_ think--you
couldn't _dream_--that the letter was really for me; and yet you might
behave very disagreeably, and make me very unhappy, if you were not just
the lovely, kind-hearted, magnanimous--"

Campbell, looking up from his coffee: "Oh, hello!"

Mrs. Campbell: "Yes; that is what took my fancy in you, Willis: that
generosity, that real gentleness, in spite of the brusque way you have.
Refinement of the heart, _I_ call it."

Campbell: "Amy, what are you after?"

Mrs. Campbell: "We've been married a whole year now--"

Campbell: "Longer, isn't it?"

Mrs. Campbell: "--And I haven't known you do an unkind thing, a brutal
thing."

Campbell: "Well, I understand the banging around hardly ever begins much
under two years."

Mrs. Campbell: "How _sweet_ you are! And you're _so_ funny always!"

Campbell: "Come, come, Amy; get down to business. What is it you do
want?"

Mrs. Campbell: "You won't go and tease that poor boy about his letter,
will you? Just hand it to him, and say you suppose here is something
that has come into your possession by mistake, and that you wish to
restore it to him, and then--just run off."

Campbell: "With my parasol in one hand, and my skirts caught up in the
other?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Oh, how good! Of course I was imagining how _I_ should
do it."

Campbell: "Well, a man can't do it that way. He would look silly." He
rises from the table, and comes and puts his arm round her shoulders.
"But you needn't be afraid of my being rough with him. Of course it's a
mistake; but he's a fellow who will enter into the joke too; he'll enjoy
it; he'll--" He merges his sentence in a kiss on her upturned lips, and
she clings to his hand with her right, pressing it fondly to her cheek.
"I shall do it in a man's way; but I guess you'll approve of it quite as
much."

Mrs. Campbell: "I know I shall. That's what I like about you, Willis:
your being so helplessly a man always."

Campbell: "Well, that's what attracted me to you, Amy; your manliness."

Mrs. Campbell: "And I liked your _finesse_. You are awfully inventive,
Willis. Why, Willis, I've just thought of something. Oh, it would be
_so_ good if you only would!"

Campbell: "Would what?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Invent something now to get us out of the scrape."

Campbell: "What a brilliant idea! _I'm_ not in any scrape. And as for
Mr. Welling, I don't see how you could help him out unless you sent this
letter to Miss Rice, and asked her to send yours back--"

Mrs. Campbell, springing to her feet: "Willis, you are inspired! Oh, how
perfectly delightful! And it's so delicate of you to think of that! I
will just enclose his note--give it here, Willis--and he need never know
that it ever went to the wrong address. Oh, I always felt that you were
_truly_ refined, anyway." He passively yields the letter, and she whirls
away to a writing-desk in the corner of the room. "Now, I'll just keep a
copy of the letter--for a joke; I think I've a perfect right
to"--scribbling furiously away--"and then I'll match the paper with an
envelope--I can do that perfectly--and then I'll just imitate his
hand--such fun!--and send it flying over to Margaret Rice. Oh, _how_
good! Touch the bell, Willis;" and then--as the serving-maid
appears--"Yes, Jane! Run right across the lawn to Mrs. Rice's, and give
this letter for Miss Margaret, and say it was left here by mistake.
Well, it _was_, Willis. Fly, Jane! Oh, Willis, love! Isn't it perfect!
Of course she'll have got his formal reply to my invitation, and be all
mixed up by it, and now when this note comes, she'll see through it all
in an instant, and it will be such a relief to her; and oh, she'll think
that he's directed _both_ the letters to her because he couldn't think
of any one else! Isn't it lovely? Just like anything that's nice, it's
ten times as nice as you expected it to be; and--"

Campbell: "But hold on, Amy!" He lifts a note from the desk. "You've
sent your copy. Here's the original now. She'll think you've been
playing some joke on her."

Mrs. Campbell, clutching the letter from him, and scanning it in a daze:
"_What!_ Oh, my goodness! It is! I have! Oh, I shall die! Run! Call her
back! Shriek, Willis!" They rush to the window together. "No, no! It's
too late! She's given it to their man, and now nothing can save me! Oh,
Willis! Willis! Willis! This is all your fault, with that fatal
suggestion of yours. Oh, if you had only left it to me I never should
have got into such a scrape! She will think now that I've been trying to
hoax her, and she's perfectly implacable at the least hint of a liberty,
and she'll be ready to kill me. I don't know _what_ she won't do. Oh,
Willis, how _could_ you get me into this!"

Campbell, irately: "Get you into this! Now, Amy, this is a little too
much. You got yourself into it. You urged me to think of something--"

Mrs. Campbell: "Well, do, Willis, _do_ think of something, or I shall go
mad! Help me, Willis! Don't be so heartless--so unfeeling."

Campbell: "There's only one thing now, and that is to make a clean
breast of it to Welling, and get him to help us out. A word from him can
make everything right, and we can't take a step without him; we can't
move!"

Mrs. Campbell: "I can't let you. Oh, isn't it horrible!"

Campbell: "Yes; a nice thing is always ten times nicer than you
expected it to be!"

Mrs. Campbell: "Oh, how can you stand there mocking me? Why don't you go
to him at once, and tell him the whole thing, and beg him, implore him,
to help us?"

Campbell: "Why, you just told me I mustn't!"

Mrs. Campbell: "You didn't expect me to say you might, did you? Oh, how
cruel!" She whirls out of the room, and Campbell stands in a daze, in
which he is finally aware of Mr. Arthur Welling, seen through the open
window, on the veranda without. Mr. Welling, with a terrified and
furtive air, seems to be fixed to the spot where he stands.




II

_MR. WELLING; MR. CAMPBELL_


Campbell: "Why, Welling, what the devil are you doing there?"

Welling: "Trying to get away."

Campbell: "To get away? But you sha'n't, man! I won't let you. I was
just going to see you. How long have you been there?"

Welling: "I've just come."

Campbell: "What have you heard?"

Welling: "Nothing--nothing. I was knocking on the window-casing to make
_you_ hear, but you seemed preoccupied."

Campbell: "Preoccupied! convulsed! cataclysmed! Look here: we're in a
box, Welling. And you've got us into it." He pulls Welling's note out of
his pocket, where he has been keeping his hand on it, and pokes it at
him. "Is that yours?"

Welling, examining it with bewilderment mounting into anger: "It's mine;
yes. May I ask, Mr. Campbell, how you came to have this letter?"

Campbell: "May I ask, Mr. Welling, how you came to write such a letter
to my wife?"

Welling: "To your wife? To Mrs. Campbell? I never wrote any such letter
to her."

Campbell: "Then you addressed it to her."

Welling: "Impossible!"

Campbell: "Impossible? I think I can convince you, much as I regret to
do so." He makes search about Mrs. Campbell's letters on the table
first, and then on the writing-desk. "We have the envelope. It came
amongst a lot of letters, and there's no mistake about it." He continues
to toss the letters about, and then desists. "But no matter; I can't
find it; Amy's probably carried it off with her. There's no mistake
about it. I was going to have some fun with you about it, but now you
can have some fun with me. Whom did you send Mrs. Campbell's letter to?"

Welling: "Mrs. Campbell's letter?"

Campbell: "Oh, pshaw! your acceptance or refusal, or whatever it was, of
her garden fandango. You got an invitation?"

Welling: "Of course."

Campbell: "And you wrote to accept it or decline it at the same time
that you wrote this letter here to some one else. And you addressed two
envelopes before you put the notes in either. And then you put them
into the wrong envelopes. And you sent this note to my wife, and the
other note to the other person--"

Welling: "No, I didn't do anything of the kind!" He regards Campbell
with amazement, and some apparent doubt of his sanity.

Campbell: "Well, then, Mr. Welling, will you allow me to ask what the
deuce you did do?"

Welling: "I never wrote to Mrs. Campbell at all. I thought I would just
drop in and tell her why I couldn't come. It seemed so formal to write."

Campbell: "Then will you be kind enough to tell me whom you _did_ write
to?"

Welling: "No, Mr. Campbell, I can't do that."

Campbell: "You write such a letter as that to my wife, and then won't
tell me whom it's to?"

Welling: "No! And you've no right to ask me."

Campbell: "I've no right to ask you?"

Welling: "No. When I tell you that the note wasn't meant for Mrs.
Campbell, that's enough."

Campbell: "I'll be judge of that, Mr. Welling. You say that you were not
writing two notes at the time, and that you didn't get the envelopes
mixed. Then, if the note wasn't meant for my wife, why did you address
it to her?"

Welling: "That's what I can't tell; that's what I don't know. It's as
great a mystery to me as it is to you. I can only conjecture that when I
was writing that address I was thinking of coming to explain to Mrs.
Campbell that I was going away to-day, and shouldn't be back till after
her party. It was too complicated to put in a note without seeming to
give my regrets too much importance. And I suppose that when I was
addressing the note that I did write I put Mrs. Campbell's name on
because I had her so much in mind."

Campbell, with irony: "Oh!"




III

_MRS. CAMPBELL; MR. WELLING; MR. CAMPBELL_


Mrs. Campbell, appearing through the portiere that separates the
breakfast-room from the parlor beyond: "Yes!" She goes up and gives her
hand to Mr. Welling with friendly frankness. "And it was very nice of
you to think of me at such a time, when you ought to have been thinking
of some one else."

Welling, with great relief and effusion: "Oh, thank you, Mrs. Campbell!
I was sure you would understand. You couldn't have imagined me capable
of addressing such language to you; of presuming--of--"

Mrs. Campbell: "Of course not! And Willis has quite lost his head. I saw
in an instant just how it was. I'm so sorry you can't come to my
party--"

Campbell: "Amy, have you been eavesdropping?"

Mrs. Campbell: "There was no need of eavesdropping. I could have heard
you out at Loon Rock Light, you shouted so. But as soon as I recognized
Mr. Welling's voice I came to the top of the stairs and listened. I was
sure you would do something foolish. But now I think we had better make
a clean breast of it, and tell Mr. Welling just what we've done. We
knew, of course, the letter wasn't for me, and we thought we wouldn't
vex you about it, but just send it to the one it _was_ meant for. We've
surprised your secret, Mr. Welling, though we didn't intend to; but if
you'll accept our congratulations--under the rose, of course--we won't
let it go any further. It does seem so perfectly ideal, and I feel like
saying, Bless you, my children! You've been in and out here so much this
summer, and I feel just like an elder sister to Margaret."

Welling: "Margaret?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Well, Miss Rice, then--"

Welling: "Miss Rice?"

Mrs. Campbell, with dignity: "Oh, I'm sorry if we seem to presume upon
our acquaintance with the matter. We couldn't very well help knowing it
under the circumstances."

Welling: "Certainly, certainly--of course: I don't mind that at all: I
was going to tell you, anyway: that was partly the reason why I came
instead of writing--"

Campbell, in an audible soliloquy: "I supposed he _had_ written."

Mrs. Campbell, intensely: "Don't interrupt, Willis! Well?"

Welling: "But I don't see what Miss Rice has to do with it."

Mrs. Campbell: "You don't see! Why, isn't Margaret Rice the one--"

Welling: "What one?"

Mrs. Campbell: "The one that you're engaged--the one that the note was
really _for_?"

Welling: "No! What an idea! Miss Rice? Not for an instant! It's--it's
her friend--Miss Greenway--who's staying with her--"

Mrs. Campbell, in a very awful voice: "Willis! Get me some water--some
wine! Help me! Ah! Don't touch me! It was you, _you_ who did it all!
Oh, _now_ what shall I do?" She drops her head upon Campbell's shoulder,
while Welling watches them in stupefaction.

Campbell: "It's about a million times nicer than we could have expected.
That's the way with a nice thing when you get it started. Well, young
man, you're done for; and so are we, for that matter. We supposed that
note which you addressed to Mrs. Campbell was intended for Miss Rice--"

Welling: "Ho, ho, ho! Ah, ha, ha! Miss Rice? Ha--"

Campbell: "I'm glad you like it. You'll enjoy the rest of it still
better. We thought it was for Miss Rice, and my wife neatly imitated
your hand on an envelope and sent it over to her just before you came
in. Funny, isn't it? Laugh on! Don't mind _us_!"

Welling, aghast: "Thought my note was for Miss Rice? Sent it to her?
Gracious powers!" They all stand for a moment in silence, and then
Welling glances at the paper in his hand. "But there's some mistake. You
haven't sent my note to Miss Rice: here it is now!"

Campbell: "Oh, that's the best of the joke. Mrs. Campbell took a
copy"--Mrs. Campbell moans--"she meant to have some fun with you about
it, and it's ten times as much fun as _I_ expected; and in her hurry she
sent off her copy and kept the original. Perhaps that makes it better."

Mrs. Campbell, detaching herself from him and confronting Mr. Welling:
"No; worse! She'll think we've been trying to hoax her, and she'll be in
a towering rage; and she'll show the note to Miss Greenway, and you'll
be ruined. Oh poor Mr. Welling! Oh, what a fatal, fatal--mix!" She
abandons herself in an attitude of extreme desperation upon a chair,
while the men stare at her, till Campbell breaks the spell by starting
forward and ringing the bell on the table.

Mrs. Campbell: "What are you doing, Willis?"

Campbell: "Ringing for Jane." As Jane appears: "Did you give Miss Rice
the note?"




IV

_JANE; MRS. CAMPBELL; WELLING; CAMPBELL_


Jane: "No, sir; I gave it to the man. He said he would give it to Miss
Rice."

Campbell: "Then it's all up. If by any chance she hadn't got it, Amy,
you might have sent over for it, and said there was a mistake."

Jane: "He said Miss Rice was out driving with Miss Greenway in her
phaeton, but they expected her back every minute."

Mrs. Campbell: "Oh, my goodness! And you didn't come to tell me? Oh, if
we had only known! We've lost our only chance, Willis."

Jane: "I did come and knock on your door, ma'am, but I couldn't make you
hear."

Campbell: "There's still a chance. Perhaps she hasn't got back yet."

Jane: "I know she ain't, sir. I've been watching for her ever since. I
can always see them come, from the pantry window."

Mrs. Campbell: "Well, then, don't stand there talking, but run at once!
Oh, Willis! Never tell me again that there's no such thing as an
overruling providence. Oh, what an interposition! Oh, I can never be
grateful and humble enough--Goodness me, Jane! why don't you go?"

Jane: "Go where, ma'am? I don't know what you want me to do. I'm willing
enough to do anything if I know what it is, but it's pretty hard to do
things if you don't."

Campbell: "You're perfectly right, Jane. Mrs. Campbell wants you to
telegraph yourself over to Mrs. Rice's, and say to her that the letter
you left for Miss Rice is not for her, but another lady, and Mrs.
Campbell sent it by mistake. Get it and bring it back here, dead or
alive, even if Mrs. Rice has to pass over your mangled body in the
attempt."

Jane, tasting the joke, while Mrs. Campbell gasps in ineffective
efforts to reinforce her husband's instructions: "I will that, sir."




V

_MRS. CAMPBELL; WELLING; CAMPBELL_


Campbell: "And now, while we're waiting, let's all join hands and dance
round the table. You're saved, Welling. So are you, Amy. And so am
I--which is more to the point."

Mrs. Campbell, gayly: "Dansons!" She extends her hands to the gentlemen,
and as they circle round the breakfast-table she sings,

    _"Sur le pont d'Avignon,
    Tout le monde y danse en rond."_

She frees her hands and courtesies to one gentleman and the other.

    _"Les belles dames font comme ca;
    Les beaux messieurs font comme ca."_

Then she catches hands with them again, and they circle round the table
as before, singing,

    "_Sur le pont d'Avignon,
    Tout le monde y danse en rond._

Oh, dear! Stop! I'm dizzy--I shall fall." She spins into a chair, while
the men continue solemnly circling by themselves.

Campbell: "It is a sacred dance:

    _"Sur le pont d'Avignon--"_

Welling: "It's an expiation:

    _"Tout le monde y danse en rond."_

Mrs. Campbell, springing from her chair and running to the window:
"Stop, you crazy things! Here comes Jane! Come right in here, Jane! Did
you get it? Give it to me, Jane!"

Welling: "_I_ think it belongs to me, Mrs. Campbell."

Campbell: "Jane, I am master of the house--nominally. Give me the
letter."




VI

_JANE; MRS. CAMPBELL; WELLING; CAMPBELL_


Jane, entering, blown and panting, through the open window: "Oh, how I
did run--"

Mrs. Campbell: "Yes, yes! But the letter--"

Welling: "Did you get it?"

Campbell: "Where is it?"

Jane, fanning herself with her apron: "I can't hardly get my breath--"

Mrs. Campbell: "Had she got back?"

Jane: "No, ma'am."

Campbell: "Did Mrs. Rice object to giving it up?"

Jane: "No, sir."

Welling: "Then it's all right?"

Jane: "No, sir. All wrong."

Welling: "All wrong?"

Campbell: "How all wrong?"

Mrs. Campbell: "What's all wrong, Jane?"

Jane: "Please, ma'am, may I have a drink of water? I'm so dry I can't
speak."

Mrs. Campbell: "Yes, certainly."

Campbell: "Of course."

Welling: "Here." They all pour glasses of water and press them to her
lips.

Jane, pushing the glasses away, and escaping from the room: "They
thought Mrs. Campbell was in a great hurry for Miss Rice to have the
letter, and they sent off the man with it to meet her."




VII

_MRS. CAMPBELL; WELLING; CAMPBELL_


Mrs. Campbell: "Oh, merciful goodness!"

Welling: "Gracious powers!"

Campbell: "Another overruling providence. Now you _are_ in for it, my
boy! So is Amy. And so am I--which is still more to the point."

Mrs. Campbell: "Well, now, what shall we do?"

Campbell: "All that we can do now is to await developments: they'll
come fast enough. Miss Rice will open her letter as soon as she gets it,
and she won't understand it in the least; how _could_ she understand a
letter in your handwriting, with Welling's name signed to it? She'll
show it to Miss Greenway--"

Welling: "Oh, don't say that!"

Campbell: "--Greenway; and Miss Greenway won't know what to make of it
either. But she's the kind of girl who'll form some lively conjectures
when she reads that letter. In the first place, she'll wonder how Mr.
Welling happens to be writing to Miss Rice in that affectionate
strain--"

Mrs. Campbell, in an appealing shriek: "Willis!"

Campbell: "--And she naturally won't believe he's done it. But then,
when Miss Rice tells her it's your handwriting, Amy, she'll think that
you and Miss Rice have been having your jokes about Mr. Welling; and
she'll wonder what kind of person you are, anyway, to make free with a
young man's name that way."

Welling: "Oh, I assure you that she admires Mrs. Campbell more than
anybody."

Mrs. Campbell: "Don't try to stop him; he's fiendish when he begins
teasing."

Campbell: "Oh, well! If she admires Mrs. Campbell and confides in you,
then the whole affair is very simple. All you've got to do is to tell
her that after you'd written her the original of that note, your mind
was so full of Mrs. Campbell and her garden-party that you naturally
addressed it to her. And then Mrs. Campbell can cut in and say that when
she got the note she knew it wasn't for her, but she never dreamed of
your caring for Miss Greenway, and was so sure it was for Miss Rice that
she sent her a copy of it. That will make it all right and perfectly
agreeable to every one concerned."

Mrs. Campbell: "And I can say that I sent it at your suggestion, and
then, instead of trying to help me out of the awful, awful--box, you
took a cruel pleasure in teasing me about it! But I shall not say
anything, for I shall not see them. I will leave you to receive them and
make the best of it. Don't _try_ to stop me, Willis." She threatens him
with her fan as he steps forward to intercept her escape.

Campbell: "No, no! Listen, Amy! You _must_ stay and see those ladies.
It's all well enough to leave it to me, but what about poor Welling?
_He_ hasn't done anything--except cause the whole trouble."

Mrs. Campbell: "I am very sorry, but I can't help it. I must go."
Campbell continues to prevent her flight, and she suddenly whirls about
and makes a dash at the open window. "Oh, very well, then! I can get out
this way." At the same moment Miss Rice and Miss Greenway appear before
the window on the piazza. "Ugh! E--e--e! How you frightened me! But--but
come in. So gl--glad to see you! And you--you too, Miss Greenway. Here's
Mr. Welling. He's been desolating us with a story about having to be
away over my party, and just getting back for Mrs. Curwen's. Isn't it
too bad? Can't some of you young ladies--or all of you--make him stay?"
As Mrs. Campbell talks on, she readjusts her spirit more and more to
the exigency, and subdues her agitation to a surface of the sweetest
politeness.




VIII

_MISS RICE, MISS GREENWAY, and the OTHERS_


Miss Rice, entering with an unopened letter in her hand, which she
extends to Mrs. Campbell: "What in the world does it all mean, Mrs.
Campbell, your sending your letters flying after _me_ at this rate?"

Mrs. Campbell, with a gasp: "My letters?" She mechanically receives the
extended note, and glances at the superscription: "_Mrs. Willis
Campbell_. Ah!" She hands it quickly to her husband, who reads the
address with a similar cry.

Campbell: "Well, well, Amy! This is a pretty good joke on you. You've
sealed up one of your own notes, and sent it to Miss Rice. Capital! Ah,
ha, ha!"

Mrs. Campbell, with hysterical rapture: "Oh, how delicious! What a
ridiculous blunder! I don't wonder you were puzzled, Margaret."

Welling: "What! Sent her your own letter, addressed to yourself?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Yes. Isn't it amusing?"

Welling: "The best thing I ever heard of."

Miss Rice: "Yes. And if you only knew what agonies of curiosity Miss
Greenway and I had suffered, wanting to open it and read it anyway, in
spite of all the decencies, I think you would read it to us."

Campbell: "Or at least give Miss Rice her own letter. What in the world
did you do with that?"

Mrs. Campbell: "Put it in my desk, where I thought I put mine. But never
mind it now. I can tell you what was in it just as well. Come in here a
moment, Margaret." She leads the way to the parlor, whither Miss Rice
follows.

Miss Greenway, poutingly: "Oh, mayn't I know, too? I think that's hardly
fair, Mrs. Campbell."

Mrs. Campbell: "No; or--Margaret may tell you afterwards; or Mr.
Welling may, _now_!"

Miss Greenway: "How very formidable!"

Mrs. Campbell, over her shoulder, on going out: "Willis, bring me the
refusals and acceptances, won't you? They're up-stairs."

Campbell: "Delighted to be of any service." Behind Miss Greenway's back
he dramatizes over her head to Welling his sense of his own escape, and
his compassion for the fellow-man whom he leaves in the toils of fate.




IX

_MISS GREENWAY; MR. WELLING_


Welling: "Nelly!" He approaches, and timidly takes her hand.

Miss Greenway: "Arthur! That letter was addressed in your handwriting.
Will you please explain?"

Welling: "Why, it's very simple--that is, it's the most difficult thing
in the world. Nelly, can you believe _any_thing I say to you?"

Miss Greenway: "What nonsense! Of course I can--if you're not too long
about it."

Welling: "Well, then, the letter in that envelope was one I wrote to
Mrs. Campbell--or the copy of one."

Miss Greenway: "The copy?"

Welling: "But let me explain. You see, when I got your note asking me to
be sure and come to Mrs. Curwen's--"

Miss Greenway: "Yes?"

Welling: "--I had just received an invitation from Mrs. Campbell for her
garden-party, and I sat down and wrote to you, and concluded I'd step
over and tell her why I couldn't come, and with that in mind I addressed
your letter--the one I'd written you--to her."

Miss Greenway: "With my name inside?"

Welling: "No; I merely called you 'darling'; and when Mrs. Campbell
opened it she saw it couldn't be for her, and she took it into her head
it must be for Miss Rice."

Miss Greenway: "For Margaret? What an idea! But why did she put your
envelope on it?"

Welling: "She made a copy, for the joke of it; and then, in her hurry,
she enclosed that in my envelope, and kept the original and the envelope
she'd addressed to Miss Rice, and--and that's all."

Miss Greenway: "What a perfectly delightful muddle! And how shall we get
out of it with Margaret?"

Welling: "With Margaret? I don't care for her. It's you that I want to
get out of it with. And you do believe me--you do forgive me, Nelly?"

Miss Greenway: "For what?"

Welling: "For--for--I don't know what for. But I thought you'd be so
vexed."

Miss Greenway: "I shouldn't have liked you to send a letter addressed
darling to Mrs. Curwen; but Mrs. Campbell is different."

Welling: "Oh, how archangelically sensible! How divine of you to take it
in just the right way!"

[Illustration: MR. WELLING EXPLAINS.]

Miss Greenway: "Why, of course! How stupid I should be to take such a
thing in the wrong way!"

Welling: "And I'm so glad now I didn't try to lie to you about it."

Miss Greenway: "It wouldn't have been of any use. You couldn't have
carried off anything of that sort. The truth is bad enough for _you_ to
carry off. Promise me that you will always leave the other thing to
_me_."

Welling: "I will, darling; I will, indeed."

Miss Greenway: "And now we must tell Margaret, of course."




X

_MISS RICE; then MR. and MRS. CAMPBELL, and the OTHERS_


Miss Rice, rushing in upon them, and clasping Miss Greenway in a fond
embrace: "You needn't. Mrs. Campbell has told me; and oh, Nelly, I'm so
happy for you! And isn't it all the greatest mix?"

Campbell, rushing in, and wringing Welling's hand: "You needn't tell
me, either; I've been listening, and I've heard every word. I
congratulate you, my dear boy! I'd no idea she'd let you up so easily.
You'll allow yourself it isn't a very likely story."

Welling: "I know it. But--"

Miss Rice: "That's the very reason no one could have made it up."

Miss Greenway: "_He_ couldn't have made up even a likely story."

Campbell: "Congratulate you again, Welling. Do you suppose she can keep
so always?"

Mrs. Campbell, rushing in with extended hands: "Don't answer the wretch,
Mr. Welling. Of course she can with _you_. Dansons!" She gives a hand to
Miss Greenway and Welling each; the others join them, and as they circle
round the table she sings,

    _"Sur le pont d'Avignon,_
    _Tout le monde y danse en rond."_


THE END

       *       *       *       *       *




BY WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS.


THE COAST OF BOHEMIA. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

THE WORLD OF CHANCE. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50; Paper, 60 cents.

THE QUALITY OF MERCY. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50; Paper, 75 cents.

AN IMPERATIVE DUTY. 12mo, Cloth, $1.00; Paper, 50 cents.

A HAZARD OF NEW FORTUNES. 2 vols., 12mo, Cloth, $2.00; 1 vol.,
Illustrated, Paper, $1.00.

THE SHADOW OF A DREAM, 12mo, Cloth, $1.00; Paper, 50 cents.

ANNIE KILBURN. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50; Paper, 75 cents.

APRIL HOPES. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50; Paper, 75 cents.

CHRISTMAS EVERY DAY, and Other Stories. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth,
$1.25.

A BOY'S TOWN. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, $1.25.

THE MOUSE-TRAP, and Other Farces. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, $1.00.

MY YEAR IN A LOG-CABIN. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, 50 cents.

A LITTLE SWISS SOJOURN. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, 50 cents.

FARCES: _A Likely Story_--_The Mouse-Trap_--_Five O'Clock Tea_--_Evening
Dress_--_The Unexpected Guests_--_A Letter of Introduction_--_The Albany
Depot_--_The Garroters_. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, 50 cents each.

CRITICISM AND FICTION. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

MODERN ITALIAN POETS. 12mo, Cloth, $2.00.

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent by the publishers, postage
prepaid, to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt
of the price._




HARPER'S AMERICAN ESSAYISTS.

With Portraits. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00 each.


LITERARY AND SOCIAL SILHOUETTES. By HJALMAR HJORTH BOYESEN.

STUDIES OF THE STAGE. By BRANDER MATTHEWS.

AMERICANISMS AND BRITICISMS, with Other Essays on Other Isms. By BRANDER
MATTHEWS.

AS WE GO. By CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER. With Illustrations.

AS WE WERE SAYING. By CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER. With Illustrations.

FROM THE EASY CHAIR. By GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS.

FROM THE EASY CHAIR. _Second Series._ By GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS.

FROM THE EASY CHAIR. _Third Series._ By GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS.

CRITICISM AND FICTION. By WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS.

FROM THE BOOKS OF LAURENCE HUTTON.

CONCERNING ALL OF US. By THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON.

THE WORK OF JOHN RUSKIN. By CHARLES WALDSTEIN.

PICTURE AND TEXT. By HENRY JAMES. With Illustrations.

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent by the publishers, postage
prepaid, to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt
of the price._




THE ODD NUMBER SERIES.

16mo, Cloth, Ornamental.


PARISIAN POINTS OF VIEW. By LUDOVIC HALEVY. Translated by EDITH V. B.
MATTHEWS. $1.00.

DAME CARE. By HERMANN SUDERMANN. Translated by BERTHA OVERBECK. $1.00.

TALES OF TWO COUNTRIES. By ALEXANDER KIELLAND. Translated by WILLIAM
ARCHER. $1.00.

TEN TALES BY FRANCOIS COPPEE. Translated by WALTER LEARNED. 50
Illustrations. $1.25.

MODERN GHOSTS. Selected and Translated. $1.00.

THE HOUSE BY THE MEDLAR-TREE. By GIOVANNI VERGA. Translated from the
Italian by MARY A. CRAIG. $1.00.

PASTELS IN PROSE. Translated by STUART MERRILL. 150 Illustrations.
$1.25.

MARIA: A South American Romance. By JORGE ISAACS. Translated by ROLLO
OGDEN. $1.00.

THE ODD NUMBER. Thirteen Tales by GUY DE MAUPASSANT. The Translation by
JONATHAN STURGES. $1.00.

Other volumes to follow.

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any
part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price._




BY BRANDER MATTHEWS.


STUDIES OF THE STAGE. With Portrait. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.00.

Mr. Matthews writes of the stage intelligently and appreciatively--more
so, perhaps, than most Americans, for the reason that he writes from the
point of view of the stage rather than that of the front of the
house.--_Philadelphia Times._

THE STORY OF A STORY, and Other Stories. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth,
Ornamental, $1.25.

These stories have a light felicitous touch that is well-nigh the
perfection of polished story-telling. They are stamped with an exquisite
refinement of the art, and every telling point is delicately
emphasized.--_Boston Transcript._

AMERICANISMS AND BRITICISMS, with Other Essays on Other Isms. With
Portrait. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.00.

A racy, delightful little book.... It is a long time since we have met
with such a combination of keen yet fair criticism, genuine wit, and
literary grace. The skill with which certain limitations of English
literary people, past or present, are indicated is as impressive as it
is artistic.--_Congregationalist_, Boston.

THIS PICTURE AND THAT. A Comedy. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, Ornamental,
50 cents.

THE DECISION OF THE COURT. A Comedy. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth,
Ornamental, 50 cents.

IN THE VESTIBULE LIMITED. A Story. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, Ornamental,
50 cents.

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent by the publishers, postage
prepaid, to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt
of the price._




BY LAURENCE HUTTON.


LITERARY LANDMARKS OF LONDON. (_New Edition._) Illustrated with over 70
Portraits. Post 8vo, Cloth, $1.75.

Altogether this is a book of which literary America may be
proud.--_Saturday Review_, London.

LITERARY LANDMARKS OF EDINBURGH. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, $1.00.

Mr. Hutton has hunted up tradition, verified the facts, as only a
passionate pilgrim could, and we are grateful to him for the planting of
these literary landmarks.--_N. Y. Times._

CURIOSITIES OF THE AMERICAN STAGE. With Copious and Characteristic
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, Cloth, Uncut Edges and Gilt Top, $2.50.

The work presents a mass of valuable information in a most attractive
and readable form. In it an admirable literary quality, seldom found in
such histories, is conspicuous on every page.--_Christian Union_, N. Y.

FROM THE BOOKS OF LAURENCE HUTTON. With Portrait. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

Mr. Hutton's touch is graceful, his acquaintance with the subject
thorough, and he never imposes with unnecessary erudition.--_N. Y.
Times._

EDWIN BOOTH. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, 50 cents.

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent by mail, postage prepaid,
to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the
price._




BY CONSTANCE F. WOOLSON.


HORACE CHASE. 16mo, Cloth, $1.25.

JUPITER LIGHTS. 16mo, Cloth, $1.25.

EAST ANGELS. 16mo, Cloth, $1.25.

ANNE. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth, $1.25.

FOR THE MAJOR. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

CASTLE NOWHERE. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

RODMAN THE KEEPER. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

One of the most remarkable qualities of Miss Woolson's work was its
intense picturesqueness. Few writers have shown equal beauty in
expressing the poetry of landscape.--_Springfield Republican._

Characterization is Miss Woolson's forte. Her men and women are
original, breathing, and finely contrasted creations.--_Chicago
Tribune._

Delightful touches justify those who see many points of analogy between
Miss Woolson and George Eliot.--_N. Y. Times._

Miss Woolson's power of describing natural scenery and strange,
out-of-the-way phases of American life is undoubted. One cannot well
help being fascinated by her stories.--_Churchman_, N. Y.

Miss Woolson is one of the few novelists of the day who know how to make
conversation, how to individualize the speakers, how to exclude rabid
realism without falling into literary formality.--_N. Y. Tribune._

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any
part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price._




BY MARY E. WILKINS.


PEMBROKE. A Novel. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.50.

JANE FIELD. A Novel. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.25.

GILES COREY, YEOMAN. A Play. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, Ornamental, 50
cents.

A NEW ENGLAND NUN, and Other Stories. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.25.

A HUMBLE ROMANCE, and Other Stories. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.25.

YOUNG LUCRETIA, and Other Stories. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth,
Ornamental, $1.25.

Always there is a freedom from commonplace, and a power to hold the
interest to the close, which is owing, not to a trivial ingenuity, but
to the spell which her personages cast over the reader's mind as soon as
they come within his ken.--_Atlantic Monthly._

A gallery of striking studies in the humblest quarters of American
country life. No one has dealt with this kind of life better than Miss
Wilkins. Nowhere are there to be found such faithful, delicately drawn,
sympathetic, tenderly humorous pieces.--_N. Y. Tribune._

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent by mail, postage prepaid,
to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the
price._




BY GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS.


ORATIONS AND ADDRESSES. Three Volumes. 8vo, Cloth, Uncut Edges and Gilt
Tops, $3.50 each.

FROM THE EASY CHAIR. With Portrait. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.00.

FROM THE EASY CHAIR. _Second Series._ With Portrait. 16mo, Cloth,
Ornamental, $1.00.

FROM THE EASY CHAIR. _Third Series._ With Portrait. 16mo, Cloth,
Ornamental, $1.00.

PRUE AND I. Illustrated Edition. 8vo, Illuminated Silk, $3.50. Also
12mo, Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50.

LOTUS-EATING. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50.

NILE NOTES OF A HOWADJI. 12mo, Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50.

THE HOWADJI IN SYRIA. 12mo, Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50.

THE POTIPHAR PAPERS. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50.

TRUMPS. A Novel. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50.

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, Ornamental, 50 cents.

WENDELL PHILLIPS. A Eulogy. 8vo, Paper, 25 cents.

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_For sale by all booksellers, or will be sent by the publishers, postage
prepaid, to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt
of the price._

[Illustration]


       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Notes


Added the Table of Contents.

Made minor punctuation corrections.

Italicized text is indicated by underscores: _example_.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Likely Story, by William Dean Howells

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LIKELY STORY ***

***** This file should be named 28305.txt or 28305.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/3/0/28305/

Produced by David Edwards, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from scans of public domain material
produced by Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
