The Project Gutenberg EBook of Reflections on the Operation of the Present
System of Education, 1853, by Christopher C. Andrews

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Reflections on the Operation of the Present System of Education, 1853

Author: Christopher C. Andrews

Release Date: March 15, 2009 [EBook #28330]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDUCATION, 1853 ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Tamise Totterdell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









    REFLECTIONS
    ON
    THE OPERATION
    OF THE
    PRESENT SYSTEM OF EDUCATION.

    BY

    CHRISTOPHER C. ANDREWS,
    COUNSELLOR AT LAW.


    "TRAIN UP A CHILD IN THE WAY HE SHOULD GO; AND, WHEN HE IS OLD,
    HE WILL NOT DEPART FROM IT."


    BOSTON:
    CROSBY, NICHOLS, AND COMPANY,
    111, WASHINGTON STREET.
    1853.




    BOSTON:
    PRINTED BY JOHN WILSON AND SON,
    22, SCHOOL STREET.




PREFATORY NOTE.


The increasing importance of the subject treated of has led the author
to revise an article, published nearly two years ago in a monthly
journal, and to present it in the following pages. His object is to call
attention to what he regards a _defect in the operation_ of our present
system of education, and to propose some suggestions for its remedy.
That defect consists in the want of moral instruction in our schools.
Its existence, he believes, may be attributed to the state of public
opinion, rather than to any imperfection in the system itself. For this
reason, he is of opinion that remarks on the subject are more necessary,
and therefore worthier of the consideration and indulgence of the
public.

    35, COURT STREET, BOSTON,
          May, 1853.




    THE
    INCOMPLETE OPERATION
    OF OUR
    PRESENT SYSTEM OF EDUCATION.


The duty of bringing up the young in the way of usefulness has ever been
acknowledged as of utmost importance to the well-being and safety of a
State. So imperative was this obligation considered by Solon, the
Athenian lawgiver, that he excused children from maintaining their
parents, when old and feeble, if they had neglected to qualify them for
some useful art or profession. Although this principle has universally
prevailed in every civilized age, yet the success of its practical
operation depends entirely upon what is understood by necessary
knowledge and useful employment. If, as among the Lacedemonians and many
other nations of antiquity, a useful art consisted chiefly in the
exploits of war,--in being able to undergo privations and hardships, and
in wielding successfully the heavy instruments of bloodshed,--such an
education as would conduce to the acquirement of that art must be
estimated on different grounds from that system whose object is to
develop the moral and intellectual faculties.

From the distant past, traditions have come down, evincing in many
instances exemplary care in the culture of youth; but the conspicuous
record made of them by the historian and poet refutes the idea that they
were common. With the lapse of centuries, revolutions in the arts and
sciences have been effected, important in themselves, but more so for
the changes they have produced both in social and political affairs.
Like hunters who discover in their forest-wanderings a valuable mine
which shapes anew their course of life, the people of the old world, in
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, were allured from their
incessant conflicts by the more profitable arts of peace. Till then the
interests of learning had been crushed by the superstition and bigotry
of the times. In the fourteenth century even, the most celebrated
university in Europe, that of Bologna, bestowed its chief honors upon
the professorship of astrology. But these grand developments in art and
science gave a new impulse to social life. Thenceforward the interests
of education began to thrive. The patronage given to popular
instruction by many of the rulers of European States has imparted a
lustre to their annals, which will almost atone for their heartless
perversion of human rights. For whether we consider the coercive system
of Prussia, which not yet exhibits very happy practical results; or the
Austrian system, which indirectly operates coercively by denying
employment to those unprovided with school-diplomas; or the Bavarian,
which makes a certificate of six years' schooling necessary to the
contracting of a valid marriage or apprenticeship; or, indeed, the
systems of many other Continental countries,--we find much to excite
cheering anticipations.

This country--this Commonwealth especially--has ever been distinguished
for being foremost in the maintenance of a benevolent and comprehensive
system of education. That system is, we believe, in the judgment of
foreigners, one of the most original things which America has produced.
Fortunately for the prosperity of the people who derive their support on
this rugged soil, their fathers were a class of men deeply imbued with
moral sentiment,--lovers of freedom and of knowledge; men who sought
that security of their principles in the spread of moral intelligence,
which the sword alone would in vain attempt to procure. "The hands that
wielded the axe or guided the canoe in the morning opened the page of
history and philosophy in the evening;" and it cannot be a matter of
surprise, that, counting their greatest wealth in their own industry and
resolution, they should at an early period turn their attention to the
important subject of education; and that they even denied themselves
many of the comforts of life, in order to secure the blessings which
might evolve therefrom.

The peculiarity of our system of government is, that it invests the
sovereignty in the people; and, as it has always been the policy of
every nation claiming to be civilized to educate those who were designed
to govern, it might naturally enough be inferred, that, in this country,
means would be provided whereby the whole people might receive an
education. And thus it is. The true object, therefore, of such a system
of instruction as the government supports, it must be conceded by all,
consists in qualifying the young to become good citizens,--in teaching
them not only what their duties are, but making them ready and willing
to perform them. We should discriminate between the object of common
schools and the object of colleges; between an institution intended to
inform every one of what every one should know, and one designed to fit
persons for particular spheres of life, by a course of instruction
which it is impracticable for all to pursue. A very large majority of
those who enter our colleges are desirous of acquiring that knowledge,
as well as discipline, which will prepare them most thoroughly for some
one of the learned professions: it is a course preparatory to one still
higher,--a gateway by which the industrious and sagacious may with
greater ease traverse the long and winding avenues of science. Of a more
general nature is the object of that instruction provided by the State
for all, because it is designed to fit them for a greater variety of
duties, and the chief of these duties is that of _living justly_. If we
regarded physical resources as the chief elements of prosperity, or
intellectual superiority the principal source of national greatness; if
we followed the theory of the Persian legislator, Zoroaster, who thought
that to plant a tree, to cultivate a field, and to have a family, were
the great duties of man, we might be content with that instruction which
would sharpen the intellect, and furnish us with acute and skilful men
of business. But an enlightened public sentiment rejects such a theory
as narrow and unsafe. It is surely of great importance that children
should be made familiar with the common branches of knowledge; that
their minds should receive as thorough discipline as is practicable;
but of what transcendent importance is it that they should have
impressed upon their minds the principles of truth and justice, and the
true value of resolute, earnest industry; that they should grow up in
the love of virtue and honor, and be taught to know and govern
themselves! Education of the heart, as well as education of the mind,
should be promoted. The State should make men before it makes artisans;
citizens before it makes statesmen. And this in theory it proposes to
do. The highest praise that can be bestowed upon our system of
education, here in Massachusetts, is that the leading object it
contemplates is the moral instruction of the young. This is its grand
and peculiar feature. Those who have been and are now at the head of our
educational interests, have sought, by timely word and deed, to carry
this purpose into active operation. In so doing, they have attempted to
give effect to the law which expressly ordains that "all instructors of
youth shall exert their best endeavors to impress on the minds of
children and youth committed to their care and instruction, the
principles of piety, justice, and a sacred regard to truth, love to
their country, humanity and universal benevolence, sobriety, industry
and frugality, chastity, moderation and temperance, and those other
virtues which are the ornament of human society, and the basis upon
which a republican constitution is founded; and it shall be the duty of
such instructors to endeavor to lead their pupils, as their ages and
capacities will admit, into a clear understanding of the tendency of the
above-mentioned virtues." (Rev. Stat. chap. 23, Sec. 7.)

Nobody, probably, at this day believes, that, in cherishing principles
of this nature, the law which creates this system is visionary or
impracticable. All are ready to admit, that the human heart needs
the influence of moral discipline. Yet such is the nature of our
social existence that there is a great tendency to postpone its
application,--to let it depend upon contingencies. When nearly all of
the good or evil that we can possibly do has been done,--after
temptations have been resisted or yielded to,--after our years begin to
wane, we then think seriously of moral improvement. Preachers the most
eloquent--for their eloquence commands the highest reward--we employ to
exhort us to practise virtues, which, if we had been rightly educated,
we should have practised from our earliest youth with as much facility
as we read or write. If a child is to learn grammar, let him commence,
every one will say, when young, while his memory is most retentive. If
we are to teach him those principles which are to shape his destiny
in life, and have their home in the heart, should we wait till it is
least susceptible of impression? It cannot be denied that too much
indifference prevails on this subject. We are apt to shut our eyes to
the evils which arise from imperfect education, so long as they do not
affect our personal interest. Victims of depraved appetites and passions
we take charge of, not out of regard for them, or the circumstances
which have induced their guilt, but for our own protection. When a man
sunk in crime is held up to public gaze, nearly the same feeling is
excited which actuates boys who follow with noisy jests a drunken woman.
Rarely do we stop to inquire, why, if wrong influences had been brought
to bear upon our characters, we should not have been as bad. Unless such
instruction be promoted, many who are now unconcerned for the
misfortunes of others will themselves ask for compassion. "Surely there
will come a time," says Dr. Johnson with truthful energy, "when he who
laughs at wickedness in his companion _shall start from it in his
child_."

Now, the only sure and legitimate way of reforming those evils which
burden society is to prevent their acquiring any existence. It is a
favorite notion with many, that, by checking vice here and there, our
benevolent institutions are working a thorough cure. But this is not
so. While we furnish subsistence to those whom intemperance and idleness
have brought to destitution,--while we erect asylums where reason may be
restored to the shattered mind,--while we enlarge prisons in which to
punish the violators of the law,--we should remember that some endeavors
should be made to prevent others from requiring the same charities, and
incurring the same penalties. Instead of standing merely by the fatal
shoal to rescue the sinking crew, we should raise a warning signal to
avert future shipwrecks.

All experience shows that, to operate successfully, this branch of
education must be early attended to. True it is, that, just as 'the twig
is bent, the tree's inclined;' and true it is, that on the discipline of
childhood depends the moral character of manhood. The tree in the
forest, after it has grown to a considerable height, may yet be bent
from its natural course, and, by long-continued force, be made to grow
in a different direction; but that change will not be permanent. When
the power which turned its course is withdrawn, every breeze and every
tempest that shake its branches will aid it in gradually assuming its
original position, till hardly a trace of that power which attempted to
guide its growth can be perceived. There may be some who would neglect
that moral influence on the young which is necessary, trusting in the
delusive expectation, that the law will keep them in the right path;
that the example of punishment, the terror of the gallows, the prison,
or the penitentiary, will prevent the commission of crime. But let us
not wait for the saving influence of these things; for they are but
checks which often render the next outbreak more alarming. The force of
punishment will be found to resemble the application of power in
changing the growth of the tree: weeks, years of confinement, will not
effect a complete reformation in the offender. His life may seem to be
changed, his habits reformed; but, as he goes out to mingle again with
the world, as one occasion after another presents itself to him, his
former passions begin to revive, those early impressions take possession
of him, and he becomes the same that he was originally, only that his
degraded position renders him far less able to resist the temptation to
do wrong. Impressions and habits acquired in youth are proverbially
lasting. With characteristic eloquence and fervor has Lord Brougham
illustrated the peculiar importance of early training. In a Speech
delivered in the House of Lords in 1835 upon one of those measures which
have conferred so much glory on his name as well as benefit upon his
countrymen, he said, "If at a very early age a system of instruction is
pursued by which a certain degree of independent feeling is created in
the child's mind, while all mutinous and perverse disposition is
avoided,--if this system be followed up by a constant instruction in the
principles of virtue, and a corresponding advancement in intellectual
pursuits,--if, during the most critical years of his life, his
understanding and his feelings are accustomed only to sound principles
and pure and innocent impressions, it will become almost impossible that
he should afterward take to vicious courses, because these will be
utterly alien to the whole nature of his being. It will be as difficult
for him to become criminal, because as foreign to his confirmed habits,
as it would be for one of your lordships to go out and rob on the
highway. Thus, to commence the education of youth at the tender age on
which I have laid so much stress, will, I feel confident, be the same
means of guarding society against crimes. I trust every thing to
habit,--habit, upon which, in all ages, the lawgiver, as well as the
schoolmaster, has mainly placed his reliance,--habit, which makes every
thing easy, and casts all difficulties upon the deviation from the
wonted course. Make sobriety a habit, and intemperance will be hateful
and hard; make prudence a habit, and reckless profligacy will be as
contrary to the nature of the child, grown an adult, as the most
atrocious crimes are to any of your lordships. Give a child the habit of
sacredly regarding truth, of carefully respecting the property of
others, of scrupulously abstaining from all acts of improvidence which
can involve him in distress, and he will just as little think of lying
or cheating or stealing, or running in debt, as of rushing into an
element in which he cannot breathe."

The thought may strike some, however, that children can receive moral
discipline at home; that parents are best enabled to understand the
disposition of their children, and can consequently apply the requisite
training with more success than any one else; and, most of all, because
it is their especial duty so to do. So we might say, with almost as much
reason, that parents could teach their children the elementary branches
of knowledge; in the first place, because it is in their province to
know the peculiar turn of mind possessed by their children, and also for
the equally plausible reason, that they are under a great obligation to
educate them. Now, there is much truth in the observation of Seneca's,
that people carry their neighbors' faults in a bag before them, which
are easily to be seen, and their own behind them unseen; and, without
doing parents too much injustice, we may say that they are inclined to
carry the failings of their children tied up with their own. The fact
is, generally speaking, parents are so confident that their children do
not lack in honesty and integrity, at a time when these principles
should be forcibly impressed upon them, that they let the occasion for
moral training pass until bad habits are deeply rooted in their
character. There are, we know, many cheering exceptions; yet, if moral
instruction is neglected in the school, to a majority of the scholars
that neglect will nowhere be provided for, until some bad results have
ensued.

To carry out, then, the primal purpose of our system of education,
instructors should seek to mould the character of their pupils.
Supervisors and committee-men should require a faithful discharge of
this trust. When they come to examine the school, if the standard of
intellectual attainments is not so high as might be desirable, they
should yet bear testimony to its advancement, if they find that those
"virtues which adorn life" have been held up in all their attractiveness
to the imitation of the pupil.

Thus have we seen that the system itself contemplates the culture of the
heart as well as the mind; and that it is wise, practical, and just in
doing so. We now propose to show that this object is generally
disregarded, if not entirely lost sight of, in our common schools; and
to illustrate, if possible, the means whereby it can be more completely
carried into operation. In the first place, the present state of society
testifies to a neglect somewhere of inculcating habits of rectitude.
There is a want of CONSCIENCE in the community. The prevalence of crime,
as seen by the returns of public prosecutors and magistrates, is but a
small part of the evidence of this fact. We might as well judge of a
man's wealth by his dress, as to form an opinion on public morals by the
number of punishable offences committed. And, indeed, the records of
courts furnish but incomplete evidence of the number of punishable
offences actually committed; for where one criminal is brought to the
bar of justice, ten escape detection. We have the authority of a very
eminent Judge for this remark. But there are wrongs which are not
punishable by the law, being too small and undefinable for its
cognizance. It is the bad faith which enters into contracts, and
deceives the honest purchaser, or dupes the confiding vendor; the
baseness which conspires to wink down credit; the avarice which greedily
takes advantage of poverty, or the craft which converts it into a weapon
of fraud; the scandal which sets neighbor against neighbor; the fretful
harshness which clouds the domestic fireside; the ingratitude which
spurns parental influence; the selfishness which would trade in
principles, and bargain away public measures for private gain,--these,
and such as these, are the conclusive proofs of public vice. Even the
deplorable appearances which penury exhibits are counterfeited, and we
hesitate to give alms lest we should encourage an impostor. The
benevolent man distrusts the beggar who asks for a night's lodging, and
turns him away, fearful that he might prove an assassin or a robber; or
he reluctantly calls him back, lest he should revenge himself by burning
his barn. There are common symptoms which show a patient's sickness,
though they do not indicate the particular nature of his disease. So
this mutual distrust, which characterizes the dealings of men, indicates
the debility of public morals, and points with unerring certainty to the
neglect of early discipline.

But an inspection of the schools will afford us the most reliable
evidence on this subject. From the system of instruction now pursued in
our best common schools, a scholar of ordinary capacity is enabled to
become a good reader, writer, and speller; to acquire a very good
knowledge of geography and arithmetic, and a little insight into natural
philosophy, physiology, grammar, and history, as well as to gain some
habits of order and correct deportment. It is true also that in some
schools considerable efforts are bestowed on moral culture: this,
however, depends upon the peculiar character of the teacher. Yet it
cannot be denied, that intellectual improvement is treated as of
paramount importance; and that, if any attempts are made at moral
training, they are purely incidental; being considered collateral to the
other lessons. Surely no one will think of reproaching teachers for this
condition of things; for they are governed by the public opinion of the
district or town they teach in, as much as the statesman is governed by
the public opinion of the country. The voice of the district is silent
on the subject. The committee who examined or engaged them did not
allude to that part of their duty, or inquire into their qualifications
for discharging it. If the teacher goes through the term in harmony, and
succeeds in advancing his pupils in an ordinary degree in the common
branches, he is acknowledged to have accomplished his entire duty.

In attempting to show the manner in which the right development of
character may be blended with the development of the mental faculties,
it might be proper to advert to the method a teacher could pursue with
the greatest success. A very imperfect idea only of any policy can be
given, inasmuch as the duty must be left to his own discretion. No set
plan can be adhered to; neither could text-books be used to advantage.
He should not have an appointed time for such an exercise, nor resort to
formal lectures, nor rely upon the studied maxims which moralists have
framed in the closet, nor depend upon the stereotyped precepts of
philosophers. As the sentiments he inculcates are addressed to the
heart, so also from the heart should they spring. Every one knows that
the events which transpire in and about the school-room furnish too
frequent opportunities for this species of instruction. These acts of
turpitude he should heed, and make the subject of his lessons. Report
comes to him that some of his pupils have been guilty of insulting and
ridiculing an aged and infirm person. He might give them time to reflect
upon the nature of their act, and to decide themselves whether it was
right or wrong. Then let him show the claims which age, combined with
feebleness, has upon our respect and sympathy, and expose the cruelty
and shame of that conduct which would increase its misfortunes. He
learns, perhaps, that a pupil has used profane language during an
intermission. As he requires the school to pause, let him speak in
simple language of the omnipotence and omnipresence of the Creator; of
the commandment which he has ordained, that none should take his name in
vain. By referring to some of the faculties, mental and physical, with
which he has been endowed, let the teacher call forth the gratitude,
not only of that pupil but the whole school, for the wonderful goodness
of their Maker. By reminding them of his compassion and tenderness, his
infinite wisdom and power, let him inspire them with love and reverence
for his name. Envy and jealousy he will see prominent in the character
of his fairest pupils: let him show that the heart was not made for such
feelings; that, if they are nurtured there, no room will be found for
noble and generous sentiments. Quarrels will occur in which blows will
be dealt lustily: a few simple illustrations will prove that force is a
dangerous and imperfect arbiter of justice. If unhappily falsehood
prevails, let him make haste to supplant a habit, so fearful and
pernicious, though every thing else be laid aside. Let him show the
great inconvenience a man must experience in whose word no confidence
can be reposed. The fable of the shepherd-boy who gave false alarms to
the distant workmen of the approach of wolves, so that when the wolves
really came his cries were in vain, will show that lying is unprofitable
in the end. But his chief object should be to exhibit the moral
turpitude of the habit,--the facility with which it leads to deeper
guilt,--the manifold evils which it engenders in the community; and thus
to impress upon the minds of his pupils a sacred regard for truth.
Such, it might seem, would be the course which a high-minded and zealous
teacher would pursue in imparting moral instruction. But, whatever be
his method, it is quite certain that a successful performance of his
duty in this respect implies great capacity. Extensive learning will not
be a sufficient qualification. An accurate and comprehensive knowledge
of the sciences may have given vigor to his mind; he may be familiar
with the classic pages of Thucydides and Homer, Horace and Livy; he may
be versed in the philosophy of history, and yet lack in the essential
elements of his art. He must possess native talent, a clear insight of
human character, agreeable address, extemporaneous powers of speech. He
must be a clear-thinking, conscientious, practical man; and it will be
impossible for him to fail in his undertaking. Such a teacher will win
the respect and esteem of his pupils: they will imitate his example, and
cherish his counsel.

Now, the inquiry will naturally be made if the teachers of common
schools have these qualifications. There are some who are thus
qualified. They are those who in other professions would rise to
eminence by the zeal and ability with which they now advance our youth
in intellectual culture. But they are an exception to the common
standard. The majority of teachers, however, are quite young. They are
preparing themselves for other duties, which they consider more
important to their own interests, if not the interests of the public.
Not experienced sufficiently in their art to excel in its ordinary
labors, they do not stand far enough above their pupils to succeed in
this higher and more difficult branch of instruction.

Before, then, moral education can be successfully promoted, the right
kind of teachers must be employed. There is but one way of obtaining
them, and that is by paying them liberal salaries. All are not
philanthropists. Here and there, it is true, may be found persons
disinterested enough to devote their energies to the public good, for
their daily bread alone. But it is the height of absurdity to expect
that men of talent and learning will continue in so arduous an
occupation as that of teaching for small compensation, when in less
laborious pursuits they can acquire opulence. The average pay received
by male teachers throughout the Commonwealth, as appears from the last
annual report of the learned Secretary of the Board of Education, is
$37.26 per month. The average length of schools being seven months and a
half, the yearly salary of the teacher would therefore be $279.45; out
of which he must pay for his board and all other expenses. Hardly
adequate to support one man respectably, it entirely excludes the
circumstance of his having a family, implying a self-denial of the
common uses of social life. The natural presumption is, that a teacher
is not exempt from the calamities that sometimes befall men; that he
buys a few books and a little stationary; that he is as unwilling as any
one to wear ragged clothes; and, uncertain of continued employment in
one place, that he incurs some expense in changing his locality. But the
standard price which he receives ignores any such presumption. In regard
to the payment of female teachers, we might suppose that a different
rule would prevail; that in a community where woman holds a high moral,
social, and intellectual position,--where marked deference is paid to
her character,--where the great superiority of her influence as a parent
and a teacher is acknowledged,--one might indeed suppose that she would
be liberally rewarded for her services, especially when those services
are rendered in her peculiar sphere of duty,--that of teaching. Strange
as it may appear, such is not the case; while her labor, apparently not
so responsible, is often more wearing than the labor of the
schoolmaster. It seems that the average pay of female teachers is $15.36
per month. When it is remembered that all the expenses of living are to
be deducted from the amount paid at this rate, her real income shrinks
into the merest trifle. There is not an occupation in which intelligent
young women can be employed that does not present greater pecuniary
inducements. Under such circumstances it must be a matter of surprise
that we have as good teachers, both male and female, as now have charge
of our schools. Will any one, then, for a moment suppose that persons of
greater ability than they will be induced to engage or continue in such
an employment, when wealth and influence and happiness point in another
direction? Laying aside suppositions, let us see what the facts are.
With the majority of those now engaged in the business, teaching is a
temporary employment. Some are teaching during their college vacations,
intending, as soon as they graduate, to commence their professional
studies;--they are perhaps our future judges, or clergymen, or sagacious
merchants; others are already abandoning the business to enter upon
mercantile pursuits. As soon as they have acquired experience, so that
their services are truly valuable to the public, they find that their
future prospects are to be sacrificed if they continue longer in the
profession. Thus, instead of retaining persons in this most important of
all professions, we drive them out of it to adorn and exalt other
occupations. Many of the ablest men in each of our learned professions
were once school-teachers: if a proper reward had encouraged them to
remain in that capacity, how visible at this day would be the influence
which they would have exerted upon their pupils! It is clear, then, that
the only means by which we can retain teachers who have the requisite
talent and ability, is by paying them adequate salaries. Then our
schools can furnish moral as well as intellectual instruction; and the
object which our system of education contemplates can in a great degree
be accomplished.

Fully aware that the people are peculiarly sensitive on the subject of
taxation, especially when no tangible results are to follow its
increase, we do not hesitate to say that the interests of education
demand a far greater expenditure of money. The spirit which has
characterized the people of the Commonwealth, in their past efforts to
advance the cause, promises favorable action on the subject. In an age
when astonishing improvements in every art and every science are being
developed,--when nature, in her most regal and opposing state, bends to
the energy of man,--when countless sums are lavished to gratify and
satiate every sense, how mortifying and discreditable that a great moral
cause should languish! Even if the contribution which would be required
for this purpose could in any way be felt by the poorest citizen, it
could not be felt as a burden; for he might regard it as an investment
the most profitable and secure,--the income of which would return to his
own door full of blessings upon his declining days. When solicited to
double the tax which he had formerly paid for school-purposes, regarding
his own interest merely, and not that of the public, he might sincerely
say, "Yes, out of my limited means I am content to pay freely for such
an object. By paying the teacher more, am I not increasing his
usefulness? Am I not doing something to bring up my children in
knowledge and integrity? Will they not be a greater comfort to me, and
more happy and prosperous themselves? Besides, in a few years, much
mischief in the community may be diminished, and there will be a smaller
tax on me and mine to support criminals and prisons. If all are taught
to do their duty as citizens, I shall not suffer for their neglect of
doing so." Though the correctness of his reasoning will be admitted, the
argument in this behalf should be placed on higher grounds than
individual prosperity. The benefits to be derived by the public as
exhibited in the abatement of many social evils,--in the diffusion of
rational happiness,--in the gains of honest industry, such should be the
inducements to this worthy undertaking.

In conclusion, we submit that for reasons too apparent to be alluded
to, and too urgent to be disregarded, more attention should be devoted
to the true aim and purpose of education,--to a more complete operation
of the system. More than the past has needed, will the future require
the benefits which it unfolds. Let the teacher's vocation be elevated,
and advantages will accrue to the State, compared with which, exuberant
harvests, a thriving commerce, and an overflowing treasury, will be but
small resources. We should form a wise and generous precedent in this
matter, below which indifference will not suffer us to fall. We should
engage in the enterprise with a determination to carry it forward to the
highest degree of success. It may be "absurd to expect, but it is not
absurd to pursue, perfection."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Reflections on the Operation of the
Present System of Education, 1853, by Christopher C. Andrews

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDUCATION, 1853 ***

***** This file should be named 28330.txt or 28330.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/3/3/28330/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Tamise Totterdell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
