Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, February 3, 1880, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Harper's Young People, February 3, 1880
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: March 16, 2009 [EBook #28344]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, FEB 3, 1880 ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S

YOUNG PEOPLE

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.--NO. 14. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, February 3, 1880. Copyright, 1880, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: FEEDING THE SPARROWS.]

THE HOUSE-SPARROW.


The English house-sparrow, a pert, daring little bird, which is seen in
crowds in almost all cities of the Northern United States, was first
brought to this country about twenty years ago. It is said the first
specimens were liberated in Portland, Maine, where they immediately made
themselves at home, and began nest-building and worm-catching as eagerly
as when in their native air. Others were soon brought to New York city,
and set free in the parks. At that time New York, Brooklyn, and other
cities were suffering from a terrible visitor, the loathsome
measuring-worm, which made its appearance just as the trees had become
lovely with fresh spring green. It infested the streets in armies, hung
in horrible webs and festoons from the branches of the shade trees, and
ruined the beauty and comfort of the city during the pleasantest season
of the whole year. About the first of July, when the worm finished its
work, the trees appeared stripped and bare, as if scathed by fire, and a
second budding resulted only in scanty foliage late in the season. A
month after the worm disappeared, its moth--a small white creature,
pretty enough except for its connections--fluttered by thousands
through the city, depositing its eggs for the worm of another year.
Desperate measures seemed necessary to stop this nuisance, and the
question of cutting down all the trees was seriously considered. But
relief was at hand. A gentleman, an Englishman, proposed an importation
of sparrows, and soon hundreds of these brown-coated little fellows were
set loose in different cities. They at once became public pets. Little
houses were nailed up on trees and balconies for them to nest in,
sidewalks and window-sills were covered with crumbs for their breakfast,
and boys were forbidden to stone them or molest them in any way.

Now although the sparrow is very willing to feed on bread-crumbs and
seeds, and save itself the trouble of hunting for its dinner, by a wise
provision of nature the little ones, until they are fully fledged, can
eat only worms and small flies and bugs. As the sparrows have three or
four broods during the warm weather, they always have little ones to
feed at the very season when worms and other insects destructive to
vegetation are the most plentiful. An English naturalist states that in
watching a pair of sparrows feeding their little ones, he saw them bring
food to the nest from thirty to forty times every day, and each time
from two to six caterpillars or worms were brought. It is easy to see
from this estimate how quickly the tree worms would disappear, as proved
to be the case in the cities where the sparrows were set free.

A very few years after they were introduced not a worm was to be seen.
The trees now grow undisturbed in their leafy beauty all through the
summer, and many children will scarcely remember the time when their
mothers went about the streets where shade trees grew carrying open
umbrellas in sunny days and starry evenings to protect themselves from
the constantly dropping worms.

It is no wonder that every one is gratefully affectionate to the
sparrow. They are very social little birds, and are entirely happy amid
the noise and dirt and confusion of the crowded street. They are bold
and saucy too, and will stand in the pathway pecking at some stray crust
of bread until nearly run over, when they hop away, scolding furiously
at being disturbed. They are fond of bathing, and after a rain may be
seen in crowds fluttering and splashing in the pools of water in the
street. The cold winter does not molest them. They continue as plump and
jolly and independent as ever, and chirp and hop about as merrily on a
snowy day as during summer.

In the New York city parks these little foreigners are carefully
provided for. Prettily built rustic houses may be seen all over Central
Park, put up for their especial accommodation. During the summer, when
doors and windows are open, the sparrows hold high revels in the Central
Park menagerie. They go fearlessly into the eagle's cage, bathe in his
water dish, and make themselves very much at home. In the cages occupied
by pigeons, pheasants, and other larger birds, the sparrows are often
troublesome thieves. They can easily squeeze through the coarse
net-work, and no sooner are the feed dishes filled with breakfast than
they crowd in and take possession, scolding and fluttering and darting
at the imprisoned pigeons and pheasants if they dare to approach.

The smaller parks of New York city contain each about two hundred houses
for the sparrows. Some of them are of very simple construction, being
made of a piece of tin leader pipe about ten inches long, with a piece
of wood fitted in each end. A little round doorway is cut for the birds
to enter, and they seem perfectly happy in these primitive quarters.
Feed and water troughs are provided, and it is the duty of the park
keeper to fill them every morning. The birds know the feeding hour, and
come flying eagerly, pushing and scolding, and tumbling together in
their hurry for the first mouthful. The greedy little things eat all
day. School-children come trooping in, and share their luncheon with
them, and even idle and ragged loungers on the park benches draw crusts
of bread from their pockets, and throw the sparrows a portion of their
own scanty dinner.

It is very easy to study the habits of the sparrow, for it is so bold
and sociable that if a little house is nailed up in a balcony, or by a
window where people are constantly sitting, a pair of birds will at once
take possession, bring twigs and bits of scattered threads and wool for
a nest, and proceed to rear their noisy little family. Chirp, chirp,
very loud and impatient, three or four little red open mouths appear at
the door of the house, the parent birds come flying with worms and
flies, and then for a little while the young ones take a nap and keep
quiet, when, they wake up again and renew their clamor for food.

If houses are not provided, the sparrow will build in any odd corner--a
chink in the wall or in the nooks and eaves of buildings. A pair of
London sparrows once made their nest in the mouth of the bronze lion
over Northumberland House, at Charing Cross. They are very much attached
to their nest, and after the little speckled eggs are laid will cling to
it even under difficulties. The sailors of a coasting vessel once lying
in a Scotch port frequently observed two sparrows flying about the
topmast. One morning the vessel put to sea, when, to the astonishment of
the sailors, the sparrows followed, evidently bent upon making the
voyage. Crumbs being thrown on the deck, they soon became familiar, and
came boldly to eat, hopping about as freely as if on shore. A nest was
soon discovered built among the rigging. Fearing it might be demolished
by a high wind, at the first landing the sailors took it carefully down,
and finding that it contained four little ones, they carried it on shore
and left it in the crevice of a ruined house. The parent birds followed,
evidently well pleased with the change, and when the vessel sailed away
they remained with their young family.

Much has been written about the mischievous doings of the sparrow, and
war has been waged against it to a certain extent both here and in
England. But the sparrow holds its ground well, and proves in many ways
that even if it may drive away robins, and injure grain fields now and
then, it more than balances these misdeeds by the thousands of
caterpillars, mosquitoes, and other insects which it destroys, thus
saving the life of countless trees and plants. The whole year round it
is the same active, bustling, jolly creature, and our cities would be
lonely and desolate without this little denizen of the street.




A BRAVE PATRIOT.


In 1780, after the fall of Charleston, the British commander had issued
a proclamation to the people of South Carolina, calling upon them to
return to their allegiance, and offering protection to all who did so.
The men inhabiting the tract of country stretching from the Santee to
the Pedee selected one of their number to repair to Georgetown, the
nearest British post, to ascertain the exact meaning of the offer, and
what was expected of them.

In accordance with his instructions, Major John James sought an
interview with Captain Ardesoif, the commandant of Georgetown, and
demanded what was the meaning of the British protection, and upon what
terms the submission of the citizens was to be made.

He was informed roughly that the only way to escape the hanging which
they so justly deserved was to take up arms in his Majesty's cause.

James, not relishing the tone and manner of the British officer, coolly
replied that "the people whom he came to represent would scarcely submit
on such conditions."

Ardesoif, unaccustomed to contradiction, and enraged at the worthy
major's use of the term "represent," which smote harshly on his ears,
sprang to his feet, and, with his hand on his sword, exclaimed,
"Represent! If you dare speak in such language, I will have you hung at
the yard-arm."

Major James was weaponless, but in his anger was equal to the occasion.
Seizing the chair upon which he had been sitting, he floored his
insulter at a blow, and giving his enemy no time to recover, mounted his
horse and escaped to the woods before pursuit could be attempted.

His people soon assembled to hear his story, and their wrath was kindled
at hearing how their envoy had been received.

Required to take the field, it needed not a moment to decide under which
banner, and the result was the formation of Marion's Brigade, which won
such fame in the swampy regions of the South.




A LATIN WORD SQUARE.


  Behold my first! In her palmy days
    (In the time of my _second_, you understand)
  She had many poets who sang her praise,
  Had soldiers and statesmen and wealth to amaze,
  Her fame was unrivalled in many ways--
    She had no equal in all the land.

  Again to the time of my _second_ refer,
    And spell that backward, my third behold--
  A hero of monstrous strength. They aver
  He held up a temple its fall to defer,
  And ate forty pounds (but I hope 'tis a slur)
    Every day for his food, both hot and cold.

  Now spell my first backward, my fourth appears,
    The greatest power of any time.
  All poets have sung of its hopes and fears,
  All men have known it with smiles and tears,
  It has ruled and will rule for years and years
    In every nation and every clime.

  Now take my word square and look all about,
    Sideways, across, and down the middle,
  Not a word can be found there by spy or scout
  Which can not be spelled upside down, inside out,
  All in Latin, you know; but now I've no doubt
    You've guessed every word of this easy riddle.




A TERRIBLE FISH.


Among the inhabitants of the sea which, from their size or strength,
have been termed "monarchs of the ocean," are the saw-fish and the
sword-fish, which are formidable enemies to the whale; but it is not
merely on their fellow-inhabitants of the deep that these powerful
fishes exercise their terrible strength. Some singular instances are
related of their attacking even the ships that intrude upon their watery
domain. An old sea-captain tells the following story:

"Being in the Gulf of Paria, in the ship's cutter, I fell in with a
Spanish canoe, manned by two men, who were in great distress, and who
requested me to save their lines and canoe, with which request I
immediately complied, and going alongside for that purpose, I discovered
that they had got a large saw-fish entangled in their turtle net. It was
towing them out to sea, and but for my assistance they must have lost
either their canoe or their net, or perhaps both, and these were their
only means of subsistence. Having only two boys with me at the time in
the boat, I desired the fishermen to cut the fish away, which they
refused to do. I then took the bight of the net from them, and with the
joint endeavors of themselves and my boat's crew we succeeded in hauling
up the net, and to our astonishment, after great exertions, we raised
about eight feet of the saw of the fish above the surface of the sea. It
was a fortunate circumstance that the fish came up with his belly toward
the boat, or he would have cut it in two.

"I had abandoned all idea of taking the fish, until, by great good luck,
it made toward the land, when I made another attempt, and having about
three hundred feet of rope in the boat, we succeeded in making a running
bow-line knot round the saw, and this we fortunately made fast on shore.
When the fish found itself secured, it plunged so violently that I could
not prevail on any one to go near it: the appearance it presented was
truly awful. I immediately went alongside the Lima packet, Captain
Singleton, and got the assistance of all his ship's crew. By the time
they arrived the fish was less violent. We hauled upon the net again, in
which it was still entangled, and got another three hundred feet of line
made fast to the saw, and attempted to haul it toward the shore; but
although mustering _thirty hands_, we could not move it an inch. By this
time the negroes belonging to a neighboring estate came flocking to our
assistance, making together about one hundred in number, with the
Spaniards. We then hauled on both ropes nearly all day before the fish
became exhausted. On endeavoring to raise the monster it became most
desperate, sweeping with its saw from side to side, so that we were
compelled to get strong ropes to prevent it from cutting us to pieces.
After that one of the Spaniards got on its back, and at great risk cut
through the joint of the tail, when the great fish died without further
struggle. It was then measured, and found to be twenty-two feet long and
eight feet broad, and weighed nearly five tons."

An East Indiaman was once attacked by a sword-fish with such prodigious
force that its "snout" was driven completely through the bottom of the
ship, which must have been destroyed by the leak had not the animal
killed itself by the violence of its own exertions, and left its sword
imbedded in the wood. A fragment of this vessel, with the sword fixed
firmly in it, is preserved as a curiosity in the British Museum.

Several instances of a similar character have occurred, and one formed
the subject of an action brought against an insurance company for
damages sustained by a vessel from the attack of one of these fishes. It
seems the _Dreadnought_, a first-class mercantile ship, left a foreign
port in perfect repair, and on the afternoon of the third day a
"monstrous creature" was seen sporting among the waves, and lines and
hooks were thrown overboard to capture it. All efforts to this effect,
however, failed: the fish got away, and in the night-time the vessel was
reported to be dangerously leaking. The captain was compelled to return
to the harbor he had left, and the damage was attributed to a
sword-fish, twelve feet long, which had assailed the ship below
water-line, perforated her planks and timbers, and thus imperilled her
existence on the ocean.

Professor Owen, the distinguished naturalist, was called to give
evidence on this trial as to the probability of such an occurrence, and
he related several instances of the prodigious strength of the "sword."
It strikes with the accumulated force of fifteen double-handed hammers;
its velocity is equal to that of a swivel-shot, and it is as dangerous
in its effects as a heavy artillery projectile would be.

The upper jaw of this fish is prolonged into a projecting flattened
snout, the greatest length of which is about six feet, forming a saw,
armed at each edge with about twenty large bony spines or teeth. Mr.
Yarrel mentions a combat that occurred on the west coast of Scotland
between a whale and some saw-fishes, aided by a force of "thrashers"
(fox-sharks). The sea was dyed in blood from the stabs inflicted by the
saw-fishes under the water, while the thrashers, watching their
opportunity, struck at the unwieldy monster as often as it rose to
breathe.

The sword-fish is also furnished with a powerful weapon in the shape of
a bony snout about four or five feet long, not serrated like the
saw-fish, but of a much firmer consistency--in fact, the hardest
material known.




THE STORY OF OBED, ORAH, AND THE SMOKING-CAP.

BY MRS. A. M. DIAZ.


[Illustration]

A cozy room, a wood fire, bright andirons, and a waiting company. The
Family Story-Teller promised the children he would come, and the whole
circle, young, older, oldest, are expecting a good time; for the Family
Story-Teller can tell stories by the hour on any subject that may be
given him, from a flat-iron to a whale-ship. He once told about a
flat-iron--and nothing can be flatter than a flat-iron--a story half an
hour long. It began, "Once there was a flat-iron."

But where is he? Has he forgotten? Did the snowstorm hinder? Has he
missed his horse-car? Hark! a stamping in the entry. Dick runs to open
the door, and shows Family Story-Teller upon the mat, tall and erect,
brushing the snow from his cloak, his whiskers, and his laughing eyes.

Miss Flossie declared that he must be "judged" for coming so late.

Said Dick, "I judge him to tell as many stories as we want."

This judgment being thought too easy for a person like him, to make it
harder he was "judged" to tell the stories all about the same thing. It
was left to grandpa to say what this thing should be, and grandpa said,
with a laugh, "going to mill."

"Very well," said Family Story-Teller, "I will begin at once, and tell
you the entertaining story of 'Obed, Orah, and the Smoking-Cap.'" He
then began as follows:

       *       *       *       *       *

Once upon a time, in the pleasant village of Gilead, dwelt Mr. and Mrs.
Stimpcett, with their four young children--Moses, Obadiah (called Obed),
Deborah (called Orah), and little Cordelia. Mrs. Stimpcett, for money's
sake, took a summer boarder, Mr. St. Clair, a city young man, who wished
to behold the flowery fields, repose upon the dewy grass, and who had
also another reason for coming, which will be told presently.

On the morning after Mr. St. Clair's arrival, Mrs. Stimpcett said to
grandma that, as the noise of four young children at once would be too
much for a summer boarder until he should become used to it, Obed and
Orah would go and spend the day with their grandfather's cousin, Mrs.
Polly Slater. Mrs. Polly Slater lived all alone by herself in a cottage
at another part of the village of Gilead. Obed was six and a half years
old, and Orah nearly five.

The two children set forth early in the morning. Orah wore her pink
apron and starched sun-bonnet, and Obed wore his clean brown linen frock
and trousers, the frock skirt standing out stiff like a paper fan. As
his second best hat could not be found, and his first best was not to be
thought of, he was obliged to wear his third best, which had a torn
brim, and which he put on with tears and sniffles and loud complaints.

It happened very curiously that as Obed and Orah were walking through
the orchard, Obed still sniffling, they saw, under a bush, a beautiful
smoking-cap. Obed quickly threw down his old hat, and put on the
smoking-cap in a way that the loose part hung off behind.

This beautiful smoking-cap belonged to the summer boarder, and was
presented to him by a young lady who liked him very much. It was wrought
in a Persian pattern slightly mingled with the Greek, and was
embroidered with purple, yellow, crimson, Magenta, sage green, invisible
blue, ecru, old gold, drab, and other shaded worsteds, dotted with
stitches of shining silk and beads of silver, the tassel alone
containing skeins of ecru sewing silk. The young lady lived not very far
from Mr. Stimpcett's, and _she_ was that other reason why Mr. St. Clair
became a summer boarder in the pleasant village of Gilead.

Spry, the puppy dog, probably carried the smoking-cap to the orchard;
but all that is known with certainty is that Mr. St. Clair, the evening
before, then wearing the cap, reclined upon several chairs with his head
out of the window, gazing at the moon, and there fell asleep, and that,
as on account of the abundance of his hair it was a little too small,
the cap fell off his head, and that when he awoke the pain in the back
of his neck and the lateness of the hour caused him to forget all about
it.

Now when Obed and Orah arrived at Mrs. Polly Slater's, they found her
doors shut and locked. Mr. Furlong, the man who lived in the next house,
called out to them, "Mrs. Polly Slater has borrowed a horse and cart,
and gone to mill; she will stay and eat dinner with your aunt Debby."
Then he added, "I am harnessing my horse to go to mill; how would you
like to go with me, and ride back with Mrs. Polly Slater in the
afternoon?"

Obed and Orah liked this so much that they ran and clambered into the
cart as fast as they could, Orah climbing in over the spokes of a wheel.
Mr. Furlong fastened Obed's cap on by tying around it a stout piece of
line.

When they had ridden several miles on their way to mill, they met a boy
on horseback galloping at a furious rate. The moment this boy saw Mr.
Furlong, he pulled up his horse--he nearly fell off behind in doing
so--and said he, "Mr. Furlong, your sister at Locust Point has heard bad
news, and wants to see you immediately."

Mr. Furlong drove as fast as he could, until he came to the road which
turned off to Locust Point. Here he set the children down, and showed
Obed, not quite half a mile ahead of them, a large white building with a
flag flying from the top. "There," said he, "your aunt Debby, you know,
lives next to that white building. It is a straight road. I am sorry to
leave you. Keep out of the way of the horses, and go directly to her
house." Mr. Furlong then drove to Locust Point.

[Illustration]

Now after the two children had walked a short distance, they came to a
road which led across the road in which they were walking, and along
this cross-road were running boys and girls, some barefoot, some
bare-headed, some drawing baby carriages at such a rate that the babies
were nearly thrown out; and all that these boys and girls would say was,
"Baker's cart! baker's cart!" At last Obed and Orah found out that a
baker's cart had upset in coming through the woods, and had left
first-rate things to eat scattered all about. Our two children found a
whole half sheet of gingerbread, which was not sandy, to speak of; and
as they sat eating it, they looked through some bushes down a hill, and
saw there something which looked like a molasses cooky. They scrambled
down, the blackberry vines doing damage to their clothes, and found two
molasses cookies, and each took one. But before Orah had finished hers
she leaned her head on a grassy hummock, and fell asleep. When she
awoke, sad to relate, they turned the wrong way, and went farther and
farther and farther into the woods. After walking a long time, they came
to a brook, and stopped there to drink. They had to lie flat on the
ground, and suck up the water. Orah took off her shoes and stockings,
because there was sand in them, and dipped her feet in the brook. Obed
pulled hard, but he could not pull her stockings on over her wet feet,
and she had to carry them and her shoes in her hand. The woods became
thicker as the children walked on, and the trees taller. Obed began to
cry. "Oh dear!" he said; "we are lost! we are lost!"

"Oh, I want to see my ma! I do! I do!" said Orah, and burst out crying.
Crying?--roaring!--so the man said who heard it.

This was a charcoal man who happened along just then, driving an empty
charcoal cart. He kindly asked them where they lived, and whither they
were going. After Obed had told him, he said to them, "You poor little
children! You are dirty and ragged, and you are a long way from your
aunt Debby's. I shall pass near your father's house, and would you like
to take a ride with me?" Then, as they seemed willing, he helped them
into his cart, dropping them at the bottom as the safest place. Obed,
however, by putting his toes into knot-holes and cracks, climbed high
enough to put his head over the top, and Orah found a loose board which
she could shove aside, and so push her head through and look up at Obed.

[Illustration]

Now as they were rattling down a steep hill not a great way from home, a
slender young lady started from the sidewalk, and ran after them,
shouting and waving her parasol in the most frantic manner. The charcoal
man did not hear her. This frantic and slender young lady was the young
lady who made for Mr. St. Clair the smoking-cap done in the Persian
pattern slightly mingled with the Greek, and embroidered with the shaded
worsteds before mentioned, mingled with stitches of silk and beads of
silver.

It is not strange that upon seeing that smoking-cap, which had cost her
so much time and labor and money, appearing over the top of a charcoal
cart on the head of a sooty little boy--it is not strange, I say, that
the slender young lady went to Mr. St. Clair and asked what it all
meant. She found Mr. St. Clair sitting upon the door-step, watching the
sunset sky. Mr. St. Clair declared that he had spent the whole day in
looking for the smoking-cap, and that it must have been stolen. Mr. and
Mrs. Stimpcett came out, and said _they_ had been looking for the cap
all day, and had felt badly on account of its loss. At this moment,
grandma, who was confined to her room with rheumatism, called down from
a chamber window that there were two little beggar children coming round
the barn--colored children, she thought.

"Why," cried the slender young lady, "that's the very boy!"

Mr. St. Clair rushed out to the barn. Just as he left the door-step who
should drive up to the gate and come in but Mrs. Polly Slater. "I have
been to the mill," said she, "and I came home by this road, thinking you
would like to hear from Debby."

"But where are Obed and Orah?" cried Mrs. Stimpcett, in alarm.

"I have not seen them," said Mrs. Polly Slater.

As she said this, Mr. Furlong stopped at the gate. He said that as he
was passing by he thought he would ask how Obed and Orah got on in
finding their aunt Debby's.

"_Aunt Debby's!_" cried Mr. Stimpcett, Mrs. Stimpcett, grandma, and Mrs.
Polly Slater--"_Aunt Debby's!_"

On hearing at what place Mr. Furlong had left her children, Mrs.
Stimpcett fainted and fell upon the ground. Then all the people tried to
revive her. The slender young lady fanned with her parasol, Mrs. Polly
Slater fetched the camphor bottle, Mr. Furlong pumped, Mr. Stimpcett
threw dipperfuls of water--though owing to his agitation not much of it
touched her face--and grandma called down from the chamber window what
should be done.

In the confusion no one noticed the approach of a newcomer. This was the
charcoal man, bringing shoes and stockings. "Here are your little girl's
shoes and stockings," said he. "She left them in my cart."

"They are not _my_ little girl's," said Mr. Stimpcett, throwing a
dipperful of water on the ground.

"She said she was your little girl," said the charcoal man. "But there
she is"--pointing to the barn; "you can see for yourself."

Mr. Stimpcett ran to the barn, and was amazed to find that the two
beggar children were his Obed and Orah. Mr. St. Clair was scolding them,
and the tears were running down their cheeks in narrow paths. Mr.
Stimpcett led them quickly to Mrs. Stimpcett. Seeing their mother
stretched as if dead upon the ground, they both screamed, "Ma! ma!
m--a!"

The well-known sounds revived her. She opened her eyes, raised herself,
and caught the children in her arms.

The slender young lady advised that the smoking-cap be hung out-doors in
a high wind, and afterward cleansed with naphtha. The clothes of Obed
and Orah were also hung out, and Mr. Stimpcett, for fun, arranged them
in the forms of two scarecrows, which scared so well that the birds flew
far away. The consequence was an enormous crop of cherries, all of
which, except a few for sauce, Mr. Stimpcett sent to the charcoal man.

Mr. St. Clair and the slender young lady were married the next year at
cherry-time, and it was said that during their honey-moon they subsisted
chiefly upon cherries. And now my story's done.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How is this, Mr. Story-Teller?" cried the children's mamma. "The story
is a story, no doubt, but it can not be counted in, for Obed and Orah
did not really go to mill."

Family Story-Teller said, looking around with a calm smile, that he
could tell plenty more, and that in his next one Grandma Stimpcett
should really go to mill, and should meet with surprising adventures.




PUSSY'S KITTEN (?).

  Once a tiny little rabbit strayed from home away;
  Far from woodland haunts she wandered, little rabbit gray.
  Our old Tabby cat, whilst sitting at the kitchen door,
  Thought she saw her long-lost kitten home returned once more.

  Gave a pounce, and quickly caught it, with a happy mew,
  Ere the frightened little wanderer quite knew what to do.
  Gently Tabby brought her treasure to the old door-mat,
  Purred, and rubbed and licked and smoothed it--motherly old cat!

  But what puzzled pussy truly, and aroused her fears,
  Was the length to which had grown her kitten's once small ears.
  Most amazing, most alarming, was that sight to her;
  Green and round her eyes were swelling, stiff and straight her fur.

  "Poor wee kitty! what a pity you're deformed!" thought she;
  "Surely this has somehow happened since you went from me.
  But you're welcome home, my kitten; mother's love is strong,
  Though I will confess I wish your ears were not so long."

  So the tiny little rabbit grew contented quite,
  And our visitors like to call and see the pretty sight
  Of nice old Tabby playing with her rabbit-kitty gray;
  And she doesn't dream of her mistake, although, the truth to say,

  Her own true kitten went the road that many kittys go;
  For John the coachman took it to the horse-pond just below.
  But I think it is most cruel to drown a little cat;
  And I trust all girls and boys will have too much heart for that.




THE BOYS AND UNCLE JOSH.

BY W. O. STODDARD.


"Hey Billy, my boy! Going skating?"

"Yes, Uncle Josh, Joe Pearce and me. The big pond's frozen solid."

"Is it safe?"

"Charley Shadders he says it's twenty feet thick in some places."

"Twenty feet thick! I declare! That's pretty thick ice. How did he
know?"

"I don't know. I guess he guessed at it. He's an awful guesser."

"I should say he was. Twenty feet thick! Why, Billy, the water's only
five feet deep in summer."

"Oh, but," exclaimed Joe Pearce, who had been listening with all the
eagerness of twelve years old, "it swells water to freeze it, Uncle
Josh."

"So it does, so it does. But I never heard of a swell like that." And
Uncle Josh--for he was uncle to all the small boys in the village--shook
his fat sides with laughter, but it was not all about the remarkable
ice, for his next question was, "But, Billy, you've put all your skating
on one foot. How's that?"

"'Cause it's all in one skate."

"Well, it's big enough. Why don't you divide it, and give the other foot
a fair share?"

"I've put mine on the other foot," shouted Joe, trying to balance
himself on one leg and hold up an uncommonly large skate for inspection.

How those skates were strapped on! They were even steadied with pieces
of rope, and had bits of wood and leather stuffed in under the straps to
make them fit.

"You see, Uncle Josh," explained Billy, "my brother Bob he went away to
college, and left his skates, 'cause, he said, the college was out of
ice this winter. And Joe Pearce he didn't have any. And Christmas forgot
to give me any. And so we divided 'em, and took the sled, and we're
going to the big pond."

"That was fair. Only you haven't divided the sled."

"The sled won't divide," said Joe, with a solemn shake of his curly
head; "but I'd like to divide my skate with my other foot."

"I'll tell you what, boys," suddenly exclaimed Uncle Josh, "let's have a
little Christmas of our own."

"Have you got any?" asked Billy.

"I guess I have. Come right along to the store with me."

"Come on, Joe. Keep your skate on. Don't limp any more'n you can help."

But both he and Joe cut a queer figure as they followed Uncle Josh up
the street; for when a boy makes one of his legs longer than the other,
and slips and slides on that foot, it makes a good deal of difference in
the way he walks.

Everybody knew Uncle Josh, and although he was a deacon and a very good
man, everybody expected to see a smile on his face, and to hear him
chuckle over something when they met him. So nobody was half so much
surprised as Joe and Billy were, and their surprise did not come to them
until they reached the store. But it came then.

"Skates for these boys," said Uncle Josh, as they went in. "One for each
foot, all around. Straps too."

That was it, and now the boys were doing more chuckling than Uncle Josh
himself.

"Billy," asked Joe, "do you know what to say?"

"Why, we must thank him."

"Yes, I s'pose so. But that doesn't seem to be half enough."

"Can't we thank him big, somehow?"

"Enough for two pair of skates?"

"That's so. We can't do it."

They had to give it up; but they did their best, and Uncle Josh cut them
short in the middle of it.

"Come, come, boys, we can't stay here all day. There won't be another
Saturday again for a week, and then it may rain. Don't put your skates
on. Wait till we get to the pond. Bring along the big ones. They'll do
for me."

"Why, are you going, Uncle Josh?"

"Of course I am. If the ice is twenty feet thick, I want to skate on it.
That kind of ice'll bear anybody."

And so the boys tied the big skates upon the sled, and were starting
off, when Uncle Josh exclaimed:

"No, boys, give 'em to me. I haven't had a pair of skates in my hand for
twenty years. I want to see how it would seem to carry them."

There were not a great many people to be met in a small village like
that, but every one they did meet had a smile for Uncle Josh and his
skates, till they reached the miller's house, just this side of the
pond. And there was Mrs. Sanders, the miller's wife, sweeping the least
bit of snow from her front stoop.

"Joe," said Billy, "do you see that?"

"And Charley Shadders was guessing, then. He said snow wouldn't light on
her stoop."

"There isn't but mighty little of it, and it didn't cost her anything."

But just at that moment Mrs. Sanders was resting on her broom, and
looking very severely at Uncle Josh, and saying,

"Now, Deacon Parmenter, where are you going with those boys? Skates,
too, at your time of life."

"Good-morning, Sister Sanders. I declare, if you'll go with us, I'll
trot right back and get a pair of skates for you. I'd like to see a
good-looking young woman like you--"

"Deacon Parmenter! Me? To go skating? With you and a couple of boys? I
never!"

But she did not look half so angry as she did at first. She was a plump
and rosy woman; but she had a pointed nose, and her lips were thin.
Billy whispered to Joe Pearce, "Aunt Sally says it'd keep any woman's
lips thin to work 'em as hard as Mrs. Sanders does hers."

They were almost smiling just now, for Uncle Josh went on: "Now, Sister
Sanders, I know it's a little queer for an old fellow like me, but it's
just the thing for young folks. Just you say the word, and you shall
have 'em. You're looking nicely this morning, Sister Sanders."

"Billy," whispered Joe, "how red in the face Uncle Josh is getting!"

"So is she," said Billy. "If he goes on that way, she'll come along and
spoil the fun."

"No, she won't."

Joe was right, for Mrs. Sanders brought her broom down on the front step
with a great bang with one hand, and she smoothed her front hair with
the other, as she answered Uncle Josh: "No, Deacon Parmenter, I couldn't
bring myself to set such an example. You must take good care of the
boys, and see that they do not get into any mischief. If I was their
mothers, I'd feel safer about them to know you was with 'em."

Uncle Josh had a spell of coughing just then, and it seemed to last him
till he and the boys were away past the miller's house, and going down
the slope toward the pond.

It was frozen beautifully, for the weather had been bitterly cold,
without any snow to speak of. The pond was all one glare and glitter,
and more than twenty men and boys were already at work on it, darting
around, like birds on their ringing, spinning, gliding skates. Only that
some of the smaller boys put one more in mind of tumbler pigeons than of
any other kind of birds.

It was quite wonderful how quickly Joe and Billy had their new skates
on, and Uncle Josh looked immensely pleased to see how well they both
knew how to use them.

"Why, boys, you haven't tumbled down once. How's that?"

"Oh, we know how," said Billy; "and the ice is great. Thick ice always
skates better'n thin ice."

But Uncle Josh had seated himself on the sled, and was hard at work
trying to put on Brother Bob's big skates.

They fitted him well enough, but he seemed to have a deal of trouble in
getting hold of the straps.

"Seems as if my feet were further away from me than they were twenty
years ago."

"Joe," said Billy, "let's help. We can strap 'em for him."

"That's good, boys. Pull tight. Tighter. Let me stamp a little.
There--one hole tighter. Now buckle."

And so they went on, till Uncle Josh's skates were strapped, as Joe
Pearce said, "so they couldn't wiggle."

"That's all right," said Uncle Josh. "Now, you boys, just skate away,
anywhere, and I'll enjoy myself."

They hardly liked to leave him, but off they went, for the boys to whom
they wanted to show their new skates were away over on the other side of
the pond.

"I don't know if this ice is twenty feet thick," muttered Uncle Josh, as
he pulled his feet under him, "but it looks twenty miles slippery. Ice
on this pond always freezes with the slippery side up. Steady, now.
There! I'm glad I've got the sled to sit down on."

It was well it was a good strong sled, with thick ice under it, for
Uncle Josh sat down pretty hard, and he was a fat, jolly, heavy sort of
man.

He sat right still and laughed for a whole minute, and then he tried it
again.

This time he succeeded in standing up, and he was just saying to
himself, "I wish Jemima Sanders had come along to see me skate," when
one of his feet began to slip away from him.

"I know how," he shouted. "There's no help for it. I must strike right
out."

So he did, and his first slide carried him nearly a rod on that one
skate before he could get the other one down. He did that, however, and
it worked finely, for he had been a good skater when he was a young man.
He had kept hold of the rope-handle of the sled, and it was following
him. That is, when he struck out with a foot he swung his long arms too,
and the sled swung around on the ice as if it was half crazy.

"What can be the matter with my ankles?" he said to himself. "They used
to be good ankles."

No doubt; but then the last time he had skated before that, they had not
had so much to carry.

"Billy," exclaimed Joe Pearce, "Uncle Josh is agoing!"

"How he does go! Ain't I glad it's thick ice!"

"Let's go. Come on, boys."

Other eyes than theirs had been watching Uncle Josh, for everybody knew
him, and nobody had ever seen him skate, and Joe and Billy were followed
by almost all the boys on the pond.

"Hurrah for Uncle Josh!"

"Can't he skate, though!"

"See him go."

Right across the pond, as if he were in a desperate hurry to reach the
opposite bank before the ice could melt under him, went Uncle Josh, and
with him, all around him, swung the sled.

It may have served as a sort of balance-wheel, and helped to steady him,
but it could not steer him. Neither could he steer himself, and the next
thing he knew he was headed down the pond, and skating for dear life
toward the dam.

"If I stop, I shall come down," he said, with a sort of gasp. "I'm
getting out of breath. Good! I'm pointed for the shore again, and
there's a snow-bank."

All the boys were racing after him now, but they had stopped shouting in
their wonder at what could have got into Uncle Josh. He himself was
beginning to feel very warm, for it was a good while since he had done
so much work in so short a time.

"Here comes the shore!" But just as he said it, there he was, and the
skate he was sliding on caught in a chip on the ice.

The wind had been at work to keep the pond clean when it piled that
snow-bank, and had left it all heaped up, white and soft and deep, and
into it went Uncle Josh, head first, while the sled was pitched a rod
beyond him.

"Get the sled, Billy," said Joe.

"He skated himself right ashore."

"Guess he isn't hurt."

[Illustration: "HURT? NO, INDEED!"]

"Hurt? No, indeed!" shouted Uncle Josh, as he came up again through the
snow. "That's the way we used to skate when I was a boy. Billy, where's
that sled?"

He did not seem in any hurry to stand up, but Joe Pearce found his hat,
and handed it to him.

"Thank you, Joseph. Billy, you may bring the sled right here in front of
me."

"He wants to sit down," said one of the boys.

"He's sitting down now," said Joe. But Billy brought the sled, and Uncle
Josh carefully worked himself forward upon it, and began to brush away
the snow.

"I'm as white as a miller," he chuckled to himself. "Boys, I guess you
may do the rest of my skating for me to-day."

"Don't those skates fit?" asked Joe.

"Oh yes, they fit well enough. It's the ice that doesn't fit. It's too
wide for me."

"Well," said Billy, "we'll pull you across. Take hold, boys."

"I declare!" began Uncle Josh; but the boys had seized the rope, and
were off in a twinkling.

"It's fun," they heard him mutter; "but what would Sister Sanders say?"

"There she is!" exclaimed Billy, "right down by the shore. She's come to
see us skate."

"Hold on, boys! hold on! Let me get my skates off."

But there were so many boys pulling and pushing around that sled that
before they could all let go and stop it, the pond had been nearly
crossed, and there was Mrs. Sanders.

Uncle Josh did not seem to see her at all, and only said, "Now, boys,
just unbuckle my skates for me, will you?"

It would have been done more quickly if there had not been so many to
help, and by the time one skate was loose, Uncle Josh was laughing
again.

"Deacon Parmenter!"

"Is that you, Sister Sanders? They're all safe--every boy of them. Just
wait a moment now, and they'll be ready for you."

"Ready for me! What can you mean? I'm just amazed and upset, Deacon
Parmenter. A man like you, to be cutting up in such a way as this!"

"There they are, Sister Sanders. You can put 'em right on. Come and sit
down on the sled. They're a little large for me, but they'll just fit
you; I know they will."

Uncle Josh had very carefully risen to his feet, and was holding out to
her Brother Bob's big skates, straps and all. Her face grew very rosy
indeed as she looked at them.

"Fit me!" she exclaimed--"those things fit me! Why, Deacon Parmenter,
what can you mean?"

"Too small, eh? Well, now, I'd ha' thought--"

But Mrs. Sanders turned right around and marched away toward her own
house without saying another word.

"Boys," said Uncle Josh, "the skating is fine, but there isn't any more
of it than you'll want. Billy, take care of Brother Bob's skates for
him. I hope you'll all have a good time."

He was edging and sliding along toward the shore while he was talking,
and the last they heard him say was,

"I can skate well enough, but I'm afraid somebody else'll have to do my
walking for me for a week or two."

"He's just the best man in the village," said Joe Pearce.

"So he is," said Billy; "but I'm glad the ice was thick. What would we
have done if he'd broken through?"

"That's why fat men like him don't skate, Billy. Did you see what a hole
he made in that there snow-bank?"

He had, and so had the rest, but they all skated a race across the pond
to take another look at it, and wonder how he ever managed to get out.




SHIPS PAST AND PRESENT.--[SEE PAGE 162.]

[Illustration: SHIPS OF COLUMBUS.]

[Illustration: NORWEGIAN SHIP OF THE TENTH CENTURY.]

[Illustration: THE FIRST OCEAN STEAM-SHIP.]

[Illustration: THE "MAYFLOWER."]

[Illustration: OCEAN STEAM-SHIP OF TO-DAY.]

[Illustration: AMERICAN CLIPPER SHIP.]

SHIPS PAST AND PRESENT.


On page 161 are given illustrations of six different styles of vessels,
all of which are correct drawings of ships that in different ages have
acted important parts in the history of this continent.

The upper right-hand picture represents a Norwegian war ship of the
tenth century, and in such a one Scandinavian traditions assert that,
early in the eleventh century, Olaf Ericsson and his hardy crew sailed
into the unknown west for many a day, until at length they reached the
shores of America. On the authority of these same traditions, some
people assert that the structure known as the "old stone mill of
Newport" was erected by this same Olaf Ericsson, and left by him as a
monument of his discovery.

If Ericsson and his men did make the voyage across the unknown ocean, it
was a very brave thing for them to do, for as the picture shows their
ship was a very small affair when compared with the magnificent vessels
of to-day, and was ill fitted to battle with the storms of the Atlantic.
She was of about ten tons burden, or as large as an oyster sloop of
to-day, and carried a crew of twenty-five men. A single mast was stepped
amidships, and this supported the one large square sail which was all
that ships of those days carried. Well forward of the mast was a single
bank of oars, or long sweeps, that were used when the wind was
unfavorable, or during calms.

Although this style of craft appears very queer to us, in those days it
was considered the perfection of marine architecture, and in these
little ships the fierce Scandinavian Vikings, or sea-rovers, became the
scourge and terror of the Northern seas.

The upper left-hand picture represents three ships very different in
style from the first, but still looking very queer and clumsy. They are
the ships in which, in--who can tell the date?--"Columbus crossed the
ocean blue," and made that discovery of America which history records as
the first. These caravels, as they were called, were named the _Santa
Maria_, _Pinta_, and _Nina_. The first-named was much larger than the
others, and was commanded by Columbus in person; but large as she was
then considered, she would now be thought very small for a man-of-war,
as she was, for she was only ninety feet in length. She had four masts,
of which two were fitted with square and two with lateen sails, and her
crew consisted of sixty-six men. In old descriptions of this vessel it
is mentioned that she was provided with eight anchors, which seems a
great many for so small a ship to carry. The other two vessels were much
smaller, and were open except for a very short deck aft. They were each
provided with three masts, rigged with lateen-sails.

From this time forth a rapid improvement took place in the building of
ships. They were made larger and stronger, as well as more comfortable;
a reduction was made in the absurd height of the stern, or poop, and
much useless ornamentation about the bows and stern was done away with.

In the third picture is shown a model ship of the seventeenth century,
which is none other than the _Mayflower_, in which, in 1620, the
Pilgrims crossed the ocean in search of a place for a new home, which
they finally made for themselves at Plymouth.

During the eighteenth century trade increased so rapidly between the
American colonies and the mother country that the demand for ships was
very great, and the sailing vessels built then and early in the present
century have not since been excelled for speed or beauty. But a great
change was about to take place; and early in this century people began
to say that before long ships would be able to sail without either the
aid of wind or oars, and in 1807 Robert Fulton built the first
steamboat. Twelve years later the first ocean steamer was built, and
made a successful voyage across the Atlantic. She was named the
_Savannah_, and our fourth picture shows what she looked like.

The last two pictures are those of a full-rigged clipper ship of to-day
under all sail, and one of the magnificent ocean steamers that ply so
swiftly between New York and Liverpool, making in eight or nine days the
voyage that it took the _Savannah_ thirty days to make.




THE RABBITS' FETE.

BY MRS. E. P. PERRIN.


"Good-night, little girl. Go to nurse, and ask her to pop you right into
bed."

The front door was shut, and Ellie hurried up stairs to the great hall
window, and looked out to see her mamma and pretty Aunt Janet get into
the sleigh and drive off. "Hark!" she says to herself, "how nice the
bells sound! They keep saying,

  'Jingle bells, jingle bells,
    Jingle all the way;
  Oh, what fun it is to ride
    In a one-horse open sleigh!'

It's just as light as day out-doors. The moon makes the snow look like
frosted cake. I can see the croquet ground as plain as can be, and it
looks like a great square loaf. There's the arbor, and the seats in it
have white cushions on them. How funny it would be to play croquet on
the ice! Only the balls would go so fast we should have to put on skates
to catch them. I can see ever and ever so far--'way over to the woods
where Jack sets his traps. He says they are chock-full of rabbits; but I
don't believe him, for he never catches any. What's that moving on the
edge of the grove? What can it be? Oh, it's lots of them! They are
coming this way, and I can hear them laughing and talking."

Ellie watched, and soon saw a troop of rabbits hopping along toward the
lawn.

"Why, I do believe it is a rabbit party. How lucky it is I haven't gone
to bed!"

On they came, chattering in the funniest way, and dressed in the top of
the fashion. One who seemed to be the leader said: "Ladies and
gentlemen, this is the spot. You see how level it is for dancing, and we
can have a game at croquet if you choose. The band will now strike up;
and take partners, if you please, for a waltz."

Ellie wondered where the band was, but the strains of "Sweet Evelina,
dear Evelina," came floating on the air, and, looking up, she saw two
crows perched on the bar from which the swing hung in summer. One had a
little fiddle, and the other a flute.

"That's the queerest thing yet," thought Ellie. "The idea of a crow
being able to play on anything, when they make such a horrid noise
cawing! The night crows must be different from the day ones."

After the waltz was ended, and the couples were promenading, Ellie took
a good look at the young ladies and their lovely dresses. There was one
so beautiful she was charmed by her. She was as fair as a lily, and so
gentle and sweet Ellie called her the belle of the ball. A little gray
fellow never left her side, and could not do enough for her. He called
her Alicia, and Ellie did not wonder he seemed so fond of her. She
noticed, too, a tall young lady who had a white face with a black nose.
She looked very cross, but was much dressed in a scarlet silk, with a
long train, which gave her no end of trouble, for it was always in the
way. Ellie heard her say, in the crossest way: "I suppose Alicia thinks
she looks well to-night with that high comb in her head. I call her a
perfect fright."

"You only say so because you haven't one," answered her companion. "I
think it is very becoming, and it makes her veil float out beautifully
behind."

The leader called out, "Take partners for the Lancers!" and they quickly
formed into sets.

They danced to perfection; even the "grand square" was got through
without a blunder. The leader was unlucky enough to step upon the
scarlet train, and its wearer turned upon him, crying out: "I do wish,
Mr. Hopkins, you wouldn't be so clumsy! You will tear my dress off me."

He humbly begged her pardon, but told his partner he should look out and
not get in the same set with Matilda again; she was as disagreeable as
ever. "Just because her grandmother was French, she gives herself great
airs. She is no better than the rest of us."

After the Lancers was finished, Matilda went to the arbor to get her
train pinned up. It was sadly torn. While one of the matrons was at work
upon it, Ellie listened to the conversation.

"Why isn't Mrs. Gray here to-night?" asked one.

"Don't you know she has eight little ones a week old to-day?"

"Oh, indeed! Her hands must be full. I have been so busy with my own
affairs, I know nothing about my neighbors'. But who is that who has
just arrived? Mr. Hopkins will surely break his neck trying to get to
him."

"That must be Lord Lepus; he belongs to the Hare family, one of the most
aristocratic in England. I heard he was to be invited. What an honor!--a
nobleman at our New-Year's fete."

Matilda grew impatient, and pulled her dress away, saying, "That will
do; I hope you've been long enough about it," and without a word of
thanks hurried to join the young people.

"How very rude she is!" thought Ellie. "I always thought that French
people were polite."

Her attention was drawn to the new arrival. "He must be what Jack calls
a swell," thought she, "with that long coat almost touching his heels,
and his button-hole bouquet of carnations, heliotrope, and smilax. How
does he keep that one eyeglass in his eye? It never moves, and yet he
skips about like a grasshopper."

"Shall I present your lordship to one of the ladies?" asked Mr. Hopkins.
"Any of them will be only too happy to dance with you."

"Aw, really now!" answered Lord Lepus. "'Pon my word, they are all such
charming creatures, it is hard to choose. Who is the little one with the
blue veil standing with the gentleman in demi-toilet of gray?"

"That is Alicia. The gentleman is Mr. Golightly. They are to be married
soon."

"How extremely interesting! Pray present me."

His lordship secured the blushing Alicia for a waltz, and was so well
pleased with his partner he danced with her again and again.

After the last dance, Ellie saw Mr. Hopkins setting out the wickets for
croquet. The balls were lady apples with different colored ribbons tied
to the stems, and the mallets were cat-o'-nine-tails, with the pussy end
going the other way.

"Well," thought she, "I don't see but that rabbits know as much as
people. I wonder how they will play."

She did not have to wonder long, for they were at it almost before she
had done thinking. Lord Lepus was a fine player. Alicia was his partner,
and with his help her balls went flying through the wickets in a
twinkling. Golightly and Matilda were in the same game, and did their
prettiest; but his lordship was too much for them.

At last when Alicia sent Matilda's ball spinning, and struck the stake
for her partner and then for herself, Matilda flew in a rage, and
lifting her mallet, struck Alicia a blow on the head, which drove the
teeth of her comb down into the pretty white skin. Poor Alicia gave one
cry, and dropped senseless. Golightly was beside himself with grief, and
pushing Lord Lepus aside as he sprang to her aid, cried, "Away! away!
You took her from me in life: she is mine in death."

"I beg pardon--" politely began his lordship, but was interrupted by
Mrs. Muff, Alicia's chaperon, who calmly ordered Golightly to stop his
noise, and help Mr. Hopkins carry her charge to the arbor.

"Oh, what shall we do?" groaned Golightly, beating his brow with his
hand.

"Do," repeated Mrs. Muff; "why, send for a porous plaster. Here,
Skipjack, run to Dr. Pine as fast as you can, and fetch me one."

In a moment he was back with it, and Mrs. Muff quickly clapped it upon
Alicia's head. Ellie looked on with breathless interest, and soon Alicia
slowly opened her eyes, and looking up, said, in a soft voice, "Dear
Golightly!"

Mrs. Muff skillfully jerked off the plaster, and Ellie saw the teeth of
the comb sticking to it.

"Bless my soul! it's the most extraordinary thing," cried his lordship.

"Oh, that's nothing," replied Mrs. Muff; "I always use them when my
children are teething, with great success. But where is Matilda?"

"The poor girl was terribly cut up, you know, and ran away toward the
woods," answered Lord Lepus. "How does the charming Alicia find herself?
Well enough to join us, I hope."

"She must rest awhile. A short nap will entirely restore her," said Mrs.
Muff.

At that moment Mr. Hopkins put his head in the arbor, and announced
supper was served.

"Now," said Mrs. Muff, "while you are at supper Alicia shall go to
sleep, and I will watch her."

Ellie looked out, and saw a table spread on the croquet ground. "Well,
well, how quick rabbits are! I wonder what they have to eat;" and she
ran along with the rest of the party to find out. The table was loaded
with nice things--apples and celery in abundance, and piles and piles of
popped corn. Lord Lepus had never seen any before, and was so much
pleased with it, Mr. Hopkins ordered a waiter to fill a bag and give it
to his lordship when he left. "How strange," thought Ellie; "mamma says
it is very impolite to carry away anything to eat when you go to
parties. But perhaps it is different with rabbits."

When they had finished supper, Mr. Cawkins and son--the band--came
flapping down and picked up everything that was on the table. "I suppose
that playing makes them hungry," thought Ellie; "but how fast they do
eat!"

When the last kernel of popped corn had disappeared, the crows flew back
to their perch and began to play the liveliest, merriest tune Ellie had
ever heard. Mr. Hopkins said to Lord Lepus, "Will your lordship join us
in dancing the merry-go-round? It is our national dance, and we always
have it on New-Year's Eve."

"I shall be most happy; and here comes the fair Alicia, looking as fresh
as a daisy. I will secure her for my partner."

But Mr. Hopkins formed them into a circle, and they began to dance
around, singing as they went. Ellie listened, and caught the words,

  "Come dance, come dance the merry-go-round,
  With sprightly leap and joyous bound.
  We'll grasp each hand with right good cheer,
  And welcome in the glad new year.
    Oh, the merry-go-round, the merry-go-round,
    We'll dance till day is dawning."

They flew around fast and faster, till Ellie could not tell one from
another. They looked like a streak on the snow.

"Dear me, how dizzy they will get! Poor Alicia will certainly have the
headache," thought Ellie; but still quicker went the music, and still
faster flew the dancers. All of a sudden Ellie was startled by a loud
"caw." She felt some one shaking her shoulder, and a voice in her ear
said, "Wake up, Miss Ellie, wake up. The hall clock has just struck half
past nine, and to think of your being out of bed at this hour! What will
your mamma say? That giddy-pate Sarah told me she would undress you, for
I was called away."

"I am so glad," said sleepy little Ellie, "for I have seen the
merry-go-round."

Nurse gathered her up in her arms, and bore her to the nursery.

"Nursey," asked Ellie, "are English hares better than our rabbits?"

"Yes, miss, much better for soup."

"Soup!" cried Ellie; "how dreadful, when he was so beautifully dressed!"

"Yes," said nurse, "we like to have them dressed; they are so hard to
skin."

"What do you mean?" exclaimed Ellie. "He wore such a beautiful long
coat, and had on a locket and three rings."

"Dear me," thought nurse, "she has been in the moonlight so long I am
afraid it has turned her brain. She certainly seems a little looney. The
sooner she is undressed and in her bed, the better."

"Oh, nursey, the next time baby has any teeth coming, put on a porous
plaster, and it will pull them right through his gums."

"Bless the child! What is she talking about now? Hares and plasters! The
moon is a dangerous thing, and Sarah shall be well scolded for her
neglect."

As Ellie laid her head on the pillow, she said, "They danced the
merry-go-round, and at the end of every verse they sang, 'Oh, the
merry-go-round, the merry-go-round, we'll--dance--till--day--'"

Nurse looked, and saw that little Ellie was fast asleep.




A WISE DOG.


Many anecdotes have been published respecting dogs, proving that,
besides giving evidence of being endowed with certain moral qualities,
they possess and exercise memory, reasoning powers, and forethought;
they can communicate with each other, form plans, and act in concert.
The subject, however, is by no means exhausted, and dog stories almost
always meet with a welcome reception, especially from juvenile readers.

The following story gives an instance, in the first place, of two dogs
combining to perform a certain action; in the second place, it shows
that one of these dogs evidently understood from the conversation of his
master and another man the consequences likely to result from this
action, and that he thereupon formed and carried out a plan to avoid
them.

[Illustration: COME OUT AND HAVE SOME FUN.]

A farmer who resided in a town on the borders of Dartmoor was the owner
of a valuable sheep-dog. So skillful was this dog in collecting and
driving the sheep, that he almost performed the part of a shepherd. If
the farmer, on his return from market, wanted the sheep to be driven to
the field, he had only to say, "Keeper, take the sheep to field," and
the dog would collect the flock and drive them to the field without
suffering a single one to stray. But the proverb, "Evil communications
corrupt good manners," is as applicable to dogs as to men. Keeper got
acquainted with another dog, which proved to be of disreputable
character, and like other disreputable characters, had a habit of
rambling about at night. When the farmer was smoking his evening pipe by
the kitchen fire, and Keeper was stretched along the hearth, apparently
asleep, a low bark would be heard outside; Keeper would prick up his
ears, and when the door was opened, would make his escape and join his
companion, and then away would go both dogs on a ramble.

This game was carried on for some little time; Keeper's bad habits were
not suspected at home, and he did his duty by his master's sheep as
faithfully as ever. In the mean time it became known in the town that a
few miles distant many sheep had been "worried" by dogs, but as yet the
culprit or culprits had not been discovered. It may, perhaps, be as well
to explain that by "worrying" sheep is meant that they have been
attacked by dogs, which seize the sheep by the throat, bite them, and
suck the blood, and then leave them to perish. In a single night one dog
has been known to "worry" forty sheep. No wonder such animals are a
terror to farmers. Besides, if a dog once takes to "worrying" sheep, he
never leaves off the habit.

One evening as the farmer sat by his fire smoking and conversing with a
neighbor, Keeper as usual basking by the fire, and waiting the expected
call of his dog companion, the conversation turned on the great number
of sheep that had been lately "worried" and destroyed, and the loss that
would ensue to the farmers.

"Well," said the neighbor, "we caught one on 'em, with his mouth and
coat bloody, and we hanged him up on the spot. They do say thy dog
Keeper was with un."

"It is too true, he was there," replied the farmer; then looking at the
apparently sleeping dog, and shaking his head at him, he said, "Thee
knows thee has been with un. Thy turn will come next. We'll hang thee up
to-morrow."

Keeper lay still, pretending sleep, but with his ears open. He had heard
his death-warrant, and was determined that it should not be carried into
execution if he could prevent it. When the outer door was opened, he
slunk off quietly, and was never seen again.

What became of him was never known.

Who will say after this that dogs do not understand the conversation of
men, especially when it relates to "worrying" sheep, and the punishment
it entails on the guilty dogs?




[Illustration: Music: A Fox went out in a hungry plight.]

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Lesson of the Bath.=--One of the most valuable discoveries made by
Archimedes, the famous scholar of Syracuse, in Sicily, relates to the
weight of bodies immersed in water. Hiero, King of Syracuse, had given a
lump of gold to be made into a crown, and when it came back he suspected
that the workmen had kept back some of the gold, and had made up the
weight by adding more than the right quantity of silver; but he had no
means of proving this, because they had made it weigh as much as the
gold which had been sent. Archimedes, puzzling over this problem, went
to his bath. As he stepped in he saw the water, which his body
displaced, rise to a higher level in the bath, and to the astonishment
of his servants he sprang out of the water, and ran home through the
streets of Syracuse almost naked, crying, "_Eureka! Eureka!_" ("I have
found it! I have found it!").

What had he found? He had discovered that any solid body put into a
vessel of water displaces a quantity of water equal to its own bulk, and
therefore that equal weights of two substances, one light and bulky, and
the other heavy and small, will displace different quantities of water.
This discovery enabled him to solve his problem. He procured one lump of
gold and another of silver, each weighing exactly the same as the crown.
Of course the lumps were not the same size, because silver is lighter
than gold, and so it takes more of it to make up the same weight. He
first put the gold into a basin of water, and marked on the side of the
vessel the height to which the water rose.

Next, taking out the gold, he put in the silver, which, though it
weighed the same, yet, being larger, made the water rise higher; and
this height he also marked. Lastly, he took out the silver and put in
the crown. Now if the crown had been pure gold, the water would have
risen only up to the mark of the gold, but it rose higher, and stood
between the gold and silver marks, showing that silver had been mixed
with it, making it more bulky; and by calculating how much water was
displaced, Archimedes could estimate roughly how much silver had been
added. This was the first attempt to measure the _specific gravity_ of
different substances; that is, the weight of any particular substance
compared to an equal bulk of some other substance taken as a standard.
In weighing solids or liquids, water is the usual standard.

       *       *       *       *       *

=How this Solid Earth keeps Changing.=--The student of history reads of
the great sea-fight which King Edward III. fought with the French off
Sluys; how in those days the merchant vessels came up to the walls of
that flourishing sea-port by every tide; and how, a century later, a
Portuguese fleet conveyed Isabella from Lisbon, and an English fleet
brought Margaret of York from the Thames, to marry successive Dukes of
Burgundy at the port of Sluys. In our time, if a modern traveller drives
twelve miles out of Bruges, across the Dutch frontier, he will find a
small agricultural town, surrounded by corn fields and meadows and
clumps of trees, whence the sea is not in sight from the top of the
town-hall steeple. This is Sluys.

Once more. We turn to the great Baie du Mont Saint Michel, between
Normandy and Brittany. In Roman authors we read of the vast forest
called "Setiacum Nemus," in the centre of which an isolated rock arose,
surmounted by a temple of Jupiter, once a college of Druidesses. Now the
same rock, with its glorious pile dedicated to St. Michael, is
surrounded by the sea at high tides. The story of this transformation is
even more striking than that of Sluys, and its adequate narration justly
earned for M. Manet the gold medal of the French Geographical Society in
1828.

Once again. Let us turn for a moment to the Mediterranean shores of
Spain, and the mountains of Murcia. Those rocky heights, whose peaks
stand out against the deep blue sky, scarcely support a blade of
vegetation. The algarobas and olives at their bases are artificially
supplied with soil. It is scarcely credible that these are the same
mountains which, according to the forest-book of King Alfonso el Sabio,
were once clothed to their summits with pines and other forest trees,
while soft clouds and mist hung over a rounded, shaggy outline of wood
where now the naked rocks make a hard line against the burnished sky.
But Arab and Spanish chroniclers alike record the facts, and
geographical science explains the cause. There is scarcely a district in
the whole range of the civilized world where some equally interesting
geographical story has not been recorded, and where the same valuable
lessons may not be taught. This is comparative geography.




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.]


That our youthful correspondents may not think we slight any of their
favors, we would say that we regret exceedingly that our limited space
compels us to print so few of their prettily worded and neatly written
letters. We thank you all for your praise and hearty goodwill, but while
we read all your comments on _Young People_ with attention, as in that
way we learn what pleases you best, we must choose for printing those
letters which tell something of interest to other young readers.

To one thing we would call your attention. When you send drawings of
"Wiggles" and other picture puzzles, be careful to do it on a separate
piece of paper. Your letters are all recorded, and filed away, and if
your idea for a "Wiggle" is drawn on the same piece of paper on which
you write your letter, it makes confusion. We hope our young
correspondents will pay attention to this suggestion.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ISHPEMING, MICHIGAN.

     In _Harper's Young People_, No. 10, Mr. Lossing wrote about
     "Putnam's Narrow Escape." He said his informant was General
     Ebenezer Mead. Please tell Mr. Lossing that General Mead was my
     great-grandfather. I am nine years old. I was born in Evergreen,
     Louisiana, and came North when I was only three weeks old, so I
     don't remember about any home but where I live now.

  BEN BRYANT HILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

  DEL NORTE, COLORADO.

     I am ten years old, and live away out in the Rocky Mountains. I
     went down to the hotel last night, and saw the twelve Ute chiefs
     who are on the way to Washington. Ouray, the head chief, had his
     wife with him. There being but one chair in the room, she very
     kindly sat flat upon the floor, and allowed her husband to occupy
     the chair.

  WALLACE S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SHEEPSCOTT BRIDGE, MAINE.

     I am eleven years old. My father tells me lots of stories about
     Indians, and shows me the places where some poor people were killed
     by them. Our field takes in a part of Garrison Hill, where people
     used to come into the fort when the Indians came. My father says
     Sheepscott is a very old place, and the Pilgrims came here for
     corn. Close by our field is an old barn where the Indians came when
     some men were threshing, and fired on them, and killed two and took
     their scalps off, and one man hit back at them with his flail, and
     broke an Indian's arm, and they carried him prisoner to Canada. It
     says so on his old grave-stone, and I have seen it. My grandfather
     shot bears, but there are none here now. The people here build
     little houses on the ice, and catch lots of smelts through a hole
     in the ice. Sometimes there are as many as a hundred houses. The
     smelts are sent to New York. I like _Young People_, and hope I
     shall always get it.

  CLARENCE E. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WARREN, OHIO.

     I want to tell you about my dogs. I have two coach-dogs; Spot and
     Sport are their names. I used to drive them in a sleigh, and they
     would draw me all about the town. I trained them all myself. Sport
     was just like some horses; he would back and kick and chew his
     harness. One day he chewed it all to pieces. Spot was good all the
     time. I am older now, and drive ponies. I drove the dogs when I was
     five years old.

  ALASKA P.

       *       *       *       *       *

  EMPORIA, KANSAS.

     My uncle gave me a little axe on New-Year's Day, of which I am very
     proud, and make good use of it by cutting wood for my mamma, but
     Kansas wood is very hard to split. My papa says, "Where there is a
     will there is a way," and I am going to earn money enough with my
     axe to subscribe for _Young People_.

  PORTER HUNTER.

       *       *       *       *       *

  EAST SMITHFIELD, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I have a canary. His name is Willie. He sings very sweetly, but he
     has not bathed for a long time. Do you know any way to make him
     take his bath?

  MARY.

Sometimes canaries will not bathe in cold weather. You must give your
bird tepid water, otherwise it will get chilled, and sicken. Try putting
the bath dish in its cage and leaving it alone. Some canaries will never
bathe if they are watched.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PEABODY, MASSACHUSETTS.

     I have two Maltese cats exactly alike. One of them will eat
     pea-nuts faster than I can crack them. The one that eats pea-nuts
     has a bad cold. What can I do for her?

  HARRY P. H.

Your kitty has a very funny appetite. Keep her in a warm corner by the
fire, and give her plenty of warm milk to drink, and her cold will get
well. A little weak catnip tea mixed with the milk would do her good.

       *       *       *       *       *

Robie I. G. has a kitty which climbs up on the balusters every morning
and tries to open his chamber door; Carlotta P. writes that her kitties
Betsy and Busti play with balls, and run up the curtains as if they were
climbing trees; Charlie M. S., Annie C. and Maggie W., Mattie V. S., and
Ida R. L., also write of pet cats and dogs and birds.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAYNARD A. M.--Your story and poems are very pretty, and show much fancy
and imagination for a boy of your age, but we have not room to print
them. We return them to Detroit, Michigan, the only address you give.

       *       *       *       *       *

"MYSTIC."--Your drawing is very well done, but we can not use it.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS A. T.--There is no commentary on Pope's translation of Homer, but
many interesting papers have been published on the subject.

       *       *       *       *       *

EDWARD M. VAN C.--Your letter was a long time reaching its destination,
as it first took a trip to the Dead-letter Office at Washington, and was
forwarded to us from there. Like the little girl mentioned in the paper
on the Dead-letter Office in _Young People_, No. 11, you posted it
_without a stamp_.

       *       *       *       *       *

E. L. M.--You write a very pretty letter considering that you are "only
a little girl nine years old," and you need not feel nervous in future.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS E. W.--Many thanks for the charming letter and poem you so kindly
forward from the bright little nine-year-old girl, Jennie Lancaster, of
Marshall, Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDIE W. P.--The quotation you wish is probably this: "Nothing in his
life became him like the leaving it." It occurs in Shakspeare's play of
_Macbeth_, act first, scene fourth.

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGE O. D.--We are very sorry you are so unfortunate, and trust the
weekly visit of _Young People_ will continue to brighten the monotony of
your illness.

       *       *       *       *       *

W. T. DOTY.--The incident you mention must be taken as an exception to a
general rule, as the personal observation of many students of natural
history establishes the statement to which you demur.

       *       *       *       *       *

ETHEL S. M.--Either spelling of the word is correct. The form you object
to is more often used by American writers than the one you found in your
English history.

       *       *       *       *       *

Favors are acknowledged from Esther B., Minnesota; Osborn D., Arkansas;
Bert C. S., Iowa; Tillie F. W., Maryland; Ethel P., Washington, D. C.;
Willie Baldwin, Massachusetts; Louis C. V., New Jersey. From
Connecticut--Archie H. L., "Daisy." From New York--M. Cohn, Addie
and A. Goodnow. From Missouri--Charlie B., Theodore W. B. From
Illinois--S. M. H., Marion Potter. From California--Mary M. Carr, Arthur
White.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles are received from Charlie A. T., Illinois;
H. W. Singer, Ohio; Florence and Pauline W., California; J. T. Newcombe,
Michigan; Ida U. B., Minnesota; John R. Glen, Georgia; S. Addison W.,
Maryland; C. S. C., Connecticut; J. H. Hassett, New Hampshire. From
Massachusetts--A. A. Gilmore, Stanley King, C. H. A., A. F. C. From New
York--Thomas H. Van T., F. W. P., Mabel L., William MacG., Walter L.,
H. and B., Rufus W. T., E. S., F. Bisbee. Oscar F., New Jersey.

Many of these answers are given in very neat operations in figures.

       *       *       *       *       *

Answers to Mathematical Puzzles in No. 10:

No. 5.--While selling their apples separately the boys received an
average price of two and one-twelfth cents per apple. The boy who sold
the whole lot together received only two cents per apple, losing
one-twelfth of a cent on each. This loss on sixty apples amounted to
five cents.

No. 6.--Mother's age, sixty-five; oldest daughter's, thirty; second
daughter's, twenty; youngest daughter's, fifteen.




ADVERTISEMENTS.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be issued every Tuesday, and may be had at
the following rates--_payable in advance, postage free_:

  SINGLE COPIES                     $0.04
  ONE SUBSCRIPTION, _one year_       1.50
  FIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS, _one year_     7.00

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY ORDER or DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

ADVERTISING.

The extent and character of the circulation of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
will render it a first-class medium for advertising. A limited number of
approved advertisements will be inserted on two inside pages at 75 cents
per line.

  Address
  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




A LIBERAL OFFER FOR 1880 ONLY.

HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE _and_ HARPER'S WEEKLY _will be sent to any address
for one year, commencing with the first Number of_ HARPER'S WEEKLY _for
January, 1880, on receipt of $5.00 for the two Periodicals_.




=PLAYS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE=, with Songs and Choruses, adapted for Private
Theatricals. With the Music and necessary directions for getting them
up. Sent on receipt of 30 cents, by HAPPY HOURS COMPANY, No. 5 Beekman
Street, New York. Send your address for a Catalogue of Tableaux,
Charades, Pantomimes, Plays, Reciters, Masks, Colored Fire, &c., &c.




CANDY

Send one, two, three, or five dollars for a sample box, by express, of
the best Candies in America, put up elegantly and strictly pure. Refers
to all Chicago. Address

  C. F. GUNTHER,
  Confectioner,
  78 MADISON STREET, CHICAGO.




WOODEN WEDDING PRESENTS

Ready-made and to order.

SCROLL SAWS, DESIGNS, AND WOOD,

At LITTLE'S TOOL STORE, 59 Fulton St., N. Y. City.

Circulars free by mail.




DU CHAILLU'S STORIES

OF

ADVENTURES IN AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stories of the Gorilla Country.

     By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

It is a capital book for boys. * * * The stories it contains are
full of the kind of novelty, peril, and adventure which are so
fascinating.--_Spectator_, London.

These stories are entertaining and are well told, and they are
calculated to impart much knowledge of natural history to youthful
readers.--_Boston Traveller._

       *       *       *       *       *

Wild Life under the Equator.

     By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

The amount of enjoyment that was afforded to the children by the
previous work of this author, "Stories of the Gorilla Country," is
beyond computation. * * * We have read every word of "Wild Life under
the Equator" with the liveliest interest and satisfaction No ingenious
youth of twelve in the land will find it more "awfully jolly" than did
we.--_N. Y. Evening Post._

       *       *       *       *       *

Lost in the Jungle.

     By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

Full of adventures with savage men and wild beasts; shows how these
strange people live, what they eat and drink, how they build, and what
they worship; and will instruct as well as amuse.--_Boston Journal._

A whole granary of information, dressed up in such a form as to make it
nutritious for young minds, as well as attractive for youthful
appetites.--_Philadelphia Ledger._

       *       *       *       *       *

My Apingi Kingdom:

     With Life in the Great Sahara, and Sketches of the Chase of the
     Ostrich, Hyena, &c. By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated. 12mo,
     Cloth, $1.50.

In this book Mr. Du Chaillu relates the story of his sojourn in Apingi
Land, of which he was elected king by the kind-hearted and hospitable
natives. * * * We assure the reader that it is full of stirring
incidents and exciting adventures. Many chapters are exceedingly
humorous, and others are quite instructive. The chapter, for instance,
on the habits of the white and tree ants contains an interesting
contribution to natural history.--_N. Y. Herald._

       *       *       *       *       *

The Country of the Dwarfs.

     By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

Hail to thee, Paul! thou hero of single-handed combats with gorillas and
every imaginable beast that ever howled through the deserts, from the
elephant to the kangaroo; thou unscathed survivor of a thousand-and-one
vicissitudes by fire, field, and flood; thou glowing historian of thine
own superlatively glorious deeds: thou writer of books that make the
hairs of the children stand on every available end; thou proud king of
the Apingi savages of the equator; hail! we say.--_Utica Herald._

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, N. Y.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




ABBOTTS' ILLUSTRATED HISTORIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

HISTORICAL BIOGRAPHIES. By JACOB ABBOTT and JOHN S. C. ABBOTT. The
Volumes of this Series are printed and bound uniformly, and contain
numerous Illustrations. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00 per volume; Set in box, 32
vols., $32.00.

  Cyrus the Great.
  Darius the Great.
  Xerxes.
  Alexander the Great.
  Romulus.
  Hannibal.
  Pyrrhus.
  Julius Caesar.
  Cleopatra.
  Nero.
  Alfred the Great.
  William the Conqueror.
  Richard I.
  Richard II.
  Richard III.
  Margaret of Anjou.
  Mary Queen of Scots.
  Queen Elizabeth.
  Charles I.
  Charles II.
  Hernando Cortez.
  Henry IV.
  Louis XIV.
  Maria Antoinette.
  Madame Roland.
  Josephine.
  Joseph Bonaparte.
  Hortense.
  Louis Philippe.
  Genghis Khan.
  King Philip.
  Peter the Great.

For the convenience of buyers, these Histories have been divided into
Six Series, as follows:

I.

_Founders of Empires._

  CYRUS.
  DARIUS.
  XERXES.
  ALEXANDER.
  GENGHIS KHAN.
  PETER THE GREAT.

II.

_Heroes of Roman History._

  ROMULUS.
  HANNIBAL.
  PYRRHUS.
  JULIUS CAESAR.
  NERO.

III.

_Earlier British Kings and Queens._

  ALFRED.
  WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR.
  RICHARD I.
  RICHARD II.
  MARGARET OF ANJOU.

IV.

_Later British Kings and Queens._

  RICHARD III.
  MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS.
  ELIZABETH.
  CHARLES I.
  CHARLES II.

V.

_Queens and Heroines._

  CLEOPATRA.
  MARIA ANTOINETTE.
  JOSEPHINE.
  HORTENSE.
  MADAME ROLAND.

VI.

_Rulers of Later Times._

  KING PHILIP.
  HERNANDO CORTEZ.
  HENRY IV.
  LOUIS XIV.
  JOSEPH BONAPARTE.
  LOUIS PHILIPPE.

       *       *       *       *       *

ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S OPINION OF ABBOTTS' HISTORIES.

In a conversation with the President just before his death, Mr. Lincoln
said: "_I want to thank you and your brother for Abbotts' Series of
Histories. I have not education enough to appreciate the profound works
of voluminous historians; and if I had, I have no time to read them. But
your Series of Histories gives me, in brief compass, just that knowledge
of past men and events which I need. I have read them with the interest.
To them I am indebted for about all the historical knowledge I have._"

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




"_A book beyond the pale of criticism._"

  N. Y. DAILY GRAPHIC.

       *       *       *       *       *

Boy Travellers in the Far East.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADVENTURES OF

TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY

TO

JAPAN AND CHINA.

Illustrated, 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

A more attractive book for boys and girls can scarcely be
imagined.--_N. Y. Times._

The best thing for a boy who cannot go to China and Japan is to get this
book and read it.--_Philadelphia Ledger._

One of the richest and most entertaining books for young people, both in
text, illustrations, and binding, which has ever come to our
table.--_Providence Press._

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, N. Y.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




A BOOK FOR EVERYBODY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ninth Edition now Ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

=HOW TO GET STRONG, AND HOW TO STAY SO.= By WILLIAM BLAIKIE. With
Illustrations. 16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your book is timely. Its large circulation cannot fail to be of great
public benefit.--Rev. HENRY WARD BEECHER.

It is a book of extraordinary merit in matter and style, and does you
great credit as a thinker and writer.--Hon. CALVIN E. PRATT, _of the New
York Supreme Bench_.

A capital little treatise. It is the very book for ministers to
study.--Rev. THEODORE L. CUYLER, D.D., _in New York Evangelist_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




[Illustration]

PUZZLE PICTURE.


The envelope in the middle of this picture is supposed to contain a
number of letters. These letters taken from the envelope, and correctly
placed before the several objects shown in the picture, will transform
them into wild animals.




THROWING LIGHT.


I am intangible; can't be seen, yet can be felt; am apparent to the
taste--certainly to the touch, for I am pocketed daily, and there is no
one who would not gladly grasp me at any time when offered; at the same
time, I am almost always disagreeable, and very rarely desired. Too much
of me is dangerous, and yet how could any one have too many of me?
though even a sip is more than any one craves. No one was ever heard to
say he was tired of me, and yet how many tears I have made children
shed! I am the means of making people happy, yet I am dangerous under
certain circumstances, though, to be sure, if I make people sick, I also
make them well. Once I made a dreadful disturbance in New York, but yet
I doubt if there is any city in this country where more of me, if as
many, pass from people's hands.

I cost nothing, anybody can have me that wants me, yet no one if poor
can keep me, though I am easily bottled. You can't confine me, though
you can shut me out, for there is nothing to take hold of, but a little
package will hold many hundreds of me. I am a fluid, yet I am only air.
I can be made by a stroke of the pen, but the greatest care must be
exercised in making me properly; but when I am made artificially I am
not half as refreshing as when Nature makes me. You can carry me in your
pocket, but you can not take hold of me. You may swallow me, but you can
not touch me. What am I? Let some one else throw a light.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Answer to Charade.=--Answer to Charade on page 146 of HARPER'S YOUNG
PEOPLE No. 13 is "Chart."




[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

=Answer to the Elephant Puzzle.=--To solve the Elephant Puzzle presented
in No. 13 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE make two cuts with the scissors as
shown by the white lines in Fig. 1, and transpose the section thus cut
out, placing it in the position shown by the white lines of Fig 2.




[Illustration]


IT BEING DICK'S BIRTHDAY, HE IS ALLOWED TO STAY HOME FROM SCHOOL.

  1. Exploring the closets.
  2. Bread and butter, with plenty of sugar.
  3. Plays horse with the parlor chairs.
  4. "I've sawed the chair. What will mother say?"
  5. Ornaments the walls.

_Result: On Dick's next Birthday he will go to School._





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, February 3, 1880, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, FEB 3, 1880 ***

***** This file should be named 28344.txt or 28344.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/3/4/28344/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
