The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Treatise on Foreign Teas, by Hugh Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Treatise on Foreign Teas
       Abstracted From An Ingenious Work, Lately Published,
       Entitled An Essay On the Nerves

Author: Hugh Smith

Release Date: April 10, 2009 [EBook #28549]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TREATISE ON FOREIGN TEAS ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






A

TREATISE

ON

FOREIGN TEAS,

_ABSTRACTED_

FROM

An ingenious WORK, lately published,

ENTITLED

_AN ESSAY ON THE NERVES_;


ILLUSTRATING

Their efficient, formal, material, and final Causes; with the Manner of
the Liquids being corrupted by corrosive Acids, and stagnated by obtuse
Alkalies:

IN WHICH ARE

OBSERVATIONS ON MINERAL WATERS,
COFFEE, CHOCOLATE, _&c._

AND

An Investigation of the Nature and Preparation of Foreign Teas, with
their pernicious Effects in debilitating the Nervous System:

INTERSPERSED WITH

THE AUTHOR'S REMARKS,

Arising from an Analysis of such Preparations as may be most
beneficially substituted for INDIA TEA.

THIS SELECTION, containing the Sentiments of the many eminent Physical
Professors who have written on Foreign Teas, is designed to shew, by
the most forcible Arguments and distinguished Authorities, the extreme
Danger to which the Public are exposed from the continual Use of an
Article so pernicious and destructive to the Constitution.

[Price Six-pence.]




Dr. SOLANDER's
SANATIVE ENGLISH
TEA.

UNIVERSALLY APPROVED and RECOMMENDED

BY THE MOST

EMINENT PHYSICIANS,
IN PREFERENCE TO FOREIGN TEA,
As the most Pleasing and POWERFUL RESTORATIVE,

IN ALL
NERVOUS DISORDERS,
HITHERTO DISCOVERED.

Our first aliment at breakfast, being designed to recruit the waste of
the body from the night's insensible perspiration; an inquiry is
important, whether INDIA TEA, which the Faculty unanimously concur in
pronouncing a Species of Slow Poison, that unnerves and wears the
substance of the solids, is adequate to such a purpose--If it be
not--the inquiry is further necessary to find out a proper substitute.
If an Apozem PROFESSIONALLY approved and recommended for its nutritive
qualities, as a general aliment, has claim to public attention,
certainly Dr. SOLANDER'S TEA, so sanctioned, is the most proper morning
and afternoon's beverage.

Prepared for the Proprietor by an eminent Botanist.

Sold Wholesale and Retail by the Proprietor's Agent, Mr. T. GOLDING,
at his Warehouse for Patent Medicines, No. 42, Cornhill, London; and
Retail by Mr. F. NEWBERY, No. 45, St. Paul's Church-Yard; Messrs.
BAILEY'S, Cockspur-street; Mr. W. BACON, No. 150, Oxford-street; Mr.
OVERTON, No. 47, New Bond-street; and by Mr. J. FULLER, South Side of
Covent Garden. Also by the Venders of Patent Medicines in most Cities
and Towns, in England, Ireland, and Scotland.

Sold in Packets at 2s. 9d. and in Canisters at 10s. 6d. each, Duty
included.

Liberal Allowance for Exportation, to Country Venders, and to Schools.

The native and exotic Plants which chiefly compose Dr. Solander's Tea,
being gathered and dried with peculiar attention, to the preserving of
their sanative Virtues, must render them far more efficacious than many
similar Preparations, which by being reduced to Powder, must have those
Qualities destroyed they might otherwise possess.

A Packet of this Tea at 2s. 9d. is sufficient to breakfast one Person a
Month.




ADVERTISEMENT TO THE FOREIGN TEAS.


Having, in the preceding enquiry, traced, from the system of the
nerves, that on their state the health of the constitution chiefly
depends, our immediate concern is next to ascertain what kind of food
we either adopt from choice, custom, or necessity, is the most likely
to destroy the economy of the nerves. And as Foreign Teas have long
been censured as being the cause of many disorders which arise from the
nerves being disarranged or debilitated, an impartial enquiry is here
made into the nature, preparation, and effects, of these Teas. By this
investigation it will appear, that Teas imported from China and India
are the most injurious of any beverage that can possibly be taken as a
general and constant aliment. But, not prematurely to anticipate any
part of the following subject, the Reader is most respectfully referred
to the following pages for further evidence.


INTRODUCTION.

As two of the four meals that form our daily subsistence are chiefly
composed of tea, an enquiry into what kind is the most salutary must be
as necessary as it may prove interesting and beneficial; for, on the
choice of proper or improper tea must greatly depend the health or
disease of the public in general. To this may be attributed the
constitution being either preserved from that innumerable train of
afflictions, which arise from too great a relaxation of the nervous
system by acute distempers, misfortunes, &c. or being so debilitated by
excessive drinking of India Tea, as to render it alone the prey of
melancholy, palsies, epilepsies, night-mares, swoonings, flatulencies,
low spirits, hysteric and hypochondriacal affections. For tea that is
pernicious is not only poison to those who, from any cause of corporal
debility or mental affliction, are liable to the above diseases;--but
it is also too frequently found to render the most healthy victims of
these alarming complaints. And as nervous disorders are the most
complicated in their distressing circumstances, the greater care should
be taken to avoid such aliments as produce them, as well as to choose
those which are the most proper for their relief and prevention. Those
who are now suffering from the inconsiderate use of improper tea, what
pitiable objects of distress and disease do they not represent for the
caution of those who may timely preserve themselves? Nervous disorders
are the most formidable, by being the most numerous in their attacks
upon the human frame. Every moment, comparatively speaking, produces
some new distress of mind or body. The imagination cannot avoid the
horrors of its own creation, while the memory is harrassed with the
shadows of departed pleasures, which serve but to encrease the pain of
existing torments. All the endearments of life are vanished to the poor
wretch who sees himself surrounded by the spectres of dismay, terror,
despondency, and melancholy. And such is but the thousandth part of the
afflictions that are to be avoided or produced by the choice of the
prevailing beverage of tea. Not only the innumerable train of nervous
afflictions, but all those disorders that arise from an improper
temperature of the fluids, may be produced from the action, corrosion,
and stimulation of pernicious teas. In proportion to the state of the
fluids, in particular constitutions, they may either prove too relaxing
or astringent, too condensing or attenuating, and too acrid or viscid;
for India teas, that to some constitutions are very diluting, may
produce in others contrary effects: therefore such should be chosen as
possess a combination of quality that may render them, as nearly as
possible, to a general specific. But this cannot be well expected where
one single ingredient is used, and that is distinguished for its
particular qualities, which, if wholesome, can only be such to those
whose fluids are so, by nature or circumstances, as to require such a
particular assistant; for to every other state of the fluids they must
be pernicious. It is consequently evident, that if teas imported from
India have any virtues, they cannot be such as to render them worthy of
being universally adopted as a general aliment. If wholesome to a few,
they must be pernicious to the rest of mankind, with whose
constitutions they have no congeniality, medicinal or alimentary
virtue. Supposing they may possess some physical properties, like all
other medicines, they can only benefit such disorders as nature
particularly formed them to relieve. Those who have been advocates for
their positive virtues have, in this instance, but more confirmed the
impropriety of adopting them as a general morning and evening beverage.
This only explains more evidently the cause of so many being injured,
where one is benefited, by drinking constantly India tea. There cannot
possibly be stated a more self-evident proposition than where any
simple or combined matter is adopted for a particular purpose, it must,
in every opposite instance, prove injurious. In proportion, therefore,
to such particular qualities, they are the more improper to be
generally and indiscriminately adopted. This observation, although it
may be applied to every art or science, is still more applicable to
physic. Thus is it found that no medicine can be safely taken as a
constant and general aliment. Even those who, at first, might find it
beneficial in their respective complaints, have too frequently found
the constant use of it afterwards hurtful to the constitution it had
before relieved. It may be deduced, from the above considerations, that
India teas, however physically beneficial, to allow them all their best
of praise, must be as an aliment generally injurious. Instead of
preserving health, they sow innumerable disorders, which can only be
cured by substituting a beverage from such salutary native or exotic
herbs as are formed for the particular afflictions the former have so
pitiably brought upon the too greater part of mankind.

As almost every disorder to which the human frame is liable may be
retarded in its cure, if not confirmed in the constitution, by the
power of secretion being weakened, India teas are the most dangerous
that can be possibly used as a general beverage. By too much dilating
the canals, the concussive force of the sides is increased, which
destroys the oscillatory motion, and thus are the secretions altered
and disturbed; and as the action of medicines consists in removing
impediments to the equal motion of the fluids, the greater care should
be taken to abstain from all food or drink that may increase those
impediments. That India teas not only increase but occasion such evils
is evident, from their having been experienced to relax the tone and
reduce the consistence of the solids. As the powers of secretion depend
upon the just equilibrium of force between the solids and the liquids,
the latter must, in the above instance, make a greater _impetus_ upon
one part than another, from which proceeds that morbid state so justly
and emphatically termed Disease. Thus, according to the learned
Boerhaave, to heal is to take away the disease from the body; that is,
to remove and expel the causes which hinder the equal motion or
transflux. Medicines, he says, are those mechanical instruments by
which an artist may remove the causes of the balance being destroyed,
and thus re-instate the lost equilibrium of solids and liquids. He
therefore concludes, that a medicine supposes a flowing of the humours
or liquids; that it operates mechanically; that it acts only mediately;
that its good or bad effects depend entirely on the bulk, motion, and
figure of the acting particles, and that the destruction of the balance
must be deduced from the solids. So that, as it has been found that the
solids are wasted and impaired by the constant use of India tea, the
chief cause of disease, in general, may be attributed to such a
pernicious custom; even the properties which he ascribes to medicines
are in direct opposition to what have been found to be the prevailing
effects of teas imported into Europe. It is consequently evident, that
the drinking of this injurious tea being not only, in its operation,
productive of disease in its general sense, but also repugnant to the
salutary operation of medicine, it is the most dangerous beverage that
can be generally taken; for it appears, from the above consideration,
that its pernicious effects are not confined to any system of
disorders; it is found inimical to the first principles of health, and
therefore may be justly dreaded as capable of being the source of
disease indefinitely understood.

Having thus stated, as an Introduction to this Essay on Teas, the
general tendency of those imported from India, under the titles of
Green, Souchong, and Bohea, to injure the constitution, the following
pages will be particularly devoted to the consideration of the nature,
preparation, and manner of using, and the effects of such foreign teas.


ESSAY ON TEAS.

There is, perhaps, no subject on which there has been more declamation,
for and against its properties and effects, than those of teas imported
into this country by the companies trading from the different maritime
nations of Europe to China and India. Nor has there been a controversy
in which the health of the community has been so materially concerned,
that has afforded so little direction of moment to those who would wish
to ascertain the truth of such teas being either beneficial, injurious,
or innocent in their effects. Amidst a mass of declamatory assertion so
little intelligence is to be gained, that those who have had the
greatest interest in being informed of the real qualities of teas, have
most abandoned the enquiry before they obtained the least knowledge of
what they sought. Either perplexed with abstruse science, or
dissatisfied with assertion equally unfounded and unsupported,
thousands have discontinued the research, and committed themselves to
fatal experience. Thus have too many acquired a knowledge of the
detrimental qualities of teas, by the ruin of their constitution. To
avoid therefore such an inconvenience, the greatest care will be taken
to prevent an indiscriminate reference to authors, whose sentiments can
neither sanction adduced arguments or illustrate technical allusions.
The enquiry will be made with some reference to science, but more to
convince by demonstration than to confound by abstruse perplexities. So
that, while empty declamation is avoided, the principles of truth are
meant to be investigated by reason and experience. With this view, the
Nature of Green, Souchong, and Bohea teas is first considered. To judge
of the nature of these herbs with equal candour and propriety, it may
be necessary to consider their qualities in relation to what are
ascribed them, and what have been discovered by their analysis, and
what have resulted from experience. The virtues that have been ascribed
to them are chiefly, being a greatful diluent in health, and salutary
in sickness, by attenuating viscid juices, promoting natural
excretions, exciting appetite, and proving particularly serviceable in
fevers, immoderate sleepiness, and head-aches after a debauch. It is
also added to the list of their ascribed virtues, that there is no
plant yet known, the infusions of which pass more freely from the body,
or more speedily excite the spirits. To a person of any physical
knowledge, these qualities will either appear contradictory in
themselves, or rather ultimately injurious, than absolutely beneficial.
As the full examination of these assumed qualities, by the rules of
science, would require a volume, instead of a few pages, which the
limits of this Essay will afford, the enquiry must be made as
perspicuous as the necessity of brevity will admit. Allowing they are
diluting in health, their constant use may so attenuate the liquids as
to destroy their natural force and tensity. But Boerhaave says, there
is no proper diluent but water; it is therefore evident it is the
water, and not the tea, which is the diluting medium. With respect to
its being an attenuative of viscid humours, it can never possess this
virtue from being a diluent, for an attenuant acts _specially_ on
the particles, by diminishing their bulk, while the diluent acts upon
the whole mass of the fluid.

The general body of the liquid may be diluted while the viscid humours
remain unresolved. Indeed, the operation of an attenuant is not easily
known; for many are surprised that a slight inflammation should be so
difficult to dissipate. But their surprise would cease, were they to
consider, that medicines act more generally upon the whole body than
abstractedly upon the part affected. Suppose to attenuate some
coagulated blood, six grains of volatile salt were given, how small a
proportion must come to the part diseased, when these grains, by the
laws of circulation, will mix with the entire mass of blood, consisting
at least of thirty pounds!

Teas being said to promote natural excretions, can be no recommendation
of what is generally used; for this constant effect must render them
too copious, and thus, according to all physical experience, the blood
must be thickened in the greater vessels, which frequently terminates
in an atrophy.

The appetite being excited by the drinking of tea, is more a proof of
its attrition of the solids than any stimulus to a wholesome desire of
food. This quality accounts for the acrimonious effects too many have
experienced by its use. Many have not only had their blood
impoverished, but corrupted by the constant drinking of these teas.
Whether it arises from any positive acrimonious salt it naturally
possesses, or from any acquired corrosiveness from its mode of drying,
is not here necessary to enquire: it is only requisite to state that a
pernicious effect is too fatally experienced by those who are
unfortunately its slaves.

How India tea can be serviceable in fevers is not easy to be
understood; for, if it has that effect upon the nerves to excite
watchfulness, it must greatly tend to increase, instead of diminish
feverish symptoms. Dr. Buchan attributes even one cause of the palsy to
drinking much tea or coffee, &c. and, in a note, he subjoins: "Many
people imagine that tea has no tendency to hurt the nerves, and that
drinking the same quantity of warm water would be equally pernicious.
This, however, seems to be a mistake, many persons drinking three or
four cups of warm milk and water daily, without feeling any bad
consequences; yet the same quantity of tea will make their hands shake
for twenty-four hours. That tea affects the nerves is likewise evident
from its preventing sleep, occasioning giddiness, dimness of the sight,
sickness, &c."

With regard to India teas possessing the quality of exciting the
spirits, this, like every other stimulus, either by constant use loses
its effect, or unnerves the system it is meant to strengthen. The
nerves through which the animal spirits circulate being, like the
strings of a violin or harpsichord, too frequently braced, lose, at
last, their natural tensity, and thus render the human frame one system
of debility.

Having thus, as briefly as possible, stated that even their ascribed
virtues are either derogatory to all physical principle, or else
destructive to the constitution, from their constant use, the nature of
India teas is next considered, with respect to what appears to be their
chief component parts, from analyzation.

Teas have been found to consist principally of narcotic salts, some
astringent oil, and earth. These being found in greater quantities in
bohea than in green teas, those who have very sensible and elastic
nerves must be seized with a greater tremor after drinking the former
than the latter. The continual and regular influx of the nervous juices
is stopped by their component fibres being contracted from the
roughness and restringency of such decoctions. The force of the heat,
or the brain's propulsion of its nervous juice, being inferior to the
resistance of the whole ramified fibres thus encreased by the sudden
contraction and unequal motion, the flow of the animal spirits must be
greatly impeded and disordered. In fact, the influx suffers a
suspension, until the fibres, by relaxing again, admit their empty
tubes to receive their appropriated liquids. Thus even green tea must,
especially if taken strong and often, stop the natural circulation of
humours, and produce the attendant defects of depression of spirits,
deficiency of secretion, loss of appetite, decrease of strength, waste
of body, and, finally, a total want of effective vigour in all the
animal functions. But, as above observed, bohea tea possessing in
greater quantity the pernicious ingredients, the vessels are thrown
into momentary spasms and convulsive vibrations, by the relaxing power
of the narcotic salts, and the contracting force of the astringent oil
and earth. And here it must be noticed, that oil mixed with salt is
rendered astringent: thus all vegetables, where a mixture of both
prevails, are reckoned stimulating. The narcotic power of the salt is
derived from its hindering the flux of the animal spirits through the
nerves.

The stomach and bowels being weakened by the above causes, windy
complaints or flatulencies are consequently produced. This caused Dr.
Whytt, in his advice to patients afflicted with such diseases, to
desire they would abstain from India tea, as one of the flatulent
aliments chiefly to be avoided.

If the slightest external motion alone produces the following changes
in the body, what effects may not be ascribed to the constant use of
teas, which we find, as before stated, operate internally? A person in
perfect health, having his nostrils only touched with a feather, cannot
avoid his body being so convulsed as to produce what is commonly called
sneezing. But if the number of muscles agitated, the force and
straining of the body by sneezing, are considered; the slightness of
the cause must excite no little astonishment; for this action is
occasioned by the muscles of the scapula, abdomen, diaphragm, thorax,
lungs, &c. and if the sneezing continues, an universal explosion of the
liquids ensues: tears, mucus, saliva, and urine, are excreted. Thus,
without any moist, cold, hot, dry, sulphur, salt, or any other internal
or external application, an involuntary motion of all the solids and
fluids is produced by a feather touching, in the slightest manner, the
inside of our nostrils. But Boerhaave relates further, "That if
sneezing continues a long time, as it will by taking one hundredth part
of a grain of euphorbium up the nose, grievous and continued
convulsions will arise, head-aches, involuntary excretions of urine,
&c., vomitings, febrile heats, and other dreadful symptoms; and, at
last, death itself will ensue." It is therefore evident that the
slightest bodies produce the greatest changes in the human frame.

Such is the power of certain particles upon the nerves, that the
stomach will be thrown into convulsions that almost threaten an
inversion, by taking only four ounces of a wine in which so small a
portion of glass of antimony as one scruple is infused in eight pounds
of the former. And what is still more remarkable is, that the glass of
antimony remains not only undissolved, but, comparatively speaking,
undiminished in its weight.

These being a few of the fatal afflictions which experience shews to be
frequently the consequence of drinking India teas, its injurious nature
is too evident to require any further investigation of either their
ascribed or positive qualities. The next subject to be considered,
relative to India teas, is their Preparation.

Among the different authors of any consequence that have written on the
culture, preparation, and virtues of foreign teas, may be ranked
Kampfer, Postlethwaite, Dr. Cunningham, Priestley, Lemery, Franchus,
Meister, and Sigesbeck; as the limits of this Treatise will not permit
a detail of observations from the whole of these writers, remarks can
only be selected from the most principal of them. Most of the above,
and many other, authors agree that the leaves are spread upon iron
plates, and thus dried with several little furnaces contained in one
room. This mode of preparation must greatly tend to deprive the shrub
of its native juices, and to contract a rust from the iron on which it
is dried. This may probably be the cause of vitriol turning tea into an
inky blackness. We therefore do not think with Boerhaave, that the
preparers employ green vitriol for improving the colour of the finer
green teas. It may however be concluded, from the colour of bohea,
souchong, and such as are called black teas, that they may be thus
tinctured, by the means of vitriol, after they have been dried upon the
iron plates in the furnace room; and this may likewise particularly
cause that astringent quality which is more experienced in all the
black than any of the green teas. According to Sigesbeck, the colours
of these teas are artificial; so that if these pernicious arts are used
even to give the tea a particular colour, there is no difficulty in
ascribing the cause of their injurious effects.

That the native virtues of these teas are liable to considerable
perversion is evident from the manner in which Meister relates they are
prepared. He says the leaves are put into a hot kettle just emptied of
boiling water, and that they are kept in this closely covered until
they are cold, when they are strewed upon the hot plates above
mentioned for drying. It is easy to conceive how the virtues of a leaf,
however salutary by nature, must be destroyed by such a process. Being
thus put into a steaming kettle, and suffered to remain there until
they are cold, must cause the greatest part of their Virtues to
evaporate, and the leaves to imbibe an unwholesome taint from the
effluvia of the steaming metal. It cannot, therefore, be ascertained
whether teas that are imported in Europe, after such a mutating
preparation, have the least remains of their original odour or flavour,
no more than they have of their qualities; but, on the contrary, it
seems impossible but that the original nature of this shrub is entirely
destroyed by an artificial preparation. Some falsely suppose that this
species of management is only to soften such of the leaves as are grown
too dry, and are therefore liable to break in the curling; but this
will evidently appear not the cause, when it is considered that the
greater part of the teas must dry in such a hot climate while they are
gathering: and as they are particularly anxious to send them in as
curious a curled state as possible, such teas must be thus moistened
again, in order to curl them afterwards in that perfect manner which is
performed on the iron plates of the furnace.

The opinion, therefore, of teas deriving their green colour from being
dried upon copper being founded on a misrepresentation of the manner in
which they are really prepared, a few observations upon the subject are
indispensibly necessary. For those who have always understood that the
detrimental qualities of foreign teas were the consequence of their
being dried upon copper, may perhaps imagine they cannot be so
pernicious if they were dried upon iron; but this opinion cannot be
entertained by any persons who have the least knowledge of the manner
in which the vegetable acid will corrode iron. Those who are acquainted
with culinary processes must know in what manner the acid of onions
will operate upon any steel instrument; it corrodes a knife so as to
turn the onions black with the particles eaten away from the edge and
the face of the blade. To avoid this unwholsome and unseemly
inconvenience, a wooden instrument is generally used in all instances
where onions form a part of the cookery appendages. It is consequently
evident, that although iron utensils are now greatly used instead of
copper, yet many injurious effects may happen from their being liable
to be corroded by the acid of several vegetables. And if the nitrous
acid of the air will corrode iron so as to cause rust, when it will not
produce the proportionate effect upon copper, it is a demonstration
that iron is the most liable to such a corruption. The corrosions of
copper are undoubtedly pernicious; but the damage that tea would derive
from its being dried upon sheets of this metal would not operate so
injuriously to those who drink it as it does now by lying dried upon
iron. For the latter bring more liable to the power of the mineral,
vegetable, or animal acid, must impart more particles of its reduced
calax to the tea than copper would. And, in order to shew how
susceptible of corrosion iron is, the following instance is farther
adduced: in Ireland, where some persons practise the art of tanning
leather with fern, which possesses a very strong acid, particular care
is taken to avoid using any iron vessels in the tannage, lest the
colour of the leather should be blackened by the corroding particle of
the metal. As it is the peculiar property of iron or steely particles,
even in their most perfect state, to operate as too great an astringent
for an aliment that is taken twice a day constantly, tea, when dried
upon it, must be rendered proportionably pernicious. But admitting that
the popular opinion of their being dried upon copper was just, the teas
must be rendered proportionably injurious to the quantity of copperas
or crude vitriol they imbibe from their acidity corroding the metal.
Preparations of steel, that are, in many instances, considered as most
salutary, yet in all pulmonary disorders the most eminent physicians
have deemed them exceedingly dangerous. And in a country, like Great
Britain, Holland, and other places, where a cloudy atmosphere, caused
from their marshy soil or watery situation, renders most of the
inhabitants subject to complaints of the lungs, foreign teas,
contaminated by these iron corrosions, must be particularly
detrimental. It is therefore, from these considerations, evident, that
foreign teas, by being dried upon iron, have their bad qualities so
increased as to render them the most pernicious of any morning and
evening liquid that has yet been taken.----To return from whence we
began this short digression.

It is remarkable that no satisfactory account has yet been given in
what the bohea differs from the green tea. Dr. Cunningham, physician to
the English settlement at Cimsan, and Kampfer assert, that the bohea is
the leaves of the first collection.

This, however, being contrary to the general report of all travellers,
that none of the first produce is brought to Europe, must be
discredited; for these are all preserved for the Princes, to whom they
are sold, even in China, at an immense price. Another proof is, that
the boheas are brought here in the most considerable quantities, at a
price greatly inferior to what even the second, third, and fourth crops
are sold for in China. This not only evinces how inferior in quality
the black tea must be, but also how little they are valued among those
who must be acquainted with their properties.

Although the European dealers divide the green teas chiefly into three
sorts, and the boheas into five, yet it is unknown from what province
they are brought, of what crop they are the produce, and to which of
the Chinese sorts they belong.

Added to their abuse of preparation may be that of their package. It is
impossible but to know that their bad qualities must be considerably
augmented by being so closely packed, for such a length of time, in
such slight wooden chests, lined with a composition of wood and lead.
Considerable quantities are likewise damaged by salt water and other
causes, which, by the management of the tea dealers, are mostly mixed,
and sold under different denominations. How the tea must be affected by
the corrosion of the lead and tin by the marine acid, those of the
least chemical knowledge will easily determine. To what danger must,
therefore, the constitution of those who are in the constant habit of
drinking such an empoisoned drug be exposed, may easily be imagined.
Surely, when all these circumstances are considered respecting the
pernicious mode of preparation, and particularly the poisonous
qualities they are also liable to contract from the nature of their
package, every person must be convinced to what a loss of health, if
not of life, the constant use of such teas must expose them. Such
evidence of their deleterious tendency is almost sufficient to alarm
mankind against so prevailing an evil, without any further arguments;
but as health is too precious not to require every possible proof that
can persuade us to avoid what so immediately threatens our existence,
the following arguments and testimonies of the bad qualities of foreign
teas must not be omitted. Previous, however, to an investigation of
their effects, it may be necessary to say a few words respecting


THE MANNER OF USING.

Foreign tea, as before observed, being taken as two principal meals of
our daily aliment, is undoubtedly one great reason of the constitution
of the people having suffered an entire change in its system. That
vigour, spirits, and longevity, which characterised us in the last
century, is totally subverted; disease, dismay, and debility, now lead
us prematurely to the grave, where we end an existence too deplorable
to excite the least desire for a longer continuance. Dr. Priestley
states, very justly, in his Medical Essays, that it is curious to
observe the revolution which hath taken place, within this century, in
the constitutions of the inhabitants of Europe. Inflammatory diseases
more rarely occur, and in general are much less rapid and violent in
their progress than formerly; nor do they admit of the same
antiphlogistic method of cure which was practised with success a
hundred years ago. The experienced Sydenham makes forty ounces of blood
the mean quantity to be drawn in the acute rheumatism; whereas this
disease, as it now appears in the London hospitals, will not bear above
half that evacuation. Vernal intermittents are frequently cured by a
vomit and the bark, without venaesection, which is a proof that, at
present, they are accompanied with fewer symptoms of inflammation than
they were wont to be. This advantageous change, however, is more than
counterbalanced by the introduction of a numerous class of nervous
aliments, in a greater measure, unknown to our ancestors, but which now
prevail universally, and are complicated with almost every other
distemper. The bodies of men are enfeebled and enervated; and it is not
uncommon to observe very high degrees of irritability under the
external appearance of great strength and robustness. The
hypochondriac, palsies, cachexies, dropsies, and all those diseases
which arise from laxity and debility, are, in our days, endemic every
where; and the hysterics, which used to be peculiar to the women, as
the name itself indicates, now attacks both sexes indiscriminately. It
is evident that so great a revolution could not be effected without the
concurrence of many causes; but amongst these, I apprehend, the present
general use of tea holds the first and principal rank. The second cause
may perhaps be allotted to excess in spirituous liquors. This
pernicious custom owes its rise to the former, which, by the lowness
and depression of spirits it occasions, renders it almost necessary to
have recourse to what is cordial and exhilarating; and hence proceeds
those odious and disgraceful habits of intemperance with which too many
of the softer sex of every degree are now, alas! chargeable. These are
the sentiments of a character distinguished for his elaborate
researches and judicious discoveries in almost every branch of liberal
science. It may therefore be safely concluded, that the general manner
of using India tea morning and evening has been, and is, the principal
cause of the greater part of the diseases with which the natives of
Europe are now afflicted. When it is considered that the first meal
which is taken to recruit the body, after the loss it sustains from the
insensible perspiration of the preceding night, and to prepare it for
the avocations of the succeeding day, is India tea, who can be
surprised that nature should rapidly become the victim of disease?
Thus, instead of being supported by nutritious aliment, its nerves are
enfeebled, its spirits diminished, and all its functions enveloped with
the gloom of melancholy. Even in the afternoon, when nature is
exhausted by care and fatigue, we fly for refreshment to tea, which,
instead of bracing, still further relaxes the unnerved system. Such are
the evil effects of the imprudent manner in which this pernicious drug
is so constantly and universally used. But how must these evils appear
in their extent, when the following view is taken of India teas, with
regard to their variety of injurious EFFECTS.

In all the physical experiments that have been made upon India teas,
there is, perhaps, none that shews its acid astringency more than one
tried by the above writer, Dr. Priestley. Endeavouring to trace the
differences and ascertain the astringency and bitterness of vegetables
reciprocally bear to each other, he imagined he had found they were
distinct and separate properties, by the following experiment: Taking
two pieces of calf-skin just stripped from the calf, he immerged them
in cold infusions of green and bohea tea; at the expiration of a week
he found they were hard and curled up, and that there was no sensible
difference between them. He therefore concluded, that this experiment
afforded a striking proof of India tea differently affecting a dead and
a living fibre; this he considered as the greatest effect of a
medicine. But, with deference to so distinguished an author, I cannot
but attribute this astringency of the skin to the particular properties
of India tea; for all physical as well as medical experience proves
that vegetable produce afford some that are astringent, and others that
are relaxant, of the dead as well as the living fibre. Oak bark is
equally astringent, and hardens the fibres of the hide, as well as it
braces the living nerve of our bodies; therefore the effect produced by
the India tea upon the dead skin only proves, what we have before
related, that an infusion of it has a peculiar effect, which, being too
frequently applied to the nerves, destroys their tensity by their fine
fibres being either broken or relaxed by overbracing. Were any
astringent to be constantly taken, it must ultimately produce more or
less such an effect; so that while the above experiment of the learned
Philosopher demonstrates that India tea has the power of astringing the
dead as well as the living fibres, it does not prove that astringency
bitterness are separate qualities. On the contrary, bitterness seems to
be the characteristic taste of all that has the tendency to contract
whatever is the subject of its application. Thus galls, bark, rhubarb,
camomile tea, &c. &c. are all bitter and astringent. It is, therefore,
the immoderate use of such an astringent that ultimately relaxes and
debilitates: like the too frequent bracing of a drum, or any other
stringed musical instrument, destroys its tensity, the body is unnerved
by the overstretching of its fibres. Although we sometimes differ with
the celebrated Doctor in part of the conclusion he has drawn from his
experiment, yet the following sentiments so perfectly coincide with all
our observations upon India teas, that we are happy to have the
opportunity of corroborating our own with the sentiments of so eminent
a Philosopher. He says, from his experiments, "it appears that green
and bohea teas are equally bitter, strike precisely the same black
tinge with green vitriol, and are alike astringent on the simple fibre.
From this exact similarity in so many circumstances, one should be led
to suppose that there would be no sensible diversity in their operation
on the living body; but the fact is otherwise: green tea is much more
sedative and relaxant than bohea; and the finer the species of tea, the
more debilitating and pernicious are its effects, as I have frequently
observed in others, and experienced in myself. This seems to be a proof
that the mischiefs ascribed to this oriental vegetable do not arise
from the warm vehicle by which it is conveyed into the stomach, but
chiefly from its own peculiar qualities." Dr. Hugh Smith, in his
Treatise on the Action of the Muscles, justly says, that an infusion of
India tea not only diminishes, but destroys the bodily functions.
_Thea infusum, nervo musculove ranae admotum, vires motices minuit
perdit._ Newman, in his Chemistry, says, when fresh gathered, teas
are said to be narcotic, and to disorder the senses; the Chinese,
therefore, cautiously abstain from their use until they have been kept
twelve months. The reason attributed for bohea tea being less injurious
than green is, being more hastily dried, the pernicious qualities more
copiously evaporate.

"Tea," says Dr. Hugh Smith, in his Dissertation upon the Nerves, "is
very hurtful both to the stomach and nerves. Phrensies, deliriums,
vigilation, idiotism, apoplexies, and other disorders of the brain, are
all produced by the nerves being thus disarranged and debilitated. If
the digestive faculty of the stomach be weakened, the body, failing of
recruiting juices, must tend to emaciation, and the whole frame be
rendered one system of distress and infirmity. The nerves, being thus
deprived of a sufficiency of their animal spirits, must become languid,
and leave every sense void of the first means of conveying to the mind
the only enjoyments of our temporal existence.

"But if there be any class of persons to whom India tea is more
particularly hurtful than to any other, it is that which includes the
studious and sedentary, and especially those who are enfeebled with
gout, stone, and rheumatism; age, accident, or avocation, cause many
persons to be unfortunately ranked amongst those of the latter
description. These, from their intensity of thought, want of exercise,
injurious position of body, respiration of unwholesome air, and a
variety of other causes, have not only their animal spirits exhausted,
but their liquids corrupted from the loss of a necessary circulation.
With these evils India tea operates as an absolute poison. Indeed, it
frequently renders those incurable, who might, by other means, have
been relieved.

"When a view is taken of the dismal effects produced by India teas, the
mind seems to be bewildered in searching for the cause of using so
generally a drug that is so universally destructive. It chiefly
originated in a fundamental mistake of physical principles. About the
time that India tea was introduced to Europe, a grievous error crept
into the practice of medical professors; they falsely imagined that
health could not be more promoted than by increasing the fluidity of
the blood. This opinion once established, it is no wonder that mankind,
with one accord, adopted the infusion of India tea, which was then a
novelty to Europe, as the best means of obtaining the above effect. By
the advice of Bentikoe chiefly was the pernicious custom of drinking
warm liquors, night and day, established. To this man, and the
introduction of India tea, may be ascribed that revolution in the
health of Europeans which has happened since the last century. The
present age, therefore, have great cause to lament, in what they suffer
in nervous complaints, that their forefathers did not attend more to
the scientific and judicious advice of the illustrious Duncan,
Boerhaave, and the whole school of Leyden, who proscribed this error.
Although they could not entirely prevent this physical abuse, yet their
zealous endeavours did, in some degree, at first impede its progress;
but, however, so powerful did novelty plead in favour of India teas,
that, at last, general custom and prejudice bore away every barrier
that had been erected by these learned and experienced physicians. This
error, instead of diminishing, has increased: most valetudinarians are
now of opinion that a thick blood is the sole cause of their
complaints; with this impression they adopt what they call the diluent
beverage of India teas. It can scarcely be imagined how many disorders
this practice produces; it may be justly termed the box of Pandora,
without even hope remaining at the bottom." Tissot says, "They are the
prolific sources of hypochondriac melancholy, which both adds strength
to and is one of the worst of disorders." He adds, "with regard to
studious men, who are naturally weak and feeble, such warm beverages
are more hurtful to them than to others; for they are not troubled with
an over thick, but, on the contrary, too thin a blood. You are all
aware," continues he, "respectable auditors, that the density of the
blood is as the motion of the solids; the fibres of the learned are
relaxed, their motions are slow, and their blood, of consequence, thin.
Bleed a ploughman and a doctor at the same time; from the first there
will flow a thick blood, resembling inflammatory blood, almost solid,
and of a deep red; the blood of the latter will be either of a faint
red, or without any colour, soft, gelatinous, and will almost entirely
turn them to water. Your blood, therefore, men of learning, should not
be dissolved, but brought to a consistence; and you should in general
be moderate in the article of drinking, and cautiously avoid warm
spirituous liquors.

"Amongst the favorite beverages of the learned," the same Tissot
observes, "is the infusion of that famous leaf, so well known by the
name of India tea, which, to our great detriment, has every year, for
these two centuries past, been constantly imported from China and
Japan. This most pernicious gift first destroys the strength of the
stomach, and if it be not soon laid aside, equally destroys that of the
viscera, the blood, the nerves, and of the whole body; so that
malignant and all chronical disorders will appear to increase,
especially nervous disorders, in proportion as the use of India tea
becomes common; and you may easily form a judgment, from the diseases
that prevail in every country, whether the inhabitants are lovers of
tea or the contrary. How happy would it be for Europe, if, by unanimous
consent, the importation of this infamous leaf was prohibited, which is
endued only with a corrosive force derived from the acrimony of a gum
with which it is pregnant."

Having thus considered the dismal and too frequently fatal consequences
of the nerves being affected, it is presumed this part of the Essay
cannot be more interestingly concluded than by a summary of the
distinct symptomatic effects attending, more or less, complaints of the
nerves; and although the following symptoms are alarming with regard to
their number and variety, yet the reader may be assured there is not
one specified but what is either the immediate or ultimate effect of a
nervous affection, and which is too frequently the consequence of the
violent astringency of foreign tea taken injudiciously as a constant
aliment:--A faintness, succeeded with a delusive vision of motes,
mists, and clouds, falling backwards and forwards before the
distempered sight--A yawning, gaping, stretching out of the arms,
twitching of the nerves, sneezing, drowsiness, and contraction of the
breast--Dulness, debility, distress, and dismay, with a great sense of
weariness--A wan complexion, a languid eye, a loathing stomach, and an
uncertain appetite, which, if not immediately satisfied, is
irremediably lost--Heartburning, bilious vomitings, belchings, pains in
the pit of the stomach, and shortness of breath--Dizziness, inveterate
pains in the temples and other parts of the head, a tingling noise in
the ear, a throbbing of the brain, especially of the temporal
arteries--Symptoms of asthma, tickling coughs, visible inflations, and
unusual scents affecting the olfactory nerves--Sometimes costive and
sometimes relaxed--Sudden flushings of heat, and suffusions of
countenance--In the night, alternate sweats and shiverings, especially
down the back, which seems to feel as if water was poured down that
part of the body--A ptyalism, or discharge of phlegm from the glands of
the throat, which generally attends all the symptoms--Troublesome pains
between the shoulders, pains attended with hot sensations, cramps and
convulsive motions of the muscles, or a few of their fibres--Sudden
startings of the tendons of the legs and arms--Copious and frequent
discharges of pale and limpid urine--Vertigoes, long faintings, and
cold, moist, clammy sweat about the temples and forehead--Wandering
pains in the sides, back, knees, ancles, arms, wrists, and somewhat
resembling rheumatic pains--The head generally warm, while the rest of
the body is cold or chilly--Obstinate watchinqs, disturbed sleep,
frightful dreams, the night mare, startings when awake, and the mind
filled with the most terrific apprehensions--Tremors of the limbs, and
palpitations of the heart--A very variable and irregular
pulse--Periodical pains in the head--A sense of suffocation, frequent
sighings, and shedding of tears--Convulsive spasms of the muscles,
tendons, nerves of the back, loins, arms, hands, and a general
convulsion of the stomach, bowels, throat, legs, and indeed almost
every other part of the body--A quick apprehension, forgetful,
unsettled, and constant to nothing but inconstancy--A wandering and
delirious imagination, groundless fears, and an exquisite sense of his
sufferings--A gradually sinking into a nervous atrophy or
consumption--A perpetual alarm of approaching death--Sometimes
cheerful, and sometimes melancholy--Without present enjoyment or future
expectation of any thing but increasing misery and debility.--If these
symptoms are inconsiderately suffered to continue, they soon terminate
in palsy, hip, madness, epilepsy, apoplexy, or in some mortal disease,
as the black jaundice, dropsy, consumption, &c.

Having ascertained, from this enquiry, the injurious properties of
India tea, it may naturally be expected that I should propose some
article that might prove more beneficial. With this requisition I shall
most readily comply, although I may expose myself to the invidious
censure of having directed all my efforts to establish the celebrity of
whatever article I may recommend. But being convinced, that, by
publishing the virtue of a tea that I have investigated from physical
analysis and particular observation, I may essentially serve the
public, I am content to suffer the obloquy, provided it is productive
of a general benefit. Having, as before observed, examined, with the
greatest attention, the nature of most articles that have been offered
as morning and afternoon beverage, there are two which claim most
particularly the preference of all others that are sold under the
denomination of Tea: these are, 1st, that which was discovered by that
eminent botanist Sir Hans Sloane; and the other, by a botanist and
physician equally celebrated, Dr. Solander. I therefore, without
considering in what manner the interest of the proprietors of these
teas may be individually affected, propose two articles, in order to
shew that my partiality or opinion of the virtues of the one could not
prejudice me so far as to prevent my allowing due praise to any other
possessing qualities deserving approbation. I am happy to state that,
from my analysis of that invented by Sir Hans Sloane, called British
Tea, I found it possesses most singular virtues for relieving many
nervous complaints; but, from the same trials and experiments made on
that invented by Dr. Solander, I have been convinced that, although the
qualities of the former are exceedingly salutary, they are not so
general in their restoration and nutritious effects as the latter.
Being thus convinced of the extraordinary properties of Dr. Solander's
Tea, I have been induced to state, in a Treatise upon their Nature,
Preparation, and Effects, reasons founded on chemical analysis,
physical efficiency, and experimental observation, in support of their
most eminent virtues. After every trial I have made of coffee,
chocolate[1], and most other preparations that have been, and are at
present, offered to the public as a substitute for tea, none seem to
claim the preference so eminently as that invented by Dr. Solander.
From their analysis, I find their virtues are of the most corrective
and balsamic kind; they strengthen the tone of the stomach, not by
astringing the solids, but by lubricating the vessels, sheathing the
acrids, and attenuating the liquids.

      [1] "_Coffee.--In bilious habits it is very hurtful._" Dr.
      Carr's Med. Epist. p. 25.

      "_Coffee.--I cannot advise it to those of hardness of
      breathing._" Ibid. p. 29.

      "_Coffee, according to Paule, a Danish physician, enervates men
      and renders them incapable of generation, which injurious
      tendency is certainly attributed to it by the Turks. From its
      immoderate use they account for the decrease of population in
      their provinces, that were so numerously peopled before this
      berry was introduced among them. Mr. Boyle mentions an instance
      of a person to whom Coffee always proved an emetic. He also says
      that he has known great drinking of it produce the palsy._

      "_Chocolate is too gross for many weak stomachs, and
      exceedingly injurious to those liable to phlegm and viscid
      humours._" Saunders's Nat. & Art. Direct. for Health.

      "_Chocolate overloads the stomach, and renders the juices too
      slow in their circulation._" Smith on the Nerves.

In this manner they restore the equilibrium of the oscillatory motions,
which establish the tone of the nervous system. This being
strengthened, the animal spirits are enabled to dispense their reviving
influence to the sensitive, digestive, and intellectual powers. And
these being thus restored to their vigour of operation, a simple and
moderate portion of food is rendered the most nutritious, and the body
is consequently established in the enjoyment of health and happiness.

The above virtues of the sanative tea are not here asserted as a
declamatory panegyric, but as the result of a physical analysis of
their nature, and a serious examination into their mode of operating as
a restorative and constant aliment. Without presuming their qualities
to be an unlimited remedy for all complaints, the nature of the
preparation of this tea is compared with the causes and effects of
nervous disorders: from this comparison their relative virtue to such
diseases are most clearly evinced: and thus is this invaluable
discovery proved to be the most effectual remedy for all those
complaints caused by drinking foreign teas, that was ever yet or may be
hereafter invented.

In proposing to the public any simple or compound, for the preserving,
increasing, or restoring health, the first object should be to explain
its nature. This is the principal test by which its merits can be
known, or mankind rationally induced to try its virtues. And as this
sanative tea is offered as a substitute for what is generally used as
two fourths of our aliment, and which, from the preceding enquiry, has
been found the principal cause of our present infirmities, the greater
necessity there is for a candid investigation of its nature.

Impressed with the above conviction, it is fairly stated that the
nature of this sanative tea is not from any combination of the animal
or mineral kingdom, but a collection of the most salutary native and
exotic herbs that are produced in the vegetable empire of nature. These
have not been collected by the fanatic devotees of occult qualities,
but by the scientific researches and personal experience of a character
that is equally and justly admired for his philosophical, medical, and
botanical knowledge. The discoverer, Dr. Solander, of this tea,
inquired into the virtues of each native and exotic herb of which it is
composed, not only by abstract reasoning upon its relative qualities,
but by the more immediate evidence of his senses: by submitting each
vegetable to his taste and smell, he derived the most certain physical
proof of its qualities. Thus he knew the particular virtues of each,
and what salutary effects they must, from their preparation as a
compound, produce when applied as a relief for the innumerable diseases
caused by drinking foreign teas. Not confining himself to _English
Plants_, he studied and examined the virtues of _Exotics_, among which
he discovered some that possess virtues he had not found in those of
his own country: by adopting these, he has increased the salutary
effects of his invaluable tea. From reading Hippocrates, Discorides,
and Galen, he found the ancients derived all their knowledge of plants
by their taste and smell. With these examples before him, and his own
propensity to study, joined to his penetrating judgement, it is no
wonder he should have so well succeeded. Thus he recurred to the
original mode of inquiry, which first established and raised the
eminence of physic; neglecting that delusive principle of Aristotle's
philosophy, which has since taught too many physicians to express the
virtue of medicines by hot, cold, moist, and dry, without deriving the
least information from their senses Dr. Solander, aided by chemical
analysis, distinguished the virtue by the taste or odour of every
plant. By this means their specific juices he found tasted either
earthy, mucilaginous, sweet, bitter, aromatic, fetid, acrid, or
corrosive. From this experience he found the observation of some
botanists to be true, "That there is no virtue yet known in plants but
what depends on the taste or smell, and may be known by them."[2] With
this infallible means of pursuing his enquiry, he formed a tea composed
of herbs that are in their nature astringent, balsamic, aromatic,
cephalic, and diaphoretic. These virtues combined may be said to form
one of the most incomparable specifics, as a nutritive and restoring
aliment, that has been discovered.

      [2] _Floyer, Malpighus, Epew, Harvey, Willis, Lower, Needham,
      Glisson, &c._

In the astringent, the acid fixing upon the more earthly parts, the
nutritious oil is more easily separated, which renders them also
pectoral, cleaning, and diuretic. This part of the tea is in its nature
particularly serviceable in all cases where vulnerary medicines are
requisite. They particularly amend the acid in the nervous juice, and
thus restore the equal motion of the spirits, which were obstructed or
retarded by spasms or convulsions. By the volatile oil and volatile
pungent salt, obstructions are opened, and the motions of the languid
blood increased to a healthy degree of circulation. They resolve
coagulated phlegm in the stomach, preserve the fluidity of the juices,
and promote digestion, by assisting the bile in its operation.

And with regard to their balsamic and aromatic nature, these qualities
warm the stomach and expel wind, by rarefying the flatuous exhalations
from chyle in the prima viae. These, by their sweetness, allay the
sharpness of rheums, and lenify their acrimony. Being filled with an
oily salt, they open the passage of the lungs and kidnies. By opening
the pores, they extraordinarily discuss outward tumours, and attenuate
the internal coagulation. All these virtues may be said to be derived
from the union of their balsamic oil and volatile salt.

By a second class of aromatics, with which Dr. Solander composed this
sanative tea, is such as have a bitter astringency joined to their
volatile oil and salt. These united qualities correct acids in the
stomach, cleanse the lungs, and open obstructions in the glands caused
by coagulated serum; and the saline pungent oil altering the acids in
the glands of the brain, by correcting and attenuating its lympha and
succus nervosus, produces the same effect; for the lympha and nervous
juice are, like other glandulous humours, liable to acidity and
stagnation; therefore these aromatics, by exciting their motion and
correcting their acidities, render the liquids of the nerves more
volatile, and are therefore justly termed cephalics. And as it is the
property of volatiles to ascend, the reason is evident of the brain
being assisted by their salutary qualities. These aromatics likewise
evacuate serum from the blood, promote its circulation, and attenuate
the coagulations of chyle, lympha, and succus nervosus. And here, it is
proper to add, that all aromatics, by rarefying the blood, are cordial.
There being aromatic astringents in this tea, its infusion strengthens
the fibres and membranes of the stomach, and all the nervous system, in
such a manner as not to destroy their tensity by that too great
contraction caused by the foreign teas; and, having no acid in their
astringency, the blood is preserved from too great a rarefaction, which
would otherwise happen from the pungency of their oily qualities. These
also excite the appetite, by stimulating the natural progress of the
chyle, and thus prevent its too rapid fermentation of its spirituous
parts into windy flatulencies. For the same reason vinegar is taken
with hot meats and herbs. Having mentioned vinegar, it may not be
improper to state this vegetable acid is the best antidote against the
poison of any acrid herbs. That part of the tea which has a
mucilaginous taste is inwardly cooler than oil, although it be
different in nature. Such herbs defend the throat from the sharpness of
rheums, the stomach from corrosive humours of disease or acrimonious
medicines; the ureters from sharp, choleric, or acid urine, and
lubricate the passage for the stony gravel. Their crude parts cool the
heat of scorbutic blood, lessen its violent motion, and sheathe its
acrid saline particles.

By their different mucilaginous principles they produce the following
various salutary effects:

The earthy repel and cool outward inflammations.

The watery, which is thick and gummose, stop fluxes and correct sharp
humours.

Those of an oily odour alleviate pains.

Those of a pungent acrid dissolve tartareous concretions in the
kidnies.

From these and a variety of other salutary properties, it is evident
the general nature of Dr. Solander's tea is such as to correct acrid
humours, promote the secretions, restore the equilibrium between the
fluids and solids, and finally to brace every part of the relaxed
nervous system. The body being thus relieved from obstructions, its
circulations restored, the digestive faculties invigorated, and the
spirits re-animated, the debilitated constitution is reinstated in all
its enjoyments of health and hilarity. It may be therefore observed,
that the principle of this tea is to nourish as a general aliment,
while it renovates the human constitution, without having recourse to
the nauseous portions of galenical preparation, or the hazardous trial
of chalybeate waters. As this tea is particularly salutary in all cases
where mineral waters are generally recommended, it is very proper the
Public should be cautioned against the danger which too frequently
attends the constant drinking of them.

Chalybeate waters, it must be acknowledged, have effected very
extraordinary cures in certain cases. But when so great an author as
Helmont says, that such waters are fatal to all those who are afflicted
with peripneumonic complaints, it is surely necessary they should be
resorted to with the greatest caution; and even in complaints where
they may be serviceable, it is necessary to observe whether they really
possess those chalybeate qualities for which they are commended. Those
who have written upon their virtues assert, and with seeming propriety,
that where they deposit an ochreous sediment, they are certainly
dispossessed of their steely virtues; for ochre being no other than the
calx of iron, such a residue evinces the evaporation of the more
eminent properties of the chalybeate, by the phlogiston of the mineral
escaping by its extreme volatility. Every metal deprived of this
igneous principle is immediately reduced to a calx, and thus deprived
of its splendour, fusibility, and other properties, until restored
again by the readmission of its phlogiston. Calcined lead having lost
this inflammable quality, is reduced to a red calx or mineral earth,
which, if fluxed with any igneous body, such as oil, pitch, wax, fat,
wood, bone, or mineral oil or bitumen, the fiery principle is resorbed,
and the lead restored to its essential qualities; from these physical
observations the reader may be convinced of those mineral waters as
afford such a sediment being in a state of decomposition. They are thus
deprived of one of the four elements or principles of which they are
all more or less composed. Every analysis of mineral waters in their
perfect state has demonstrated that they possess a fixed air, a
volatile alkali, a volatile vitriolic acid, and the phlogiston. If,
therefore, either of these essential qualities is evaporated or
corrupted, the water, being in a state of decomposition, must lose the
virtues of a medicinal chalybeate.

It is only necessary to add a few further remarks, in order to shew in
what particular complaints chalybeates, even in their most perfect
state, are pernicious. By this means many of the diseased will be
guarded against a fatal error: and as the prejudice in favour of such
applications is so universally prevalent, it is hoped a few pages
allotted to this subject will be deemed a most essential service to a
deluded community. By removing such a pernicious partiality, the
health, if not the lives of thousands, may be saved, to the great
enjoyment of themselves and their relatives. Dr. Knight says very
justly, "that the explication of the manner of the operation of
chalybeate medicines in human bodies is grounded upon false principles,
and not matters of fact; to wit, that all chalybeate preparations, in a
liquid form, owe their medicinal efficacy to the metal dissolved,
whether in an aqueous or spirituous menstruum, retaining its metallic
texture." To avoid entering into the whole detail of this interesting
argument, it is only here stated in support of the above assertion,
that as mineral waters are impregnated with a combination of sulphurs,
salts, and earth, their virtues cannot be properly ascribed, as they
have been, to the metals which they contain. It might be further
proved, that iron cannot possibly enter the blood, retaining its
essential qualities; for metals in general, except mercury, are
suspended in liquids in _solutis principiis_, or principles disengaged,
which are thus deprived of their metallic properties. Iron, entering
the body as a volatile vitriolic acid, cannot act by its specific
gravity as mercury does; it therefore acts _per accidens_, and not _per
se_. But admitting that waters, however impregnated with iron, are
efficacious in checking all diarrhoea and other profuse evacuations,
by closing the relaxed vessels, and incrassating the fluids, yet as
they prove sometimes so astringent as to stop the natural secretions,
the consequences are frequently cramps, dangerous convulsions, which
often end in fevers, inflammations, and mortifications, their
indiscriminate use should be most cautiously avoided. Chalybeates, thus
contracting the least pervious glands, should not be taken in acute
inflammations, or in any complaints that are attended with a quick and
strong pulse, a plethora, or extravasation of humours. They are equally
dangerous in all nervous contractions, or where the blood is got into
the arteriolae, or capillary vessels. Thus, instead of acting like the
sanative tea, which softens, smoothes, and unbends the two constringed
fibres, the vitriolic salts of this mineral water but more contract the
fibrillae, by operating like so many wedges, which ultimately tear,
rend, or divide the tender filaments. It must, however, be admitted
that mineral waters are very beneficial in cachexies, scurvies,
jaundice, hypochondriacal and hysterical affections. Having paid this
tribute to their virtues, it is evident that what is above stated
respecting their pernicious effects has been dictated by candour, and
with no illiberal disposition to deny their absolute virtues[3]. These
few remarks have only been made in order to warn the community against
a prevailing and indiscriminate use which might otherwise, in many
complaints, prove at least fatal to their health, if not to their
existence. And as the tea discovered by Dr. Solander possesses all the
virtues of the chalybeate, without its dangerous principles, it was an
immediate duty not only to warn but direct the Public in their adoption
of an aliment so essential to their health, and consequently temporal
happiness.

      [3] _Waters drank at their source are efficacious in many
      complaints that are not accompanied with inflammatory symptoms;
      but if they are drank after a long or short conveyance, their
      effects must be proportionably injurious instead of beneficial._


PREPARATION.

As the native and exotic herbs of this tea are dried in a pure air,
without any artificial means of preparation to improve their colour or
increase their natural astringency, they must be free from those
deleterious, corrosive, and violent contractive effects with which we
have observed the general and indiscriminate use of foreign teas and
mineral waters are attended. In the first part of this Essay, it was
stated that foreign teas were dried upon iron, and thus produced those
astringent effects we have seen to characterize chalybeate waters. It
is therefore evident, that the simple preparation of these salutary
herbs being free from what renders teas and mineral waters in many
cases pernicious, must leave their qualities pure and unadulterated,
according to the intent and principle of nature in their production.
They are, therefore, found particularly free from those injurious
properties which render green tea so destructive to emaciated
constitutions. Instead of being, like the above foreign tea, hurtful to
those worn down by a long fever, or such as have weak and delicate
stomachs, their qualities are in such complaints essentially nutritious
and restorative. That stimulating roughness, which foreign teas imbibe
from their iron preparation, is not to be found in the sanative tea
discovered by Dr. Solander; the latter is therefore very beneficial
where the mucous coat of the bowels is very thin, or the ramification
of the nerves numerous, extensive, and exquisitely sensible of
impression. The cholic, gripes, or painful prickings of the nervous
coat by the India teas, are allayed by the drinking of the sanative
tea, from its tepid and lubricating nature not being perverted by any
corrosive preparation. To thin and meagre bodies, which are greatly
affected by green and bohea teas, the above is a most restorative
aliment. The atrophy and diabetes, so frequently caused by the foreign
teas, are, from the herbs of Dr. Solander's tea possessing their
natural nutritious qualities uncontaminated by metallic preparation,
often cured by using it as a morning and evening beverage; and the
depression of spirits occasioned by green and bohea, and which induces
many of its drinkers to take sal volatile, or spirits of hartshorn, is
avoided by the sanative tea; for the latter is found one of the
greatest and most salutary exhilarators of the nervous system. And thus
those who drink it as a constant aliment, are saved from the dangers
that attend rendering the blood too thin by the use of the above
volatile alkalies, or drams, which are too frequently taken to avoid
that lowness of spirits caused by the great, sudden, and violent
contraction of the nervous fibrillae. As the inconveniencies of the
foreign teas arise from the metallic properties derived from their
preparation, the advantages of the sanative tea are evidently seen to
arise from the preparation being such as leaves every herb possessed of
its natural and essential quality. This clearly evincing the
superiority of Dr. Solander's tea to every herbal beverage, it only
remains to proceed to the two remaining enquiries respecting the mode
of using and the effects of this salutary combination of vegetables.
The next subject, therefore, of investigation is the


MANNER OF USING.

As the time of drinking this tea is morning and evening, it is
necessary to enquire whether its qualities are such as are calculated
to suit the temporary necessities of nature at those periods. From what
has been observed respecting foreign teas, it is evident that their
properties are diametrically opposite to those which nature at such
times requires. When the body is exhausted by insensible perspiration,
the most requisite aliment is that which can equally restore the loss
of the solids and the languid flow of the animal spirits. What is then
taken ought therefore to be neither too heavy for the state of the
unbraced system; nor too volatile, to afford a sufficient quantity of
nutritive juices to the whole animal economy. Nor should the aliment be
so stimulating as to disorder instead of re-establishing the equalized
motion of the yet perturbed state of the animal spirits. What is then
given should have the power of sedating the nervous fluids, while it
disseminates through the viscera the elements of nutrition. These being
the requisite properties of what is taken as a breakfast, it remains to
consider whether those of the sanative tea are adequate to such
indispensible purposes.

In the preceding part of this enquiry, it has been found that the
principal qualities of this tea are moderately astringent, balsamic,
and aromatic; it is therefore evident, that, from a combination of
these eminent medical principles, this tea must operate as a sedator of
perturbation, a renovator of exhausted solids, and an exhilarator of
nervous depression. It may therefore be used as a morning beverage with
the greatest advantage, for the preservation and re-establishment of
health; for never were the qualities of any aliment so particularly
adapted to the necessities of the body at any stated period as those of
the sanative tea are at the time of breakfast. Without loading the
exhausted viscera, they afford it a sufficiency of balsamic and
nutritive aliment; nor does the sanative tea, by sedating the
fluttering spirits, destroy their vigour; but, on the contrary, by
calming their motion, they contribute more active energy by promoting
their equalized progress; and thus is the animal economy restored to
the proper use and enjoyment of its functions. And in proportion as the
spirits are restored to an equilibrium of motion and fluidity, the
relaxed tone of the nerves is recovered, and the whole functions of man
rendered capable of exercise and enjoyment.

The above being stated as the advantages attending the use of the
sanative tea in the morning, it is next expedient to consider what
benefit is derived from the use of it in the afternoon.

At this time the body is in a very different state of temperature from
that of the morning. By the toil, care, study, or amusement of the
former part of the day, the solids are wasted, and the fluids in a
state of ferment and evaporation. Added to this, the aliment which is
taken at dinner time so exhausts the animal warmth, as to leave the
whole body in a state of refrigeration. What is therefore taken in this
situation should be neither relaxing, constipating, nor heating; it
should possess a genial warmth, a cordial assistant, and a restorative
nutriment. The first should be such as to supply the deficiency of
warmth which the body feels by the act of digestion, without inflaming
the blood, or too greatly increasing the pulse. The second, or cordial
assistant, should rather increase the powers of the body than those of
the heart; for the force of the heart may be increased to the detriment
of health. This is evident from a weakness of the body being the
consequence of the force of the heart being increased in an
inflammatory fever. And with regard to what is taken in the afternoon
requiring a restorative nutriment, it is necessary that it should be
light, pure, and wholesome, lest its solidity and heaviness should
oppress the bowels at a time when their tone is relaxed by recent
fatigue and digestion. These qualities being the most proper to produce
fresh animal spirits, are the most fit to be taken when a new accession
of them is necessary. It has been observed those are the most robust
whose serum resembles most the white of an egg. It has therefore been
most rationally concluded, that the origin of the animal spirits is
from aliments capable of being changed into a similar substance, but so
attenuated by incalation as to concrete by fire. For this reason the
greatest support of the spirits is afforded by light and nourishing
meats and drinks, which in taste and smell are even agreeable to
infants. All cordials and aromatics are consequently the most proper
for such purposes, and at such times, when heavier foods would impress,
instead of recruiting, the exhausted solids and fluids. It is therefore
Boerhaave recommends such aromatics, for the reviving and recruiting
the animal spirits, as have the most pleasing taste and smell.
Agreeably to this opinion, Dr. Solander employed his researches to form
an afternoon beverage of such herbs as should possess all the above
cardiac and balsamic qualities. The use of the sanative tea between
dinner and supper operates as the most reviving and wholesome aliment
that can, at such a time, be possibly taken. An enquiry having been
made into the nature, preparation, and manner of using the sanative
tea, there only remains to conclude this Second Part of the Essay with
the consideration of its


EFFECTS.

From the view that has been taken of the nature, preparation, and
manner of using, the salutary effects are most clearly and easily to be
ascertained. As the basis of this tea is the combined principle of the
most balsamic oils, nutritious salts, and animating sulphurs, which the
vegetable world produces, their effects must be proportionably
salutary. And as their combination is such as to correct the pernicious
qualities of each other, their conjoint effect must be the most
wholesome that can possibly be administered for the health of human
nature. As every simple, however specific in certain cases, possesses
qualities that are pernicious in other respects, it has been the first
principle of physical enquiry not only to find the basis of a medicine,
but to form compounds or ingredients that corrected the injurious
tendency of each other. With this scientific principle Dr. Solander
having composed his sanative tea, has rendered it the most general
specific in its effects of any medicinal aliment.

This tea affording a compound oil, which is formed of the most aromatic
vegetables the earth affords, it is no wonder its effects, like honey,
should approach so near a general specific. The invaluable oils,
uniting with the sulphurs of the sanative tea, recruit, soften, and
lubricate the juices, diminish the too great elasticity, dryness, and
crispness of the nervous fibres, and afford the exhausted liquids fresh
supplies. Their effects are consequently exceedingly restorative in all
cases, where the force of the fibres and the vessels are too strong,
the circulation too rapid, and the blood too attenuated or diminished;
as it prevents the too quick action of the solids, and the too rapid
motion of the blood, the body is nourished, and the mind prepared for
the refreshment of sleep when the approach of night invites to repose.
In spitting of blood its effects are particularly beneficial. The oil
being easily detached from the earth of the plant is, in such cases,
exceedingly nutritive, and, by its checking the stimulation, and
sheathing the acrimony of the humours, the blood is replenished with
the most healing and balsamic virtues.

In pleurisies, ulcers, and abscesses of the lungs, hectic fevers, dry
coughs, night sweats, and difficulty of breathing, the balsamic oil and
sulphur of this tea is most salutary.

The dropsical, phlegmatic, corpulent, cathetic, and all such as are in
their stamina relaxed, will find the greatest relief in its constant
use; and to those who are emaciated, either from hereditary or acquired
disease, it is particularly beneficial.

In seasons when experience informs us that the blood requires cleansing
and attenuating, this tea will be of considerable service to the
healthy as well as the diseased. By these means the constitution will
be preserved and restored from all those chronic and acute afflictions,
which are the consequences of acrimonious humours and foulness of
blood.

As this tea produces the effects of cleansing the stomach, promoting
digestion, diluting the chyle, and invigorating the whole viscera, it
should be constantly drank by those who live freely.

Unlike most medicinal applications, this tea requires no previous
preparation of the body. Such are its nature and progression of
effects, that it first renders the body in a state suitable to receive
succeeding benefits; nor is it dangerous, like mineral waters, to which
persons afflicted with nervous complaints generally resort. Persons
suffering acute or inflammatory diseases, or who have their vessels too
greatly constringed, need not be under the apprehensions of suffering
scirrhuses, or even death, which is the confluence of drinking, in such
cases, mineral waters; but, on the contrary, they may expect to
receive, from the use of the sanative tea, the most beneficial effects,
not only in the above, but also in the gout and rheumatism, from its
moderate use producing a gentle perspiration.

To account for the variety of salutary effects that this valuable
discovery produces, we shall now proceed to consider its operation as a
medicine and an aliment, which will afford the most convincing and
conclusive arguments that can be possibly adduced in favour of its
sanative qualities.

To consider its medicinal properties or effects, it is necessary to
state in what manner it acts first upon the solids, next upon the
fluids, and lastly, how it operates upon both together; for on these
three principles the power and quality of a medicine solely depend. In
acting upon the solids, it either alters their texture and cohesion,
or, by diluting the canals, change the figure of the sides. But a
medicine acting upon fluids only either alters their properties, or
brings them out of the body. All medicines, however, act as well upon
the solids as the fluids; for the latter can scarcely be altered
without in some degree affecting the former.

As all medicines derive the greatest qualities from their filling,
evacuating, or altering the smallest parts, the sanative tea possesses
the most restorative properties from its action upon the smallest
nervous vessels, and not in the arteries, veins, glands, lymphatic and
adipose vessels. Thus, as all augmentation and accretion of the greater
depend on the extension of the smallest lateral vessels, which are
nervous tubuli, the nutrition and restitution of what is wasted must be
considerably derived from the constant use of this beverage morning and
evening. From this the medicinal effects of the tea upon the solids are
found to be consistent with the first of physical principles; for the
nutrition of the solids, which is made by the application of any part
to the place of a wasted part, is always effected in the smallest
canals, of which the greater consist.

And as every salutary change of the fluids is made in the smallest
vessels, the sanative tea possessing the power of conveying nutrition
into the most minute channels of the body, the liquids must derive from
it the greatest renovation.

From this combined effect upon the solids and liquids, the strength of
the greater vessels is increased, and thus is the whole aggregate body
invigorated; for every artery derives its energy from its sides, which
are composed of the minutest vessels. To enter into a complete detail
of its medicinal principles, would require a volume itself; we must
therefore avoid any further enquiry of its effects as a physical
remedy, in order to leave a few lines for its consideration as an
aliment.

The qualities of an aliment chiefly depend on their nature affording
that nourishment which is proper to the time of taking and the state of
the body. Indeed, without their possessing these relative properties,
either meats or drinks are injurious instead of beneficial. For this
reason physical necessity, more than tyrant custom, has caused a
thinner aliment to be taken in the morning and evening than what forms
the meals of dinner and supper. This necessity arises from the state
of the body being in the morning just recovering its spirits from a
comparative state of relaxation and imbecility, and in the afternoon
from the stomach being enfeebled by recent digestion. That the body,
immediately after sleep, is in a relaxed state, may be perceived by the
perturbation the spirits experience from any surprise or violent action
instantly succeeding. Fits and faintings have frequently been the
consequence of persons of quick sensibilities being wakened. In such a
state of relative debility, gross and solid food must oppress the
spirits, and thus render the body incapable of deriving nourishment
from such an untimely aliment. But if what is taken is light, pure, and
apt for producing chyle, the stomach being capable of digesting it,
must turn it to the most wholesome nutrition. To attain this end,
foreign teas, from their lightness, have been universally adopted; but,
as we have found, from their nature, how ill adapted they are to be
given when the nerves are already too weak to bear their violent
astringency, such should be used as are possessed of the most
nutrition, without a tendency to irritate the relaxed fibrillae.

When the stomach is enfeebled by recent digestion in the afternoon, to
take then another meal of solid aliment must evidently tend to depress
the digestive powers, and thus prevent the body from having that
nourishment it might receive from a lighter aliment.

The sanative tea being found, from the preceding enquiries, to possess
the most active, subtle, penetrating, and balsamic compound oils,
salts, and sulphurs, which pervade, without irritation, the minutest
canals, must afford that species of aliment which the body in a morning
and afternoon requires. While it attenuates, it restores the tone and
substance of the juices, strengthens the solids, invigorates every
natural function, and thus affords the means of enjoying all the
comfort that a healthy body and a happy mind can bestow.


THE END.




DR. SOLANDER's
SANATIVE ENGLISH
TEA.

UNIVERSALLY APPROVED AND RECOMMENDED
BY THE MOST
EMINENT PHYSICIANS,
IN PREFERENCE TO FOREIGN TEA,
As the most Pleasing and POWERFUL RESTORATIVE,
IN ALL
NERVOUS DISORDERS,
HITHERTO DISCOVERED.


Our first aliment at breakfast, being designed to recruit the waste of
the body from the night's insensible perspiration; an inquiry is
important, whether INDIA TEA, which the Faculty unanimously concur in
pronouncing a species of Slow Poison, that unnerves and wears the
substance of the solids, is adequate to such a purpose--If it be
not--the inquiry is further necessary to find out a proper substitute.
If an Apozem PROFESSIONALLY approved and recommended for its nutritive
qualities, as a general aliment, has claim to public attention,
certainly Dr. SOLANDER'S TEA, so sanctioned, is the most proper morning
and afternoon's beverage.

Prepared for the Proprietor by an eminent Botanist.

Sold Wholesale and Retail by the Proprietor's Agent, Mr. T. GOLDING, at
his Warehouse for Patent Medicines, No. 42, Cornhill, London; and
Retail by Mr. F. NEWBERY, No. 45, St. Paul's Church-Yard; Mess.
BAILEY'S, Cockspur-street; Mr. W. BACON, No. 150, Oxford-street; Mr.
OVERTON, No. 47, New Bond-street; and by Mr. J. FULLER, Covent-Garden,
near the Hummums. Also, by the Venders of Patent Medicines in every
City and Town, in England, Ireland and Scotland.

Sold in Packets at 2s. 9d. and in Cannisters at 10s. 6d. each, Duty
included. Liberal Allowance for Exportation, to Country Venders and to
Schools.

The native and exotic Plants which chiefly compose Dr. Solander's Tea,
being gathered and dried with peculiar attention, to the preserving of
their sanative Virtues, must render them far more efficacious than many
similar Preparations, which by being reduced to Powder, must have those
Qualities destroyed they might otherwise possess.

A Packet of this Tea at 2s. 9d. is sufficient to Breakfast one Person a
Month.




DIRECTION
FOR MAKING
DR. SOLANDER's TEA.

Two or three tea-spoonfuls of this Tea being put into a tea-pot, or a
covered bason, pour boiling water upon it, and let it remain a short
time in a state of infusion.--After using milk and sugar agreeably to
the taste, drink it moderately warm. A few tea-cups full are sufficient
for breakfast, tea in the afternoon, or any other time a person may
think proper.

                     *      *      *      *      *

    The native and exotic Plants which chiefly compose this Tea, being
    gathered and dried with peculiar attention to the preserving their
    Sanative Virtues, must render them far more efficacious than many
    similar Preparations, which, by being reduced to Powder, must have
    those qualities destroyed they might otherwise possess.

                     *      *      *      *      *

A CAUTION.

The high estimation in which Dr. Solander's Tea is held, by the first
circles of fashion, as a general beverage--the many cures it has
effected--and the pleasantness of its flavor having induced several
unprincipled persons to prepare and vend a base and spurious
preparation under a similar title; the Proprietor, in justice to the
known efficacy of this Tea, and to secure his property from further
depredations, has thought proper to have an engraved copper-plate
affixed to the canisters and packets of the genuine and original
preparation of Dr. Solander's Sanative English Tea. This plate being
entered at Stationer's Hall as the Act directs, Aug. 20, 1791, will
subject such persons as imitate the same to a consequent prosecution.
The Public are therefore cautioned from purchasing any article but what
is distinguished by the said plate, and to observe thereon the words
specified as above, of its being entered according to Act of
Parliament.




DR. SOLANDER's TEA.


This CELEBRATED TEA is peculiarly efficacious in most inward wasting,
loss of Appetite, Hysterical Disorders and Indigestion, depression of
Spirits, trembling or shaking of the Hands or Limbs, obstinate Coughs,
Shortness of Breath, and Consumptive Habits; it purifies the Blood,
eases the most violent pains of the Head and Stomach, and is a
wonderful Assuager of the excruciating pains of the Gout and
Rheumatism, by promoting gentle Perspiration. By the NOBILITY and
GENTRY this Tea is much admired as a fashionable BREAKFAST; being
pleasant to the taste and smell, gently astringing the fibres of the
stomach, and giving them that proper tensity, which is requisite to a
good digestion; and nothing can be better adapted to help and nourish
the Constitution after late hours, or making too free with wine.

This Sanative Tea is highly esteemed in the East and West Indies, being
unlike INDIA TEA, which the Faculty unanimously concur in pronouncing a
species of Slow Poison that unnerves and wears the substance of the
solids; on the contrary, this nourishes and invigorates the Nervous
System, acts as a GENERAL RESTORATIVE CORDIAL, upon debilitated
Constitutions, and is a sovereign remedy in Bilious Complaints
contracted in hot climates.

In the Measles and Small Pox, nothing need be given but a plenty of
this Tea; drank warm at Night it promotes refreshing rest, and, as
such, is a regular afternoon's beverage with many aged and infirm
Persons. Being of peculiar service to children, and such who are
weakly, many Parents, and others, having the care and education of
Females, exclude the use of any other than this salubrious Tea.

By the Studious and Sedentary, this CELEBRATED TEA is justly considered
as a MENTAL PANACEA, from its sovereign efficacy in removing complaints
of the head, invigorating the mind, improving the memory, and
enlivening the imagination.

The Proofs of Efficacy of Dr. SOLANDER'S TEA, being so numerous, would
far exceed the limitation of a Pamphlet; the Public are therefore
required to accept the following abridged List of Cures as Specimens:


CASE I. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

HAVING long languished under a severe depression of spirits, an almost
continual cough, and to all appearance, a confirmed consumption, being
afflicted with violent pains in my head and breast, together with a
total lassitude of body and limbs.--I was so weak and emaciated that
all my friends and acquaintance apprehended, I could not survive many
Weeks. In that unhappy condition, an eminent Physician recommended me
to your SANATIVE ENGLISH TEA, in the use of which I persevered for
several weeks, with the happiest effect, and am now perfectly cured by
that salutary and invaluable Medicine. Happy in the opportunity of
contributing my endeavours to alleviate the distresses of humanity, I
hereby authorise you to publish my case, with my earnest recommendation
of your Sanative Tea, to all persons afflicted with nervous and other
consumptive disorders, and am, Sir, your humble servant,

NICHOLAS SANDYS.

N.B. My near relation SAMUEL SANDYS, Esq. No. 61, Berner-street,
and many of my friends, will testify to the truth of the above.


CASE II.

Mrs. JONES, of Hammersmith, was for several years afflicted with a
bilious and nervous complaint, being recommended by a friend, who (in
an obstinate cough attended with spitting of blood) had experienced the
peculiar efficacy of Dr. Solander's Tea, was at last persuaded to make
trial of it, when in a few months she was perfectly restored to health
and spirits, by the use of this celebrated Tea.


CASE III.

Mr. BRYANT, No. 7, King-street, Bethnal-green, for twenty years was
violently afflicted with a nervous disorder, but by the constant
drinking the Sanative English Tea is now enjoying a good state of
health.


CASE IV.

CAPT. R. SMITH, of Liverpool, after a severe nervous fever, was very
much afflicted with violent Pains in his breast, attended with a
continual cough and excruciating head-ache, which entirely deprived him
of rest, and reduced him to a mere skeleton; being persuaded to drink
Dr. Solander's tea, was recovered to health and strength by that
salubrious panacea.


CASE V. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

FOR some Years past I had been violently afflicted with a slow nervous
fever attended by a continual head-ache, a total loss of appetite, and
a very bad digestion, by which I was reduced to a deplorable state of
languor and dejection of spirits. After being attended by many Doctors,
and taking a variety of Medicines, my husband, Mr. JOHN TOD, hearing
from several persons with whom he was acquainted, of the wonderful
effects your excellent Tea had done in nervous disorders, in various
Families with whom, in his extensive acquaintance, he was well known,
urged me much to drink the Tea; which I began in the Morning for
breakfast, and in a few days I found myself much better, and was much
pleased with so grateful a remedy. I continued it for some time; and I
do assure you I am now entirely recovered, and enjoy a perfect state of
health, without any medical assistance whatever. I am therefore
prompted to send you this, in gratitude for the benefit I have
received, requesting you will make what use of it you think proper, as
it may be of the same benefit to others.

I am, Sir, your very humble servant,

FRANCES TOD.
Rum and Brandy Warehouse,
No. 8, Little Carter-lane, Doctor's Commons,
Feb. 20, 1790


CASE VI. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative Tea._

WHEN I arrived in England some time ago, I was distressed with a severe
depression of the spirits, a very violent cough, and as all my friends
thought in a declining consumptive habit of body; my brother hearing
the efficacy of your Sanative Tea much praised, bought me a cannister,
and begged I would use it according to the directions given with it,
which I did, and had a tea-pot of it standing at my bed-side every
night, (for as I was very restless and very feverish) drinking it at
intervals, and likewise in the morning; before it was all out I was
entirely recovered, and have at this time good spirits, good appetite,
and good health. I therefore recommend it much. I am, Sir, &c.

MARY MULLARKY.
No. 11, York-street, London-road,
Sept. 29, 1792


CASE VII. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S _Sanative Tea_.

A near relation of mine being afflicted with a violent nervous
disorder, owing to a fright which happened to her in her lying-in, so
much so, as nearly to deprive her of reason; her intellects were for
some time, very much impaired, and she was reduced to a state of
despondency; she was attended by many eminent physicians, and took many
of her apothecary's draughts, &c. but without success, until she was
persuaded to try your Sanative Tea, by several of her acquaintances,
who had proved its good qualities, which she made use of six weeks, and
in which time she found herself perfectly recovered from such alarming
disorder. In justice to so valuable and elegant a medicine, I cannot
omit giving you this information, that it may be published for the
benefit of the community at large, being fully persuaded of its
excellent qualities. I am, Sir, &c.

RICHARD ANDREWS.
No. 20, Cross-street, Surry,
Oct. 16, 1792.


CASE VIII. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

FOR a long time I was frequently afflicted with a nervous disorder in
my head and stomach, was exceedingly ill and low spirited, and often
confined to my bed; I had a variety of things prescribed for me by
gentlemen of the faculty, but without effect, my disorder still
returning; till your Sanative Tea was recommended to me: I resolved to
try it, and it so much pleased me in taste and satisfaction of
drinking, that I made it my constant morning and evening Tea, and
continued it for some time, and quickly found my health better, my
spirits good, and have now entirely got rid, by its means, of all my
illness, and am in good health; therefore I am glad to send this
information, in justice to the virtues of the Sanative Tea,
recommending it to every one who may be afflicted with any such
dreadful complaints I laboured under. I remain, Sir, your humble
servant,

MARY SMYTH,
Mistress of the School.
Blackfriars School, near Ludgate-Hill,
Nov. 16, 1792.


CASE IX. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's_ SANATIVE TEA.

ABOUT twelve months ago, my daughter was afflicted with violent pains
in her stomach, occasioned as was supposed, by drinking strong green
tea for breakfast, without eating therewith--I had the assistance of
several gentlemen of the faculty, but to no purpose; as her complaint
grew worse almost daily; and it was the general opinion that she was in
a decline. Anxious for the safety of my child, I tried many advertised
medicines without success; till seeing in the County Chronicle the many
cures performed by your Sanative Tea, I wrote to a Friend in London to
procure me some of it; he readily acquiesced, and sent me a few packets
of the Tea as a present: In a short time her complaint was much abated,
and continuing the use of it a few weeks, she was restored to perfect
health:--in justice to the merits of your Tea, you have my consent to
make whatever use you please of this token of acknowledgement. I
remain, Sir, your obliged humble servant,

FRED. BLAKELEY.
Barsford, near Needham, Suffolk,
March 10, 1793.


CASE X. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's_ SANATIVE TEA.

HAVING been afflicted with obstructions, attended with a continual
cough and violent pains in my head and breast--I applied to many
physicians and apothecaries, without finding relief, till I drank your
Sanative Tea, which has entirely cured me. I think it my duty to send
you this acknowledgement, in justice to you and the Public at large. I
am, Sir, &c.

ANN ROYAL.
No. 63, St. John street, near the Green-Walk,
Christ-church, Surry,
March 18, 1793.


CASE XI. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

BEING much afflicted with a slow fever, very nervous, and much subject
to fits, a violent oppression at my stomach, and total loss of
appetite; I was continually taking physic of various descriptions, but
found no relief. Having heard your Sanative Tea highly praised, I
resolved to try it, and found myself in a short time much better. I
have continued drinking it ever since, and at present enjoy so perfect
a state of health, that I cannot sufficiently express my gratitude for
the benefit I have experienced. I therefore send you this, recommending
it much to every person so afflicted with illness as I was, giving you
full liberty to make this known as you may think proper. I am, &c.

CATHARINE CLOVER.
Ormond-Place, Queen-square, Bloomsbury,
March 24, 1793.


CASE XII. _To the Proprietor of the_ ENGLISH SANATIVE TEA.

HAVING had recourse to several medicines and prescriptions, for
internal weakness and indigestion, without the desired effect, I was
advised to make trial of your Sanative Tea, as a medicine. I
accordingly furnished myself with two parcels, and found it very
agreeable and pleasant; and in a short time I had the satisfaction of
feeling the good effects of this pleasing and salutary medicine; and to
confirm the services received from it, I am determined, for the future,
to drink it instead of foreign teas, because I think it more grateful
than any thing yet presented to the public as a stomatic; therefore in
justice to your valuable discovery for the public good, you are welcome
to communicate this information to the world at large; with the
sincerest wishes for the general use of your excellent Tea. I am, Sir,
&c.

RICHARD EDWARDS.
No. 37, Baldwin's-gardens, Holborn,
June 13, 1793


CASE XIII. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

BEING very much afflicted with a violent head-ache for a great many
years, I some time ago heard a great praise of the Sanative Tea; I
tried it and thought it did me good, and by continuing the use of it,
it has entirely taken away my old head-ache, and I find myself much
better, and am now quite well. Indeed it has done me more good than I
could expect, as the head-ache is particularly our family complaint. I
likewise recommended it to my brother, James Robertson, of Bradfield,
Essex, and it has had the same good effects on him. Also my sister,
Mrs. Shibley, of Battle-bridge, has experienced its salutary effects;
therefore in justice to so excellent a thing, I send you this, hoping
others troubled with a constitutional head-ache, will make use of it. I
am, Sir, your obedient servant,

RATCLIFF ROBERTSON.
No. 10, Great Shire-lane, Temple-bar,
June 26, 1793


CASE XIV. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

ABOUT two years ago, I was attacked with a nervous disorder in my head,
which violently afflicted my whole frame. I had no rest, and
oftentimes, for want of sleep, at intervals, lost my senses--being much
troubled with frights and startings, the disorder increased, till most
of my friends expected I should soon die. I took many things without
benefit, till an acquaintance recommended me to use the Sanative Tea. I
began to drink it in the night, being always very thirsty; I thought in
two or three nights that I was easier; I therefore continued it, and
not only drank it in the night, but used it constantly, and left off
drinking India tea. I gradually got better, and am now quite recovered,
having got rid of head-ache, startings, &c. I therefore wish to
recommend it for its excellence to all my sex; and beg you will accept
of this, hoping it may be useful.

I am, Sir, your humble servant,

MARY SHAW.
No. 24, Cross-street, St. George's-Fields,
July 10, 1793.


CASE XV. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Tea_.

INDUCED by a friend of mine to make use of your Tea, as an excellent
medicine for the loss of appetite, bad digestion, and great relaxation
of the whole frame, with which I had been afflicted a long time, I have
found more relief from it, than from any other medicine I have yet had
recourse to, and am convinced it has qualities superior to any thing of
the kind; and considering it as worthy of public attention, I give you
my approbation of the services it has done me. I am, your humble
servant,

JOHN MIDDLETON,
Pencil-maker.
No. 11, Turnagain-lane, Snow-hill,
July 19, 1793.


CASE XVI. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER's TEA.

HEARING of the virtues of your Tea, in nervous complaints and
indigestions, and being among my friends much persuaded to try it, I
soon found, by drinking it for breakfast, the good effects arising from
it; your Sanative Tea having operated entirely to my wish, from its
pleasing as well as its medicinal qualities. I continued to use it, at
least once a day, and as a means of disclosing its virtues shall
continue to recommend it in the circle of my acquaintance. Your humble
servant,

PETER CAPPER.
No. 14, Lambeth-walk,
Aug. 8, 1793.


CASE XVII. _To the Proprietor of the English Sanative_ TEA.

A Servant of mine having been in a continual state of pain, from what
the doctors deemed a rheumatic complaint, for the space of eight
months, and appearing to be of a consumptive habit of body, attended
with a total depression of spirits, a perpetual cough, and extreme
weakness of limbs; which threatened her dissolution. Hearing frequently
of the surprising efficacy of your Sanative Tea, I bought some for her,
and the happy effects it has produced, urges me strongly to speak in
its great praise; therefore, I send you this, hoping her case may be of
service to make the virtues of your Sanative Tea, universally known.

I am, SIR, &c.

JOSEPH SWALLOW.
No. 3, Clarence-place, St. George's, Southwark,
Aug. 20, 1793.


CASE XVIII. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

BEING afflicted with a nervous head-ache, and trembling of the hands,
lowness of spirits, and bad appetite, a friend of mine wished very much
I would drink the Sanative English Tea; which upon drinking, instead of
other Tea for breakfast, I found myself much better, and am now quite
well; my hands being perfectly steady, which is of great advantage to
me, I being a writing stationer; besides my appetite is good, and I
feel myself in every respect so well, that I am persuaded I do good to
the community, in begging you will make this publicly known. Yours, &c.

J. CLARKE
No. 16, Newcastle-court, Butcher-row, Temple-bar,
Sept. 6, 1793.


CASE XIX. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S SANATIVE TEA.

FOR many years I had been violently afflicted with acute pains
in my head, a nervous disorder, and lowness of spirits, and took many
medicines from apothecaries, but found no benefit; till lately a friend
speaking very much in praise of the Sanative Tea; it induced me to
drink it, instead of other tea; and I have found it so happily relieved
me, that I am induced to send you this, to recommend it for such
complaints, to all nervous people. I am, &c.

ROSANNAH WYNNE.
No. 62, South Audley-street, Grosvenor-square,
Sept. 10, 1793.


CASE XX. _To the Proprietor of the._ SANATIVE TEA.

I cannot with-hold my praise of your Sanative Tea, having received so
much benefit by its efficacy; for having been a long time oppressed
with a severe head-ache, and low spirits, and little or no appetite, I
was recommended to drink your tea, which, to my great surprise, very
soon restored me to health; I therefore wish this to be made public for
the good of others.

ALICE MASON.
No. 18, Upper ground, Blackfriars-Bridge,
Sept. 18, 1793.


CASE XXI. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative Tea._

Mrs. HAYDEN being much affected with an oppression at her stomach, very
low spirits, and other complaints attending a nervous disorder, for a
long time past, after taking various prescriptions of her doctors,
without effect, she was persuaded to try your Sanative Tea, which
proved most salutary, and she is now perfectly restored to health; and
takes this method to recommend it to Ladies troubled with the same
complaints.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

ROBERT HAYDEN,
Sadler.
Knightsbridge,
Sept. 19, 1793.


CASE XXII. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's_ TEA.

I was a considerable time much afflicted with a nervous fever and
depression of spirits, till hearing of the efficacy of your Sanative
Tea, in similar complaints, induced me to make trial of it--by which,
in a few weeks, I was restored to perfect health. I am, SIR, your
humble servant,

R. JONES.
Aldersgate-street,
Nov. 27, 1793.


CASE XXIII. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative Tea._

MY mother having been afflicted, for some time past, with a nervous
complaint and a bad head-ache, she took several medicines without
effect; till a lady of her acquaintance, recommended to her your
Sanative Tea, and advised her to drink it, instead of green or bohea
tea; which advice she followed; and as it relieved her of those
complaints, I send you this, in order that the good qualities of this
Tea may be known to those afflicted with similar complaints. I am,
SIR,

Your obedient servant,

GEORGE QUIN,
Hydrometer-maker.
No. 12, London-road,
Sept. 19, 1793.


CASE XXIV. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

SOME time ago being recommended to drink your Sanative Tea for a
troublesome head-ache, and a nervous disorder in my stomach, I am so
pleased with its good qualities, and efficacy, in removing those
complaints, that I am induced to recommend it as a restorative in such
cases.

I am, &c.

WM. FILBY.
No. 3, Pilgrim-street, Ludgate-hill,
Oct. 1, 1793.


CASE XXV. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

MY business obliging me for many years to be concerned in spirituous
liquors, and under the unavoidable necessity of drinking too much, I
have suffered greatly from the ill effects of the same; till
recommended to drink your Sanative Tea, which after a little time did
me so much good, that I am induced to wish that every Person would
drink the Tea who have suffered the same infirmities from the too
frequent use of spirituous liquors. I therefore send you this, in hopes
others may be benefited as I have been. I am, SIR, &c.

JOSEPH WELLS.
Guy Earl of Warwick, Upper Ground, Blackfriars-road,
Oct. 7, 1793.


CASE XXVI. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative Tea._

ABOUT six weeks ago, I was attacked with a violent sore throat, and
fever, being attended by my apothecary, and taking a number of
medicines which he sent me, a physician was advised to be called in,
but nothing they prescribed did me any good, and the doctor gave me up
as entirely lost. I was then pressed by a relation to drink a quantity
of the Sanative Tea, which I immediately did, and continued thro' the
night; I found, after a long sleep, that I was much better: I therefore
continued it for a day or two afterwards, and I was still better and
better; and in the space of three weeks, I found myself restored to
perfect health. I therefore recommend it strongly to all who may be
attacked in the same manner, and am most assuredly convinced that the
Sanative Tea contains many efficacious and excellent properties, from
the great benefit I have so astonishingly experienced by it. I am,
SIR, &c.

SAMUEL ROBINSON.
No. 15, Clifford's-Inn,
Oct. 8, 1793.


CASE XXVII. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's_ TEA.

YOUR Sanative Tea being recommended to me for a nervous disorder and a
consumptive habit of body, with which I was afflicted a considerable
time, I accordingly gave it a trial, and found myself in a short time
so much better, that I continued to drink it regularly, and am now in
exceeding good health. In gratitude to so excellent a remedy, I send
you this acknowledgement, and am, SIR, your humble servant,

JOHN LAMB.
Clifford's-Inn,
Oct. 12, 1793.


CASE XXVIII. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's_ TEA.

FOR some years past, I have been afflicted with a nervous disorder,
attended with a bad head-ache, and violent spasms in the stomach. I was
for a long time attended by an apothecary, and took much medicine, till
taking to drink the Sanative Tea, which I had heard was sold in
Cornhill, it did me much good, and so pleased me in taste, that I
continued the use of it, and am now quite well. You may as you think
fit, make use of this my poor praise.

I am, SIR, your humble servant,

JOHN WANNOCK.
No. 2, Fountain-court, Cateaton-street,
Oct. 14, 1793.


CASE XXIX. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative English_ TEA.

I was suddenly seized with a violent fever, and attended by a
physician; but grew worse. My friends, on enquiry the next day, found
me very bad; and so I remained the whole of that night; in the morning
a neighboring gentlewoman stepped in, made me some of your Sanative
Tea; which as she afterwards informed me, I drank greedily, and asked
for more, which was given me. I then fell into a pleasing sleep, and on
waking found myself so refreshed and well, that I am determined to
drink it constantly. In gratitude for the benefit I have experienced
from your Tea, you may depend upon my recommendation and custom.

I am, SIR, your most humble servant,

GEORGE BROWN.
White Lion-street, Pentonville, Islington,
Oct. 16, 1793.


CASE XXX. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

BEING afflicted with a violent head-ache, a considerable time, till
hearing of the Sanative Tea having cured many persons of that
complaint, I was induced to make trial of it, and accordingly sent for
some, which I liked so well, that I continued to drink it every morning
for breakfast; and I declare, since drinking that Tea and leaving off
green tea, I have been entirely freed from my former complaint--If
therefore this my acknowledgement of its efficacy should induce any of
my sex, who are so liable to that, so general a disorder, I don't doubt
of its doing them as much service as I have experienced.

I am, SIR, your humble servant,

E. MACKRILL.
No. 1, Basing-lane,
Nov. 21, 1793.


CASE XXXI. _To the Proprietor of the English Tea._

IT is with the utmost pleasure I inform you, that my sister who has
lingered these eight months under a decline of the most alarming kind,
is now perfectly restored to health by drinking frequently and
regularly your Sanative English Tea.

I am, SIR, your respectful servant,

T. I. UPTON,
Watch-maker.
No. 8, Bell-yard, Temple-bar.
Dec. 15, 1793.


CASE XXXII. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Tea._

IT is the duty of every individual member of society, whose health may
be renovated by the use of any medicine, freely to communicate its
efficacy for the public good, in order that it may be better-known and
disseminated amongst his fellow-creatures.--Being from the nature of my
profession (my inclination perhaps also conducing that way) necessarily
accustomed to a sedentary life, I became the unhappy victim of all
those horrible maladies incident to a debility of the nervous system,
augmented by inattention to myself, accompanied with a depression of
spirits, verging to an almost absolute despondency. A gentleman, whose
goodness and philanthropy eminently characterise him, recommended to me
Dr. Solander's Tea, and happily by the use of it I have experienced the
most unspeakable relief, and my health is completely re-established, my
nerves have assumed their natural tone, and my animal spirits that
hilarity they formerly possessed. With all the fervor of gratitude for
the salutary effects of this incomparable Tea, I sincerely recommend
its use to those who may be afflicted in the same way. I am, SIR, &c.

BUTLER FITZGERALD.
Attorney at Law and Solicitor in Chancery.
Dec. 27, 1793.


CASE XXXIII. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative_ TEA.

I was for some time supposed to be in a decline, and medicine had no
effect, till seeing an advertisement of a cure, performed by your
Sanative Tea, in a case similar to my own, I made trial of it, and
received so much benefit from its use, that I take this opportunity to
acknowledge its merit in having restored me to perfect health.

I am, SIR, your humble servant,

BENJAMIN BAKER.
Clifford's Inn Coffee-house,
Jan. 3, 1794.


CASE XXXIV. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Tea._

TWO of my children being very ill, I was recommended to try Dr.
Solander's Tea, which in a short time did them so much good, that I am
induced to send you this, believing it to be a most excellent remedy
for many disorders. I am, SIR, your most obedient servant,

E. ALLEN.
No. 13, Cross-street, Hatton-garden,
Feb. 2, 1794.


CASE XXXV. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative English Tea._

HAVING been for a long time troubled with a bad cough, violent cold, a
poor appetite, and in a very low nervous way; I took much physic, but
found no relief; till several of my acquaintance speaking greatly in
praise of the Sanative Tea, and recommending it particularly, I drank
it for some time, and finding it do me so much good, I continued the
use of it, and am now perfectly restored to health. I therefore send
you this acknowledgment of its efficacy.

I am, SIR, your most obedient servant,

JOHN WHEELER.
No. 7, Lamb's Conduit-passage, Red Lion-square,
Feb. 18, 1794.


CASE XXXVI. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

ONE of my daughters being lately very ill with an intermitting
head-ache, a nervous fever, and seemingly in a decline, at the
particular desire of a friend, I was induced to buy some of the
Sanative Tea, which she continued to drink for some time, and I am
happy in this opportunity to acknowledge that it has perfectly
recovered her.

I am, SIR, your obliged humble servant,

JAMES GENT.
No. 14, Watling-street,
May 2, 1794.


CASE XXXVII. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative English_ TEA.

BEING much afflicted with violent pains in my stomach and bowels,
attended with a loss of appetite, I was recommended to try your English
Tea, which, by the time I had taken three packets, restored me to
perfect health. I therefore send you this as a testimony of its
virtues.

And am, Sir, your humble servant,

W. JORDAN.
The Corner of Harpur-street, Red Lion-square,
May 8, 1794.


CASE XXXVIII. _To the Proprietor of the English Tea._

I was a long time afflicted with a nervous disorder, attended with such
lowness of spirits, that at times rendered me incapable of business--By
the advice of a friend I made trial of your Tea, which entirely removed
my complaint, and I now enjoy a good state of health.

I remain, SIR, your humble servant,

WM. FAIRCLOTH.
No. 50, Little Russell-street, near Duke-street, Bloomsbury,
May 12, 1794.


CASE XXXIX. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

HAVING been a considerable time afflicted with a nervous head-ache,
attended with violent pains in my stomach, for which I took several
medicines without experiencing any beneficial effect; being tired of
such, I bought some of your Sanative Tea, which by using a short time,
I experienced such a material change in my complaint, as induced me to
continue it, and am now free from my former pains and nervous
affections.

I remain Sir, your obedient servant,

RICHARD LOVEDAY.
No. 105, Bermondsey-street,
May 20, 1794.


CASE XL. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Sanative_ TEA.

MY wife being much afflicted with a nervous complaint, a bad appetite,
and depression of spirits, she was recommended to drink the English
Tea, which in a short time restored her to health--I therefore send you
this acknowledgment of its merit.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

R. CLARKE.
No. 9, Ward's Place, Islington,
June 18, 1974.


CASE XLI. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

HAVING heard your Sanative Tea spoke of with much praise, and it being
recommended to me by a friend who had experienced its efficacy in
eruptions of the skin--I was induced to make trial of it to my daughter
who had frequently been troubled with a similar complaint, and am happy
to inform you, that she has received much benefit from its use, and
make no doubt that in a short time it will have the desired effect so
long wished for.

And am, Sir, your humble servant,

JOHN ROBERTS.
Prospect-Place, Newington, Surry,
June 30, 1794.


CASE XLII. _To the Proprietor of the English Tea._

BEING in the Liquor Trade and liable to live irregular, I contracted a
violent pain and trembling of my limbs, which often rendered me
incapable of attending to business. By taking your Tea at night and for
breakfast, it has entirely removed my complaint. I therefore send you
this as a testimony of its good qualities. I remain, SIR, &c.

JAMES RAVERTY.
No. 12, Cross-street, Hatton-Garden,
July 28, 1794.


CASE XLIII. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Tea._

I was a considerable time afflicted with a consumptive cough and inward
wasting which induced me to have recourse to many gentlemen of the
faculty, without receiving any benefit from their advice or medicine.
At last I was recommended to try your Sanative Tea, and am happy to
inform you, that a few packets of it entirely removed my cough, and at
present find myself in as good a state of health as ever I enjoyed.

I am, SIR, &c.

THOMAS GALLANT.
No. 10, Peter-lane, West Smithfield,
Aug. 4, 1794.


CASE XLIV. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative Tea._

I have been for ten years very much afflicted with a rheumatic gout for
which I have taken much medicine without being relieved; fortunately, I
was advised last March to try Dr. Solander's Tea; the first two packets
I took, greatly eased my pains; and the three next parcels cured me.
Since the pains not returning, you have my authority to make this
public for the good of society. I remain, SIR, &c.

JAMES JOHNSTON.
Lambeth-Butts,
12th August, 1794.


CASE XLV. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's_ SANATIVE TEA.

HAVING for a long time suffered greatly with a severe bilious
complaint, I was persuaded to make trial of your Sanative Tea, from
which I have experienced such good effects as induces me to recommend
it to such who are afflicted with a similar disorder.

I am, &c.

RACHAEL JAMES.
Aug. 12, No. 2, Cloysters, near Smithfield.


CASE XLVI. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

I should not think I discharged my duty to the public, were I to
conceal for a moment the great benefit I have received from Solander's
Tea, as well as two of my children, who were weakly for some months,
after the measles. My own case was violent trembling of my hands,
attended with lowness of spirits, for which I took various
prescriptions from many eminent of the faculty, without any visible
benefit, till by the advice of one of them, I took to drink your Tea,
which in a few weeks entirely cured me. Finding it so efficacious, and
withal so pleasant to the taste, I gave it to my children to drink, who
I am happy to say are perfectly recovered.

I remain, SIR, &c.

WM. HOSKINS
Croydon,
Aug. 13, 1794.


CASE XLVII. _To the Proprietor of the English Sanative Tea._

BEING long afflicted with a nervous complaint, and great depression of
spirits, I was advised to try the Sanative Tea, from which I received
so much benefit, as induces my recommending it as a pleasant and
comfortable remedy.

I am, SIR, &c.

ARABELLA DEVROAX.
No. 49, Gloucester-street, Queen-square, Bloomsbury,
Aug. 13, 1794.


CASE XLVIII. _To the Proprietor of the Sanative Tea._

IN justice to your Sanative Tea, I approve of its utility in nervous
hysterical disorders and lowness of spirits, having seen its good
effect in cases under my own inspection. I also approve of it for
children in the measles.

I am, SIR, your humble servant, &c.

JAMES FELL,
Surgeon and Apothecary.
No. 36, Pratt's place, Camden Town, St. Pancras,
Aug. 14, 1794.


CASE XLIX. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

HAVING been for several years troubled with violent nervous head-aches,
I had recourse to many remedies without effect, till I tried the
Sanative Tea, a few packets of which effectually cured me.

I remain, SIR, &c.

M. LAWSON.
No. 7, New Compton-street,
Aug. 16, 1794.


CASE L. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Sanative Tea._

IN gratitude for the benefit I have received from your Tea, I
acknowledge its having recovered me from a bilious and nervous disorder
with which I was afflicted.

I am, SIR, &c.

ANN MARTIN.
Pitt-street, Blackfriars,
Aug. 18, 1794.


CASE LI. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's_ TEA.

I was for some years attacked with a violent cough, which threatened a
consumption, for which I tried several medicines in vain, till I used
your Sanative Tea, which has effectually cured me.

I am, SIR, &c.

CATHARINE BROWNE.
Blewit's-buildings, Fetter-lane,
Aug. 25, 1794.


CASE LII. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Sanative English
Tea._

HAVING been much troubled with a nervous disorder, attended with a sick
head-ache, particularly after breakfast and tea: I was strongly advised
to try your English Tea, which by persevering in its use, has recovered
me from my complaints. I remain, SIR, your's, &c.

F. MARSHALL.
Duke's-row, Somers Town,
Sept. 27, 1794.


CASE LIII. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's_ ENGLISH TEA.

BEING long afflicted with a slow nervous complaint, that brought on
such a debility of my frame as rendered me incapable of my business; I
was persuaded by a friend to the use of the Sanative Tea, and purchased
two packets, from which I found great relief, and by continuing its
use, am perfectly restored to health and strength. I am, SIR, &c.

H. I. DOBSON.
No. 62, Kingsland-road,
Oct. 16, 1794.


CASE LIV. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Tea._

YOUR Sanative Tea having cured me of a violent bilious complaint with
which I had been afflicted above six months, induces me to send you
this acknowledgement of its efficacy.

I am, Sir, &c.

WM. LANE.
Hackney Terrace, Oct. 27, 1794.


CASE LV. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Sanative Tea._

BEING for some time past afflicted with a weakness at my stomach,
attended with a violent pain in my head, I was recommended to make
trial of your Sanative Tea, which has removed my complaints, and I
would wish to recommend it to others for the same disorder.

I remain, Sir, your humble servant,

H. MEIRICK.
Shore-place, Hackney,
Dec. 3, 1794.


CASE LVI. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's Sanative_ ENGLISH TEA.

MY daughter being afflicted with violent pains in her head and stomach,
I purchased some of your Tea, which has entirely relieved her from her
complaints. I am, Sir, &c.

JAMES BENNETT.
Bagnigge Marsh, opposite the Bull,
Dec. 10, 1794.


CASE LVII. _To the Proprietor of Dr. Solander's_ TEA.

BEING greatly troubled with a weakness of stomach, indigestion and loss
of appetite, I was strongly recommended to try the Sanative Tea, which
has had so good an effect in restoring me to health, that I wish to be
the means of promoting the more general use of it in all complaints of
that nature.

I am, Sir, &c.

L. FEGAN.
No. 2, Union-row, London Road,
St. George's Fields,
Dec. 30, 1794.


CASE LVIII. _To the Proprietor of the_ ENGLISH TEA.

SIR,

MY daughter being in a poor state of health, in consequence of a weak
and bilious Stomach, I was advised to try your Sanative Tea, which
produced so good an effect, that I take this opportunity of
acknowledging it, and am, SIR,

Your humble Servant,

JAMES JARVIS.
No. 21, Chapman-street, New Road,
St. George's in the East,
Feb. 18, 1795.


CASE LIX. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S SANATIVE TEA.

SIR,

BEING greatly afflicted with a violent head ach and lowness of spirits,
I was recommended to the use of Dr. SOLANDER'S TEA, which effectually
cured me, I am, SIR,

Your obedient servant,

EVAN EVANS.
No. 7, Winsay-row, St. George's-Fields,
March 29, 1795.


CASE LX. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

SIR,

THE considerable benefit I have received from your Sanative Tea in a
nervous disorder, with which I was afflicted, induces me to send you
this acknowledgement of it's merit, and am SIR,

Your very humble servant,

JOHN RICHARDSON.
Church-street, Mile End,
April 3, 1795.


CASE LXI. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S ENGLISH TEA.

SIR,

YOUR Sanative English Tea, as a corrector of a weak and bilious
stomach, attended with loss of appetite, with which I was long
afflicted, has proved so peculiarly efficacious, that I wish it was
more generally known by such as are troubled with that too common and
cruel complaint, I am, SIR,

Your most humble servant,

RICHARD COX.
No. 8, Paradise-street, Finsbury-square,
April 12, 1795.


CASE LXII. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

SIR,

BEING troubled with a depression of spirits in consequence of a bilious
complaint and indigestion, in justice to the merits of your Tea in
removing the phlegm from my stomach, and enlivening my spirits, I send
you this acknowledgment of its virtues. I am, Sir,

Your humble Servant,

ROBERT GRIBBLE.
Portland Place, Walworth,
July 4, 1795


CASE LXIII. _To the Proprietor of Dr.._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

SIR,

AFTER a long and severe illness my brother was afflicted with a nervous
complaint, attended with lowness of spirits; being advised to drink
your celebrated Tea, he has experienced so much benefit from its use,
that it is but justice to acknowledge its efficacy. I am, Sir,

Your most humble servant,

JAMES GILBERT.
Charles Street, Whitechapel.


CASE LXIV. _To the Proprietor of the_ ENGLISH TEA.

SIR,

I was a considerable time much afflicted with a bilious complaint and
very nervous, till fortunately hearing of the many Cures performed by
your Sanative Tea, in similar complaints, induced me to make trial of
it, and to persevere in its use. I now find myself so perfectly
restored to health, that I shall embrace every opportunity to recommend
it in the circle of my acquaintance. I am, Sir,

Your obedient servant,

WILLIAM MARSH.
Seward Street, Old Street Road.
July 20, 1795.


CASE LXV. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

SIR,

I have the satisfaction to inform you, that I have just cause to
approve your Sanative Tea, from its having cured me of a severe nervous
head-ache, after the unsuccessful prescriptions of several of the
faculty.

I am, Sir, Your most obliged servant,

BARBARY STARR.
No. 6, Golden Lane, Barbican.
August 17, 1795.


CASE LXVI. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

SIR,

A friend of mine having drank your Sanative Tea, and approved it, I was
induced to try it, and have experienced its efficacy in a bilious
complaint, I am, Sir,

Your humble servant,

ALLAN WILSON.
Corn Chandler, &c. Tottenham Court Road,
May 15, 1795


CASE LXVII. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S ENGLISH TEA.

SIR,

IN the course of my practice I have had several opportunities to
observe the sanative efficacy of your English Tea, in nervous and
bilious cases; I also approve of its use in hysterical disorders and
lowness of spirits, and shall recommend for such.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant,

THOMAS LANGFORD,
Apothecary.
Strand, near Exeter Change,
October 16, 1795.


CASE LXVIII. _To the Proprietor of the_ SANATIVE TEA.

SIR,

FROM the benefit I have experienced in drinking your Sanative Tea for a
bilious complaint, bordering on the jaundice, I send you this
acknowledgment of its merit.

I am, Sir, Your obedient servant,

CHARLES WARWICK.
No. 17, Baker's Buildings, Old Bethlem,
Nov. 25, 1795.


CASE LXIX. _To the Proprietor of the_ ENGLISH TEA.

SIR,

MY apothecary, Mr. Thomas Langford, of the Strand, having prescribed my
drinking Dr. Solander's Tea for a nervous fever and head-ache with
which I was afflicted, I persevered in its use some time, and am now
happily restored to health by that pleasant remedy.

I am Sir, Your humble servant,

C. RICHARDSON.
No. 9, Mount Row, opposite the Paragon, Deptford Road,
Nov. 14, 1795.


CASE LXX. _To the Proprietor of Dr._ SOLANDER'S TEA.

SIR,

I approve of your English Tea as a general beverage, particularly in
nervous hysterical cases, and for children in the measles and
small-pox, and shall recommend for such in the course of my practice.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant,

O. FAIRCLOUGH,
Surgeon, &c.
Beaumont Street, Portland Place,
Jan. 25, 1796.




T. GOLDING, Wholesale Agent to the Proprietor of this TEA, respectfully
informs the Nobility, Gentry, and the Public in general, that for
convenience of the Country, it is appointed to be sold by

_Mr._

And by one principal Vender of Medicines in every other City and Town
in England, Ireland, and Scotland.

The native and exotic Plants which chiefly compose this Tea, being
gathered and dried with peculiar attention to the preserving their
Sanative Virtues, must render them far more efficacious than many
similar Preparations, which, by being reduced to Powder, must have
those qualities destroyed they might otherwise possess.

                     *      *      *      *      *

_A CAUTION._

The high estimation in which Dr. Solander's Tea is held, by the first
circles of fashion, as a general beverage--the many cures it has
effected--and the pleasantness of its flavour having induced several
unprincipled persons to prepare and vend a base and spurious
preparation under a similar title; the Proprietor, in justice to the
known efficacy of this Tea, and to secure his property from further
depredations, has thought proper to have an engraved copper-plate
affixed to the canisters and packets of the genuine and original
preparation of Dr. Solander's Sanative English Tea. This plate being
entered at Stationer's Hall as the Act directs, August 20, 1794, will
subject such persons as imitate the same to a consequent prosecution.
The public are therefore cautioned from purchasing any article but what
is distinguished by the said plate, and to observe thereon the words
specified as above, of its being entered according to Act of
Parliament.




DIRECTIONS
FOR MAKING
DR. SOLANDER's TEA.

TWO or three tea-spoonfuls of this Tea being put into a tea-pot, or a
covered bason, pour boiling water upon it, and let it remain a short
time in a state of infusion.--After using milk and sugar, agreeably to
the taste, drink it moderately warm. A few tea-cups full are sufficient
for breakfast, tea in the afternoon, or any other time a person may
think proper.




CONTENTS.


IN THE INTRODUCTION.

 1 Health or Disease, greatly depend on the Choice of salutary or
unwholesome Tea.

 2 Dreadful Afflictions of nervous Disorders caused by foreign Tea.

 3 The Manner of India Tea affecting the Constitution.

                     *      *      *      *      *

IN THE ESSAY ON TEAS.

 1 Foreign Teas frequently cause an Atrophy or Consumption.

 2 The acrimonious Effects of foreign Teas explained.

 3 Foreign Teas not only impoverish, but corrupt the Blood.

 4 Palsy caused by drinking foreign Teas.

 5 Narcotic Salts in foreign Teas, very injurious.

 6 Foreign Teas a chief Cause of all windy Complaints.

 7 Opinions of different celebrated authors on foreign Teas.

                     *      *      *      *      *

IN THE MANNER OF USING.

 1 The Use of foreign Teas has entirely changed the Constitution of the
Europeans, within the last Century.

 2 Dr. Priestley's physical Experiment on foreign Teas.

 3 Dr. Hugh Smith's Opinion of their injurious Effects.

 4 Tissot's Opinion of their pernicious Qualities.

 5 Symptomatic Effects and Diseases caused by using them.

 6 Sir Hans Sloane's British and Dr. Solander's English Tea considered.

 7 Effects of Coffee and Chocolate.

 8 Virtues of Dr. Solander's Sanative Tea, proved by physical Analization.

 9 Aromatic Nature of the Sanative Tea.

10 The sanative Manner of its acting on the Constitution.

11 Dr. Solander's Tea superior to Chalybrates, in all nervous
Complaints.

                     *      *      *      *      *

IN THE PREPARATION OF THE SANATIVE TEA.

 1 How the natural and nutritious Qualities of the respective Plants
are preserved, &c. &c.

                     *      *      *      *      *

MANNER OF USING THE SANATIVE TEA.

 1 The Qualities of the Plants peculiarly adapted to the Time of using
them, so as to prove the most salutary of any Morning or Evening
Beverage whatever.

The Whole concludes with a brief physical Demonstration of their
beneficial and restorative Effects on the Constitutions of all Ages who
use them instead of foreign Teas.

                     *      *      *      *      *

The native and exotic Plants which chiefly compose Dr. Solander's Tea,
being gathered and dried with peculiar Attention, to the preserving of
their sanative Virtues, must render them far more efficacious than many
similar Preparations, which by being reduced to Powder, must have those
Qualities destroyed they might otherwise possess.

A Packet of Dr. Solander's Tea at 2s. 9d. is sufficient to breakfast
one Person a Month.





End of Project Gutenberg's A Treatise on Foreign Teas, by Hugh Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TREATISE ON FOREIGN TEAS ***

***** This file should be named 28549.txt or 28549.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/5/4/28549/

Produced by Robert Cicconetti and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
