The Project Gutenberg EBook of Prince and Rover of Cloverfield Farm, by 
Helen Fuller Orton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Prince and Rover of Cloverfield Farm

Author: Helen Fuller Orton

Illustrator: Hugh Spencer

Release Date: April 22, 2009 [EBook #28586]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINCE, ROVER OF CLOVERFIELD FARM ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)










PRINCE AND ROVER
OF CLOVERFIELD FARM




[Illustration: "'What is his name?' asked Sue"]




PRINCE AND ROVER
OF CLOVERFIELD FARM

BY
HELEN FULLER ORTON

_WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND DECORATIONS BY
HUGH SPENCER_

[Illustration]


NEW YORK
FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
PUBLISHERS




_Copyright, 1921, by_
HELEN FULLER ORTON

_All Rights Reserved_

First Printing,           June 9, 1921
Second Printing,     November 15, 1921
Third Printing,         April 18, 1922
Fourth Printing,      February 8, 1923
Fifth Printing,           May 15, 1923
Sixth Printing,       October 24, 1924
Seventh Printing,    November 30, 1925
Eighth Printing,     November 12, 1926
Ninth Printing,       October 25, 1927
Tenth Printing,         August 6, 1929
Eleventh Printing,    January 31, 1931
Twelfth Printing,     February 1, 1934
Thirteenth Printing,     July 24, 1935

_Printed in the United States of America_




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                      PAGE

   I THE NEW HORSE                                             1

  II PRINCE SEES HIS OLD HOME                                  7

 III HOW ROVER GOT THE COWS OUT OF THE CORN                   16

  IV PRINCE HELPS MAKE BREAD                                  23

   V ROVER BRINGS THE COWS FROM PASTURE                       29

  VI HOW ROVER RESCUED LITTLE YELLOW CHICK                    34

 VII PRINCE BRINGS HOME THE GROCERIES                         40

VIII WHY ROVER WENT TO CHURCH                                 46

  IX PRINCE HELPS MAKE ICE CREAM                              55

   X PRINCE PLAYS TAG                                         65

  XI ROVER DOES SOME MISCHIEF                                 72

 XII ROVER FINDS BABY BETTY                                   77

XIII PRINCE SEES A DRAGON                                     81

 XIV HOW ROVER SAVED THE HOUSE                                91

  XV PRINCE USES HIS EYES                                     96




ILLUSTRATIONS


"'What is his name?' asked Sue"                         _Frontispiece_

                                                             PAGE

"Rover made them all jump over the stone wall"                21

"'You must go home to the barn'"                              31

"Rover snapped at him with his sharp white teeth"             37

"'Strangers must not come into this yard when the folks
are away'"                                                    49

"Rover looked savagely at the dog in the looking glass"       75

"'Whoa, Prince, steady, Prince,' said she"                    87

"'Why! the bridge is gone!' said Farmer Hill"                 99




FOREWORD


These stories are founded on memories of my childhood on the farm. They
first took definite form in response to the requests of my own little
boys: "Tell me about when you were little, Mama." Some of them were
demanded over and over again; but it remained for Bobby, the youngest,
to insist that they be "put into a book."

Many a time, after listening to one of them, he would say: "I wish you
would write your stories, Mama, so that other children could hear
them."

Always I replied: "I will try sometime."

But never did the time come when there were not other things to do.

Finally, one night, when I had finished telling, "How Rover Got the
Cows out of the Corn," he said: "Mama, you always say you will write
your stories, but you never do. Truly, I'm afraid the other children
will never know them."

I looked up. There were tears in Bobby's eyes.

Did it mean so much to him? Would other children like the stories?

"Bobby," I said, "truly, I will try to write them. After Christmas I
will begin."

So after the holidays were over and the older boys had gone back to
college, the writing was commenced.

"Will they do?" said I to Bobby when he had heard the last story read.
"Do you think a publisher will like them?"

"The children will like them," he replied.

So that is how Prince and Rover happened to be written.

                        H. F. O.




[Illustration: THE NEW HORSE]

I


At Cloverfield Farm there were four horses--Dobbin and Bird, Dan and
Daisy. Dan was getting old so he could not go fast or work hard any
more.

"We need another horse," said Farmer Hill one morning. "Mr. Ross has
some for sale. I am going over to look at them to-day and perhaps I
will buy one."

"I hope," said John, "that you will get one that can go fast--faster
than Daisy."

"I hope," said Sue, "that you will get a fine-looking horse."

"And I hope," said mother, "that you will get a gentle horse, one that
will be safe for me to drive."

"I will try to please you all," said father, "but first of all we must
have a strong, willing horse--one that will do his share of the farm
work."

Father was gone all day, for Farmer Ross lived five miles away.

Toward supper-time Sue looked out of the window and exclaimed: "Oh,
there's father with the new horse."

Just then Bobby came running in and shouted: "Father's coming with the
new horse."

All three looked toward the road--mother and John and Sue.

Down the road was father in the buggy, driving Daisy while he led the
new horse behind the buggy with a halter.

All the family went out to see the new horse when Farmer Hill reached
the back yard.

"He is not as handsome as I had hoped," said Sue, "but he has a kind
face."

"Can he go fast?" asked John.

"He is not a race-horse," said father, "but he has long, slim legs and
can go over the ground pretty fast--quite fast enough for us."

"Is he gentle, so that I can drive him?" asked mother.

"Yes," said father, "he is a safe horse. He will not jump or run away
even if you meet a threshing machine."

"I am glad of that," said mother. "Daisy jumps to one side if even a
piece of paper blows near her."

"He is a good horse," said Farmer Hill. "He will not run away, but he
is very strong-bitted and will have his own way sometimes. It would
take a strong arm to hold him back if he wanted to run fast."

"What is his name?" asked Sue.

"His name is Prince," said father.

"That is a fine name," said Sue.

"I hope Prince will prove to be a good horse," said mother.

"He has one excellent trait," said father. "Farmer Ross says he always
knows the way home. His daughter lost her way once and Prince found the
right road and brought her safely home."

"What a wonderful thing!" said John.

"Now I will put Prince in the stall next to Daisy's," said father.

He went toward the barn leading Prince, while John and Bobby followed
along.

When they reached the barn, Farmer Hill gave Prince a drink from the
watering trough, opened the big door and led him into the stall.

In the manger were some oats, and the rack was filled with hay which he
could eat whenever he wished.

So Prince had plenty to eat and a good stall to stand in. But he was
not happy.

He kept thinking of his old home.

It was not nearly so big a stall as this and not nearly so fine a barn.
The oats there were no better and the hay no sweeter. But that had
been his home all his life, so he kept thinking about it and wishing he
were there.

The fact was that Prince was homesick.

"I'll go back there if I get a chance," thought Prince, "and live in my
old stall, with the horses in Farmer Ross's barn."




[Illustration: PRINCE SEES HIS OLD HOME]

II


The next day after Prince came to Cloverfield Farm, Farmer Hill had to
go to the city. He took Bobby with him and they were gone until
afternoon.

All the other horses were out in the field working. Prince was standing
in his stall, very lonesome.

He was still thinking of his old home and wishing he could go back
there.

"I'll go back if I get a chance," thought Prince.

After a while mother said to John: "Prince must be thirsty. Father may
not be back for some time, so I think you had better let Prince have a
drink."

John opened the stable door and led him to the watering trough in the
barn-yard.

All the while he was drinking, Prince was wondering how he could get
away.

John had hold of the rope but not very tightly.

Suddenly, Prince gave a jerk and the rope slipped from John's hand.

Away went Prince, through the barn-yard gate, up the lane, out the
gravel driveway and down the road.

The rope was dragging along, his mane was tossing and his heels went
galloping over the dusty road.

By this time Farmer Hill and Bobby were coming home from the city in
the buggy, and they saw a horse coming toward them down the road.

"Oh, father, someone's horse is running away!" said Bobby.

When the horse came near, father exclaimed: "Why, that is Prince! I
must stop him."

"Whoa, Prince, whoa!" he said.

Prince never stopped but went galloping past.

"Oh, what shall we do?" asked Bobby.

"We must go after him," said father. So he turned Daisy around and they
started after Prince.

"Get-up, Daisy, get-up," he said. He even took the whip from its socket
and touched Daisy, just ever so lightly, but enough to let her know
she must go fast.

And so they went down the road, Prince galloping along and Farmer Hill
following after.

For two miles along a stretch of level road they went, Prince getting
farther ahead all the time.

"I'll not let him catch me," thought Prince, "I shall run and run."

Then came a cross road and Prince turned to the right.

And so they went down this road, Prince galloping ahead, father and
Bobby following after.

When Prince came to the next corner, he turned to the left.

Bobby saw him turn. "Prince has turned onto another road," he said.
"Why doesn't he go straight ahead?"

"Perhaps he wants to go to some special place," said father.

By the time they reached the corner, Prince was out of sight around a
curve in the road.

"Do you think Prince will run a hundred miles?" asked Bobby.

"We shall see," answered father. "Daisy is getting tired, so we shall
have to go slowly for a while."

"Perhaps Prince will get tired and stop," said Bobby, "and then we can
catch him."

But Prince had been resting in the barn all day, and his long slim legs
felt as strong and fresh as when he started.

No, Prince was not tired, but he had reached the place where he wanted
to go.

That white house just beyond the curve in the road was Farmer Ross's.

When Prince reached it, he slowed up, walked through the gate and down
to the barn.

The hired man, when he took the horses out to work that day, had left
the stable door open.

So Prince walked around to the back of the barn, through the open door
and into his old stall.

"How nice to be here again," thought Prince.

When Farmer Hill and Bobby reached Mr. Ross's place, Prince was nowhere
in sight.

They drove into the yard. "Why do we stop here?" asked Bobby. "We must
keep going after Prince."

"We are going after Prince," said father.

"But Prince cannot be here," said Bobby. "He was galloping down the
road."

"I think we shall find him here," said father. "This is his old home."

Father and Bobby looked around the yard, but no Prince was there.

The open stable door was not in sight.

Just then Farmer Ross came up from the field. "We are looking for
Prince," said Farmer Hill. "He must have gotten out of my stable, for
we met him coming this way and followed after."

"I have not seen him. Let us look around," said Farmer Ross.

But Prince was nowhere to be seen.

"Are you sure he came in here?" asked Farmer Ross.

"Not sure," said Farmer Hill, "but I think he did. Could he have gone
into the barn?"

They went to the stable door and looked.

There was Prince standing quietly in his stall, eating hay from the
rack.

"I told you he always remembered the way home," said Farmer Ross.

"I'll take him back and this time we'll be more careful with him," said
Farmer Hill.

So again he led Prince home and put him in the stall beside Daisy.

Every day he fed him plenty of hay and oats, gave him a good bed of
straw to lie on at night, and always treated him kindly.

John sometimes gave him a lump of sugar, but father always led him out
to water and held the halter very tightly.

After a few weeks Prince liked the new home so well that he never
wanted to go back to the old one again.




[Illustration: HOW ROVER GOT THE COWS OUT OF THE CORN]

III


Cloverfield Farm had a big Shepherd dog named Rover.

One day Rover lay under the apple tree in the back yard, taking his
afternoon nap. Just over the fence in the pasture Farmer Hill's cows
were grazing.

Suddenly Molly, the Big Red Cow, came near the stone wall on the
farther side of the pasture. She smelled the corn in Neighbor Newman's
cornfield beyond the stone wall.

Now if there is one thing that cows like better than anything else, it
is growing sweet corn. Molly looked at it longingly over the stone
wall. She smelled it in the breeze.

Not far away Molly saw a low place in the wall. Over this she jumped
into the cornfield. All the other cows saw her and followed--the White
Cow, the Black Cow, the two Speckled Cows, and the Little Red Cow.

They all began eating Neighbor Newman's corn.

Just then Mrs. Hill looked over that way and saw the cows in the
cornfield.

Farmer Hill had gone to town that day, so he could not get the cows out
of the corn. The hired man was down in the field by the woods, so he
could not get the cows out of the corn.

"Who will get the cows out of the corn?" thought Mrs. Hill.

Going to the back door, she spied Rover taking his afternoon nap.
"Rover, Rover," she called, "the cows are in the corn." But Rover only
opened one eye a very little bit and wagged his tail, a very weeny
mite, and went on with his nap.

Again she called, very loudly, "Rover, Rover, get the cows out of the
corn, quick! quick!"

Rover understood this time and jumped to his feet. "Look, there they
are," said Mrs. Hill, pointing to the cornfield.

When Rover saw what had happened, he ran just like a flash across the
pasture lot, jumped over the stone wall and began to bark at the Big
Red Cow.

"Bow-wow, bow-wow," barked Rover, which meant, "Go back into your
pasture."

But the Big Red Cow only switched her tail and went on eating corn.

"Bow-wow, bow-wow," barked Rover again; but still she went on eating
corn, and all the other cows went on eating corn.

Then Rover bit the leg of the Big Red Cow. It was only just a little
bite, but she knew it meant, "Get out of the cornfield or I will bite
you very hard."

The Big Red Cow went to the stone wall with Rover barking at her heels,
until she jumped back into the pasture lot.

Then he went to the other cows and made them all jump back over the
stone wall into the pasture lot--the White Cow, the Black Cow, the two
Speckled Cows, and the Little Red Cow.

Just as the last cow was jumping over the wall, Farmer Hill came home
along the road from the city. He saw what Rover had done.

Rover got back to his place under the apple tree just as Farmer Hill
drove into the yard. "Good dog, good dog," said Farmer Hill in a kind
voice.

Rover looked up and wagged his tail.

"Is there a bone for Rover?" said Farmer Hill. Mrs. Hill went to the
cupboard and found a big bone and gave it to Rover.

[Illustration: "Rover made them all jump over the stone wall"]

"I must have the men fix that hole in the wall," said Farmer Hill.

When Rover was through with the bone, he went back to finish his
afternoon nap under the apple tree.




[Illustration: PRINCE HELPS MAKE BREAD]

IV


"What are you going to do to-day?" asked Bobby one morning.

Father looked across the table with a twinkle in his eye.

"Prince and Daisy and I are going to help make bread to-day, Bobby,"
said he.

"Why, father," said Bobby, "you cannot make bread and horses cannot
make bread."

"I did not say we were going to make it alone," said father. "I said we
were going to help."

"Mother makes the bread. She makes it in the kitchen," said Bobby.

"But we are going to help," said father.

"Can Prince and Daisy come into the kitchen?" asked Bobby.

"No, they will not come into the kitchen," said father. "They truly
will help, though. Would you like to see them?"

"Yes," said Bobby. "That would be fun."

"Come down to the field below the barn with me," said father.

So Bobby ran along beside father down the lane to the Old Red Barn.

Father harnessed Prince and Daisy, drove them to the field below the
barn and hitched them to a tool with a shiny steel point.

"But, father, that is a plow," said Bobby. "Mother does not make bread
with a plow. She makes it in a pan and stirs it with a big spoon."

"That is true," said father, "but we shall help to make bread with a
plow."

Soon father started the horses while he held the handles of the plow so
its shiny steel point would dig down into the hard earth.

Straight to the other end of the field they went, leaving behind them a
long furrow of brown fresh earth.

Back they came toward Bobby, making another furrow. And so back and
forth, back and forth, all the forenoon they went.

Bobby sometimes trudged along by father, sometimes he rested at the
end of the field.

Bobby was watching very hard. At last he said, "Father, there is not
any bread yet. When shall I see the bread?"

"It takes a long time to make bread from this brown earth," said
father.

"Does it take all day?" said Bobby, who was beginning to get tired.

"Yes, it takes more than a day," said father. "It takes about a year."

"I think mother's way is better," said Bobby. "It takes her only one
day."

"But mother could not make bread at all, if we did not help," said
father.

"Oh, indeed, she does," said Bobby. "I have seen her make it all
alone."

"Bobby," said father, "of what does mother make our bread?"

Now Bobby was only six years old, but he had often watched mother make
bread.

"She makes it from flour," said he.

"What is the flour made from?" asked father.

"The miller grinds it from wheat," said Bobby.

"And where does the wheat come from?" asked father.

"It grows in the field," said Bobby.

"So far you are right, Bobby," said father. "Now look at the ground
over there where I have not yet plowed. Would wheat grow if I sowed it
there?"

"I suppose not," said Bobby.

"No, indeed," said father. "It would lie on top of the ground and
wither and die; but when I sow it in the soft earth which Prince and
Daisy have plowed, it will grow."

"Now I see," said Bobby, "Prince and Daisy do truly help to make
bread."

"You are good horses," said he, patting them on their noses.

Just then the dinner bell rang.

"Come, Bobby," said father. "We will take Prince and Daisy to the barn
and give them hay and oats. Then you and I will go up to the house and
eat some of mother's nice bread."

"Oh, father," said Bobby, "you forgot. It is Prince and Daisy's bread
too."




[Illustration: ROVER BRINGS THE COWS FROM PASTURE]

V


Down on Cloverfield Farm the afternoon sun was sinking toward the West.

The swallows were coming home to their nests in the barn and a gentle
breeze was starting the windmill.

Farmer Hill looked at his watch; then he went to the bars at the head
of the long lane and began putting them down.

Rover, seeing this, came running up to him. "Yes, Rover," said Farmer
Hill, "it is time to go for the cows."

Down the long lane trotted Rover, past the apple orchard, past the
clover field, past the field of wheat stubble, to the thirteen-acre
lot.

In the farthest corner of the field, with her feet in the cool water of
the pond, was the Big Red Cow. Near-by, under the elm trees, were all
the other cows lying on the grass.

Straight to the Big Red Cow ran Rover and barked. The cow knew what
that meant. It said, "You must go home to the barn." So she started
toward the lane.

Then all the other cows followed.

Rover came trotting along behind, barking sometimes if they tried to
turn back.

So they all went up the long, long lane toward the old red barn--the
Big Red Cow, the White Cow, the Black Cow, the two Speckled Cows and
the Little Red Cow.

[Illustration: "'You must go home to the barn'"]

Past the field of wheat stubble, past the clover field, and along the
orchard fence, they went.

As they came near the harvest apple tree, the Big Red Cow smelled the
apples. Now next to fresh green corn, cows like apples better than
anything else. So the Big Red Cow tried to jump over the rail fence, to
get some apples.

She might have gotten over; but Rover ran up to her and barked and
snapped at her heels with his sharp teeth, until she started on again.

So all the cows went up the lane and through the bars into the
barn-yard. They drank the cool water in the watering trough and then
went into their stalls in the stable.

Farmer Hill turned to Rover and said, "Good dog, good dog!"

Rover wagged his tail very hard. He liked to bring the cows from
pasture.

Then he went to the windmill to wait till the children should come with
their tin cups to drink the nice warm milk at milking time.




[Illustration: HOW ROVER RESCUED LITTLE YELLOW CHICK]

VI


Mrs. Plymouth Rock lived in the chicken coop out by the wood-pile with
her brood of eleven chicks. There were black chicks and yellow chicks,
but the nicest of all was Little Yellow Chick.

Mother Hen always stayed in the coop.

The little chicks would jump out between the slats and go off through
the grass and into the driveway and among the chips of the wood-pile.

When Mother Hen wanted them to come home she would call, "Cluck,
cluck, cluck, cluck!" and all the little chicks would come running to
the coop.

One hot summer afternoon, Mrs. Hill was sitting on the back porch
mending stockings. All the big hens were scattered around the
place--some in the garden, some in the cornfield, some in the
farmyard--scratching for bugs and worms.

Suddenly there was a great cackling and scurrying among the fowls.
Those in the garden ran and cackled, those in the cornfield ran and
cackled, those in the farmyard ran and cackled. They all ran as fast as
they could to the hen house.

Mrs. Hill, hearing the commotion, stood up and looked around to see
what was the matter.

There in the sky coming toward the farmyard, was a large gray hen hawk.

Old Mother Hen heard the cries of the other fowls and knew there was
danger, so she called her chicks to come home. "Cluck, cluck, cluck,
cluck!" went Mother Hen.

All the little chicks tried to run home to the chicken coop. They ran
as fast as their little short legs could carry them.

Little Yellow Chick could not run fast. He tried very hard, but
stumbled over a chip near the wood-pile.

The hawk up in the sky with his sharp eye saw Little Yellow Chick and
flew straight toward him.

Old Mother Hen could not help Little Yellow Chick, for she could not
get out of the coop.

[Illustration: "Rover snapped at him with his sharp white teeth"]

Mrs. Hill ran toward him, but she could not help him for she could not
run fast enough.

But Rover, lying under the pine tree in the front yard, heard the
commotion and came running like the wind past Mrs. Hill.

He jumped at the fierce hawk and snapped at him with his sharp white
teeth, just as the hawk was swooping to pick up Little Yellow Chick.

When Mr. Hawk heard the barking and saw Rover dash towards him he
forgot about wanting to eat Little Yellow Chick and flew away as fast
as he could.

He flew up into the sky and over the woods and far away.

Mrs. Hill picked up Little Yellow Chick and carried him to Old Mother
Hen in the coop. Old Mother Hen took him safely under her wing.

"Good dog, good dog!" said Mrs. Hill to Rover as she patted his neck.

Mrs. Hill went back to mending stockings on the porch.

But Rover lay down near the hen-coop to guard Little Yellow Chick.




[Illustration: PRINCE BRINGS HOME THE GROCERIES]

VII


The Big City was ten miles from Cloverfield Farm. Farmer Hill had to go
there often on business. Mrs. Hill had to go there to buy shoes and
clothing. Sometimes they drove, but if they were in a hurry they went
to the village a mile away and took the train.

"I must go to the city to-day to attend to some important business,"
said father one morning. "It will not take long, so I will go down on
the nine o'clock train and back on the eleven."

"Are you going to drive to the train or walk?" asked mother. "I need
some groceries before dinner and wish you would drive so you could
bring them back."

"I will drive then," said father. "I meant to walk."

Mother wrote down a long list of groceries--flour, sugar, tea, raisins,
molasses, rolled oats and spices.

"I will leave the list with Mr. Brown," said father, "so he will have
them ready for me when I come back and I won't have to wait."

So father drove Prince to the village and tied him to the hitching post
in front of Mr. Brown's store.

He gave the list to the grocer.

"Please have them ready when I come back on the eleven o'clock train,"
said he.

Then father went to his train.

The grocer put up the order. "I might as well put them in the buggy for
him now," said he.

So he carried the groceries out and packed them under the seat.

Farmer Hill intended to come back on the eleven o'clock train; but his
business took him longer than he expected, so he could not come until
the next train at one o'clock.

Meanwhile Prince stood very still and patient for some time. Then he
began to take a few steps forward once in a while, and then a few steps
backward.

Prince liked to go. He did not like to stand still so long.

Every time he stepped back and forth, the knot in the halter loosened a
little. After a while, about one o'clock, it became entirely untied.

When father got off the train, he was still thinking of his business in
the city and was in a hurry to get home. So he never once thought about
Prince, but struck off across lots and hurried home afoot.

"Where are Prince and the groceries?" asked mother, as father came into
the house.

"Prince and the groceries?" said he, "Prince and the groceries? Sure
enough, I did drive Prince down this morning. I entirely forgot him. He
must be standing at the hitching post in front of the store. I'll go
back and get him."

Before this time Prince was quite hungry. He was very tired standing
still so long. He wished he could go home to his stall and eat his
dinner.

Still Farmer Hill did not come for him.

The next time he stepped forward, there was no halter to stop him; so
he kept on walking down the street.

The thought of home and his dinner made him want them very much.

So he began to trot.

Just as Farmer Hill was leaving the house to go after him, Prince
turned into the yard.

"There is Prince now," said father. "He has come home alone."

"But I need the groceries," said mother. "I must have the sugar right
away. One of us will have to drive back after them."

"Sure enough," said father, "I'll go because I am the one who forgot
them."

He started to get into the buggy.

"Why, here are the groceries," said he. "Prince has brought them
home."




[Illustration: WHY ROVER WENT _to_ CHURCH]

VIII


On Sundays at Cloverfield Farm Rover always stayed at home to guard the
place while the family went to church.

Just once, a long time ago, he had followed clear to the church door,
when Mr. Hill had sent him back home.

One Sunday in summer, father hitched the horses to the big carriage and
drove up to the horse block where mother and the children were waiting
for him.

"Did you lock all the doors?" asked father.

"Yes," said mother, "and all the windows too."

"Where is Rover?" asked father.

"He is under the apple tree," said John.

Then they got into the carriage and drove to church--father, John and
Sue on the front seat; mother, Bobby and Baby Betty on the back seat.

Past two farm houses, under the Big Trees, past two more farm houses,
down the little hill and through the village they went to the big stone
church on the brow of the big hill.

After father had driven the horses and carriage under the shed at the
rear of the church, all the family went into church and up the middle
aisle to their pew near the front.

Meanwhile at the farm Rover was having a good nap under the apple tree.

Suddenly he was awakened by the sound of wheels on the gravel drive. Up
he jumped and ran up the driveway to welcome the family home.

But what was his surprise to see a strange horse and carriage and
strange people in the carriage!

"Strangers must not come into this yard when the folks are away,"
thought Rover. So he ran toward them, growling and barking.

"Bow-wow, bow-wow," barked Rover, "bow-wow-wow, gr-r-r-"

"Hello, Rover," said a man's voice.

[Illustration: "'Strangers must not come into this yard when the folks
are away'"]

"Why, I have heard that voice before," thought Rover.

Then he ran nearer and saw that the man was Uncle James and the lady
beside him was Aunt Polly.

Rover stopped barking and growling and wagged his tail very hard and
looked pleased, for he liked them.

Uncle James got out of the carriage and went to the front door.

He rang the bell and waited a few moments, but nobody came. He rang it
again, but nobody came.

"I thought somebody always stayed at home with Baby Betty," said Uncle
James.

"Perhaps some one is in the garden or out in the orchard," said Aunt
Polly.

Uncle James hitched the horse, and then they looked in the garden and
in the orchard, but could find nobody.

"Where are all the folks?" asked Aunt Polly of Rover.

"Find Bobby and Baby Betty," said Uncle James.

Rover pricked up his ears and opened his eyes very wide. He looked from
Uncle James to Aunt Polly.

"Go find Baby Betty," said Aunt Polly.

Then Uncle James and Aunt Polly went to the front porch and sat in the
big rockers.

Rover started down the road toward the church. He trotted along quite
fast past the two farm houses, under the Big Trees, past two more farm
houses, down the little hill and through the village to the big stone
church on the brow of the big hill.

The front door was open, so he went through the vestibule into the big
room where the minister was preaching.

"Bow-wow, bow-wow," barked Rover.

Farmer Hill looked around quickly, for he knew Rover's voice.

When Rover saw Farmer Hill's face, he ran up the middle aisle to the
pew where the Hill family sat.

When they heard a dog bark in church, some of the boys snickered and
some of the girls laughed and some of the older people smiled, but
Farmer Hill put his hand on Rover's head and said very softly, "Lie
down, Rover."

So he lay down in the aisle with his head resting on his front paws and
kept very still all through the service.

When meeting was over, the minister came to Rover and patted him and
said, "You behaved nicely in church, Rover."

As they were driving home, John said, "I wonder why Rover came to
church."

"Perhaps he was lonesome at home alone," said mother.

"Perhaps something is the matter there," said father.

As they came into the yard, Sue was the first to see the visitors.

"Why, there are Uncle James and Aunt Polly," she exclaimed.

"Didn't Rover tell you that we were here?" asked Uncle James.

"So that is why he came to church, is it?" said mother.

"Rover is an intelligent dog," said father.

Rover looked from one to another and lay down on the porch where they
were all visiting together.




[Illustration: PRINCE HELPS MAKE ICE CREAM]

IX


It was the middle of winter and Cloverfield Farm was deep under snow.
The ponds were all frozen over and even the little brook had stopped
babbling and was frozen into silvery ice.

Bobby liked the winter, because he could coast on the Little Hill and
take rides in the big bob-sleigh.

There was no work to be done on the farm in winter; so Prince and Daisy
stood all day in their stalls in the Old Red Barn.

"How would you like a long sleigh ride to-day, Bobby?" asked father one
morning.

"I'm ready for one; that would be great fun. Where are you going?"
answered Bobby.

"Well, harvest time has come," said father. "So Prince and Daisy and I
are going to help harvest butter and ice cream."

"This is not harvest time," said Bobby; "harvest time is in the summer
when it is very hot. And besides, Prince and Daisy cannot make butter
and ice cream. Mother makes the butter, and John freezes the ice
cream."

"Do you remember, Bobby, how they helped make bread?" asked father.

"Yes," said Bobby.

"If you will come with me, I will show you how they _do truly_ help to
make butter and ice cream too," said father.

"Shall I have to go far, father?"

"Yes, it is quite a long drive. Ask mother to bundle you up warm," said
father.

Before long, father was at the door with the big bob-sleigh drawn by
Prince and Daisy. He tucked Bobby in warm and snug with the buffalo
robe, and then away they went. The bells on the horses jingled merrily
as they went skimming along over the snow.

"Are we going to the city?" asked Bobby.

"No, Bobby, not this time. We are going to the river," said father.

"I never saw any ice cream in the river," said Bobby.

"Keep your eyes wide open, Bobby, and you will see Prince and Daisy
help get ice cream from the river," said father.

When they came to the river, Bobby could see that it was all one mass
of ice. Men working there had swept the snow off and were cutting the
ice into great blocks.

"Oh!" said Bobby, "this is where we get the ice for John to put in the
freezer."

Father drove close down to the edge of the river and the men filled the
sleigh with a great load of the big blocks of ice.

"May I have a dish of the ice cream to-day?" asked Bobby.

"Not to-day," said father, "not until summer."

They were on the way home now, the horses going slowly with the heavy
load.

"But it will not be summer for a long time," said Bobby. "By that time
the snow and ice will all melt."

"This ice will not melt," said father, "even when spring comes and the
snow goes off."

"That is strange," said Bobby. "Truly I am afraid it will melt and then
we shall have no ice cream."

"Just watch," said father, "and see where I put it."

When they reached home father drove to the ice house.

"Look in there," he said to Bobby, "and tell me what you see."

"I see a great pile of sawdust," said Bobby. "You won't put the ice in
there will you, father? I do not want sawdust in my ice cream."

"We will see that no sawdust gets into the ice cream," said father,
"and yet we could not make the ice cream without it."

Father carried the big cakes of ice into the ice house and piled them
in rows on a deep layer of sawdust. Then he went for another load and
another and another. All that week he kept drawing ice until the ice
house was nearly full. Over the top of the ice and around the sides of
it he packed sawdust until it looked like a mountain.

"Are you trying to keep the ice warm?" asked Bobby.

"No, Bobby, I am covering it with the sawdust to keep it cool," said
father.

"That is very strange," said Bobby. "Mother puts blankets on me to keep
me warm. You put a blanket on the ice to keep it cool. I think there
must be a mistake somewhere."

After a few months spring came and the snow melted and the ice on the
river melted.

One day mother said, "If you will get me some ice we will have ice
cream to-day. I am going to churn too and will need some for the
butter."

"I am afraid the ice is all melted, mother," said Bobby.

"Come with me and we will see," said father.

So they went to the ice house. Father climbed on top of the mountain of
sawdust. Bobby climbed after him.

Father dug some of the sawdust off, then said, "Now you may dig,
Bobby."

Bobby began to scoop the sawdust off. Pretty soon his hand touched
something cold. He dug some more and then came to a piece of shiny
silvery ice.

Father lifted it out. There was a large cake of glittering ice just as
they had put it in last winter.

"Now we'll wash the sawdust off," said father.

So they stopped at the well and washed it all clean, and then broke it
into pieces. Part of it they took to mother to keep the butter cool;
part of it to John to freeze the ice cream.

When the ice cream was frozen and Bobby was eating a dish of it, father
said, "Well, Bobby, who made the ice cream to-day?"

"I see now," said Bobby. "We could not have had it on this hot day if
Prince and Daisy had not drawn the heavy loads of ice last winter."

"And I could not have made such good butter without the ice," said
mother.

"If horses liked ice cream," said Bobby, "I would give some of mine to
Daisy and Prince."




[Illustration: PRINCE PLAYS TAG]

X


This is a story about Prince when he was naughty. It was one time when
Farmer Hill let him out into the pasture for a day and Prince would not
come back at night.

It began when Farmer Hill said one Sunday morning in spring, "I will
turn Prince and Daisy into the pasture to-day and let the other horses
take us to church."

All winter long Prince had been in his stall in the barn, except once
in a while when he had been driven to the village or the city.

He had been standing in the dark stall so long that when Farmer Hill
turned him loose in the pasture, he felt very strange.

At first he just stood near the bars and nibbled the short fresh grass.
Then he slowly walked around to the clump of trees in the middle of the
lot and ate some more grass; then he went to the far corner and took a
drink of cool water from the little brook.

The sun was shining brightly, the birds were singing in the trees.
Prince liked the bright sunlight, he liked the gentle breeze, he liked
the fresh grass.

"I shall stay here always," thought Prince. "I should like to run and
kick up my heels."

So he kicked up his heels and ran to the other end of the field.

After a while he went galloping back again.

All day Prince and Daisy were out in the pasture, sometimes eating
grass, sometimes resting under the trees, sometimes running and
prancing around.

Toward night, when it was time for them to go back into the stable,
Farmer Hill came to the bars and whistled.

They both heard him whistle.

Daisy came running toward him, and he opened the stable door and put
her in.

But Prince did not come.

Instead, he turned and ran to the other end of the field.

"I shall not go into the stable tonight," thought Prince. "I shall stay
here always."

"He acts as frisky as a young colt," said father. "I shall have to put
a halter on and lead him."

So he took the halter from its peg near the stable door, and walked
toward Prince.

Farmer Hill had almost reached Prince, who had been standing quite
still, when suddenly Prince kicked up his heels, gave his mane a toss
and was off like the wind.

"Whoa, Prince," said Farmer Hill.

Prince did not stop until he reached the other end of the field near
the barn.

Farmer Hill came back toward him, and once more Prince stood still
until he was almost there and then bounded off.

"It is like a game of tag," said Bobby, who had been watching by the
bars. "You never can catch him, father."

"I will fool him," said father. "I shall catch him then."

"How will you do it?" asked Bobby.

"Just watch, Bobby, and you will see," said father.

Father got a measure of oats from the granary and walked toward Prince,
holding it out to him.

When Prince saw the measure of oats, he wanted some to eat.

After a while he started to walk up to the measure. Then he stopped.

"I will not go near him," thought Prince. "I will stay out in the
pasture."

But the more he thought about the oats, the more he wanted them. After
a while a bright idea came to him.

"I will go and take one bite," thought Prince, "and then I will run
away quickly."

So he walked slowly up to Farmer Hill.

Farmer Hill let him put his head into the measure.

Prince took one bite. That tasted so good that he took another and
another until the oats were all eaten. While he was eating, Farmer Hill
slipped the halter around his neck.

Then he tried to get away, but the halter held him tight.

"I have you now," said Farmer Hill. "You must come into the stable."

As father led him to the stable, Bobby said, "Prince was naughty that
time, wasn't he, father?"

"Yes," said father, "he led me a merry chase, but I cannot blame him
much. Who would not rather be outdoors on a day like this than in the
finest stable, or house either?"

"I think Prince was sensible," said Bobby.




[Illustration: ROVER DOES SOME MISCHIEF]

XI


Cloverfield Farmhouse had a new looking glass. It was a very large
looking glass, reaching to the ceiling and almost down to the floor. It
was in the parlor between the front windows. On the little shelf under
it were two beautiful vases.

Rover was not allowed in the parlor except once in a while. One Sunday
John let him come in and lie in the corner.

After a while all the people went out of the parlor. Rover was there
alone fast asleep. When he wakened, he looked all around the room.

Then he got up and walked around to find a door.

There between the front windows was surely a door into another room.

Rover saw himself in the looking glass, but thought it was another dog
coming toward him into the parlor.

He began to bark at the other dog. But the other dog did not go away.
He even barked at Rover.

Rover went nearer and the other dog came nearer too.

Then Rover barked louder and showed his sharp white teeth. The other
dog showed his sharp white teeth too, but did not go away.

Rover barked and barked, which meant, "You must get right out of this
house." Then he ran at the other dog very fast.

He ran so fast that he bumped his head hard on the looking glass. He
knocked over one of the pretty vases and broke it into a hundred
pieces.

Mother and Sue heard the crash. Father and John heard the crash. They
all came running into the parlor.

There, among the broken pieces of the vase, was Rover still looking
savagely at the dog in the looking glass.

John pulled him away from the glass. Mother said, "Bad dog, bad dog!"
Sister Sue scolded him and opened the door and put him outdoors.

[Illustration: "Rover looked savagely at the dog in the looking
glass"]

"Rover was fooled that time," said father.

"We must not allow him in the parlor again," said mother.

Rover knew he must have done something wrong. With his head down and
his tail hanging very limp he went to the horse barn to lie in the dark
corner and think it over.




[Illustration: ROVER FINDS BABY BETTY]

XII


"Where is Baby Betty?" said mother, coming up from the cellar where she
had been making butter.

"I saw Baby Betty's pink sunbonnet in the front yard by the maple tree
an hour ago," said big brother John. Then he ran to the front yard and
looked everywhere--behind the maple tree, under the lilac bush, down by
the road, but no Baby Betty was there.

"I saw Baby Betty down by the pump not long ago," said father. Then
they looked by the well, and in the corn crib and all through the
farmyard, but no Baby Betty was there.

"I saw Baby Betty's curly head in the garden a while ago," said big
sister Sue. Then Sue ran to the garden and looked under the currant
bushes, behind the asparagus bed and in the strawberry patch.

But no Baby Betty was there.

"Where, oh, where is Baby Betty?" said mother. Then they all looked,
down the lane, in the apple orchard, in the clover field and behind the
haystack, but no Baby Betty could be found.

Just then Rover came home from the village with the hired man. "Where
is Baby Betty?" said father. "Find Baby Betty." Then he showed Rover
Betty's little pink sunbonnet. Rover smelled of it and looked around
the yard and whined. First he ran to the front yard and then to the
pump, then to the garden and then to the strawberry patch beyond the
garden.

"He thinks she is in the strawberry patch," said Sue, "but I looked
there and I surely would have seen her."

Up and down the rows went Rover, and across to the farther side of the
patch. Soon he stopped and barked a little and then came running back.

Again he started over to the strawberry patch. "I believe he wants us
to follow," said mother.

Then all of them followed Rover away to the farther side of the
strawberry patch.

There, behind a clump of tall plants, with her hand clutching some ripe
berries, was Baby Betty fast asleep.

Father lifted her and carried her to the house. Mother came close along
by his side; while John and Sue patted Rover's neck and said, "Good
dog, good dog."

Rover looked up at them with his kind eyes and wagged his tail very
hard.

Baby Betty went to playing again in the yard, and Rover lay down under
the apple tree to watch over her.




[Illustration: PRINCE SEES A DRAGON]

XIII


"May I have a horse to drive to town this afternoon?" asked mother one
noon in summer. "I must take Bobby and Betty to get them some new
shoes."

"Yes," said father. "You may have Prince to-day. He is our safest
horse."

So Sue stayed at home to get supper, while mother and Bobby and Betty
went away in the carriage toward the city.

The city was ten miles away. It was a pleasant drive, past the little
red school house, past farmhouses and orchards and cornfields and
woods.

When about half way there, down the road in front of them there
appeared a big threshing machine, with its engine drawing it along.

"Chug-chug-chug-chug," went the engine. Slowly it came toward them.

"Do you think Prince will be scared?" asked Bobby.

"I hope not," said mother, "but you had better take fast hold of Baby
Betty so she will not tumble off the seat if he jumps."

"Chug-chug-chug-chug," slowly came the engine.

Prince pricked up his ears.

"Whoa, Prince," said Mrs. Hill, "steady, Prince."

"I'm not afraid of that," thought Prince. "I have seen that thing
before. It makes a lot of noise, but it never hurts me."

So he went along steady and easy past the threshing machine.

After a while they came to a railroad crossing.

"I will look down the track and you look up the track," said mother to
Bobby.

"I see a train coming," said Bobby.

"We will wait until it goes past before we try to cross," said mother
"Whoa, Prince."

So Prince stood facing the track.

On came the train, very fast. "Chug, chug, chug," went the engine.
"Toot, toot," went the whistle. "Ding, dong, ding, dong," went the
bell. Soon the train went whizzing past.

Prince did not jump. He just stood still and looked at the train as it
passed. You see, he had seen trains many times before.

When the train had passed, Mrs. Hill drove over the track and on to
town.

After she had bought the new shoes for Bobby and Betty, they started
home again.

Just as they were going down Main Street, along came a parade with a
brass band at its head. "We will stop here and see the parade," said
mother.

When the band came near them it played very loud. The drums were
beating, "rub-a-dub-dub, rub-a-dub." The horns and the fifes and the
flutes and the drums, all made a beautiful big sound.

Prince pricked up his ears.

"I have heard something like that before," thought he. "It never did me
any harm."

So he stood very still as the band went past.

After the parade had gone by, they started toward home.

"Prince seems not to be afraid of anything," said mother.

As they drove along, Bobby was silent for a long time.

At last he said, "I know what this is like, mother."

"What is it like?" asked mother.

"To market, to market, to buy a fat pig. Home again, home again,
jiggity jig."

"Only this time," said mother, "it is, To market, to market, to buy
some new shoes. Home again, home again, what is the news?"

It was almost dark by the time they passed the little red school house.

Suddenly in the road ahead there appeared a strange object, coming
straight toward them. It sounded something like a steam engine. "Chug,
chug, chug, chug," it went.

In its face were two great glaring eyes.

"I never saw one of those before," thought Prince, "but I shall not
jump."

[Illustration: "'Whoa, Prince, steady, Prince,' said she"]

On it came toward them very fast.

Just as it was almost there, it went "honk! honk! honk!"

Prince pricked up his ears. Mother held tight to the reins. "Whoa,
Prince; steady, Prince," she said.

Prince did not mean to jump, but he had never seen anything like that
before and he was just a little scared. Just then the strange thing
went "honk, honk," close to his ears, as it went whizzing past.

Before they had time to think, jump went Prince to one side, which made
Baby Betty slide off from the seat.

"What was that?" asked Bobby.

But mother did not answer, for Prince was pulling hard on the lines
and going along very fast.

"It must have been a dragon," thought Bobby.

Though mother pulled on the reins as hard as she could, Prince did not
slow up, for he was a strong-bitted horse and did not mind mother's
pulling. He went fast all the way home.

When he reached home, Prince just slowed up of his own accord and went
trotting slowly into the yard.

Father was waiting by the horse-block to help them out.

"What fine new shoes!" he said. "What is the news?"

"Prince jumped and ran when he saw the dragon," said Bobby.

"The dragon?" said father. "Did you see a dragon?"

"Yes," said Bobby, "and it hissed and sputtered and went 'squawk,
squawk,' very loud and had two great big eyes."

"Oh, that must have been one of those horseless carriages," said
father.

Bobby shook his head.

"I am quite sure it was a dragon," said he. "Prince thought so too."




[Illustration: HOW ROVER SAVED _the_ HOUSE]

XIV


It was a cold winter's night at Cloverfield Farm. Outdoors the snow lay
deep on the ground. The cows and the horses were warm in the Old Red
Barn. The hens and chickens were safe in the warm hen house. The pigs
were snug and warm in the pig pen.

Inside the house a big fire was burning merrily in the sitting-room
stove. A fire was burning in the kitchen range.

All the family had gone to bed. Rover had been allowed to sleep in the
kitchen that night instead of in the cold wood shed.

In the middle of the night the wind blew hard and made the kitchen fire
roar up the chimney. It became hot--so hot that the wood around the
chimney began to smoke and burn.

All the family were asleep upstairs. They did not smell the smoke. They
could not see the flames.

But Rover was awakened by the smell of smoke and the crackling of the
fire. The smoke made his eyes smart. He knew that something was wrong,
so he began to bark.

But nobody heard him and nobody came. Then he ran into the dining-room
and barked, but nobody heard him and nobody came.

He went to the door of the hall which had been left open just a little.
Up the stairs, barking and barking, went Rover.

Farmer Hill heard him, and thought, "What is Rover barking for?" Mrs.
Hill heard him and said, "Something must be the matter. Let's go and
see." John heard him and jumped up and ran down stairs. Farmer Hill and
Mrs. Hill ran down stairs.

Then they smelled the smoke and saw the fire.

Mrs. Hill grabbed a pail of water and threw it on the fire.

Mr. Hill went to the cistern pump and pumped a pail of water and threw
it on the fire.

John ran out to the well and brought a pail of water and threw it on
the fire. Sue brought snow and put it on the fire.

All together they worked, and soon the fire stopped blazing and went
out.

"If it had not been for Rover, the house might have burned down," said
Farmer Hill.

"Rover is a good dog," said Mrs. Hill as she patted him.

"Good dog, good dog!" said John and Sue.

They gave Rover a nice warm blanket to lie on, and fixed the stove so
it could not draw so hard.

Then the family went back to sleep.

Rover lay down on the blanket, but he did not go to sleep.

All that night he kept watch.




[Illustration: PRINCE USES HIS EYES]

XV


One day in summer Farmer Hill said at breakfast, "I must go to the city
to-day. There are many things to do, but I'll be back before dark."

Then he hitched Prince to the carriage and started off along the road,
down a long hill, over the little bridge at the foot of it, along miles
of level road to the city.

All day he was going about his errands, while Prince stood in a stable
and ate his dinner and rested.

Toward night, just as Farmer Hill was going to start home, a thunder
storm came up. It thundered and lightened and rained and rained.

It rained so hard that the water ran in the street like a river.

Farmer Hill waited until the storm was over. By that time it was nearly
dark.

There were no street lamps along the road.

There was no moon in the sky.

There were no stars in the sky.

It became so dark that Farmer Hill could not see more than three feet
ahead.

"I shall have to let Prince see for me," said he.

Prince trotted along over the muddy road, now and then slowing up when
he came to a pool of water, now and then turning out when they met
another team.

Finally they had come back as far as the foot of the hill where the
little bridge was.

"Now I shall soon be home," thought Farmer Hill.

Just then Prince stopped stock still.

"Get-up," said Farmer Hill. Prince did not go. "What is the matter?"
thought Farmer Hill.

He tried to look in front along the road, but could see nothing.

Just then a flash of lightning came and lighted up the country around
for a moment.

[Illustration: "'Why! the bridge is gone!' said Farmer Hill"]

"Why! the bridge is gone!" said Farmer Hill.

Sure enough, the heavy rain had made the creek so high that it had
swept away the little bridge.

"If your eyes had not been better than mine," said he to Prince, "we
should have been thrown into the water."

Then he turned Prince around and went back along the road to the corner
and took another road home.

At last, very late in the evening, they came to the farm.

"I am glad to be at home at last," thought Farmer Hill, as Prince
turned in at the driveway.

Again Prince stopped.

"What is the matter now?" thought Farmer Hill. "Surely, there is no
bridge gone here."

"Get-up," he said to Prince. But Prince did not go ahead; instead he
backed.

It was so dark that Farmer Hill could not see the horse; he could not
see the trees; he could not see the ground.

"Get-up," said Farmer Hill again.

Prince started forward; but this time he turned out and went on the
grass at the side of the driveway.

"I wonder what can be the matter there," said Farmer Hill.

John and mother were waiting for father and came out on the back porch
as they heard the wheels coming.

"We were afraid something had happened to you, it is so late," said
mother.

Then father told them how the bridge was gone and how Prince had
refused to go on.

"But I cannot understand," said he, "why he would not come into the
yard by the driveway."

"I'll go and see," said John.

John took the lantern and went down toward the road.

In a moment he came running back.

"Come here," he called. "That big flash of lightning must have struck
here. There is a great hole in the ground."

All ran to look.

There in the driveway was a deep hole with the gravel and earth and
big stones thrown about in all directions.

"And Prince could see that in the dark!" said father. "Twice he saved
me from harm."

"He has wonderful eyes," said mother, "and he used them well."

"I shall give him some extra oats and a lump of sugar," said John.

THE END








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Prince and Rover of Cloverfield Farm, by 
Helen Fuller Orton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINCE, ROVER OF CLOVERFIELD FARM ***

***** This file should be named 28586.txt or 28586.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/5/8/28586/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
