Project Gutenberg's Bobby of Cloverfield Farm, by Helen Fuller Orton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Bobby of Cloverfield Farm

Author: Helen Fuller Orton

Illustrator: R. Emmett Owen

Release Date: May 1, 2009 [EBook #28652]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOBBY OF CLOVERFIELD FARM ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive.)







BOBBY OF CLOVERFIELD FARM

[Illustration: "'I can't stop to play now. I'm on important business'"]




BOBBY OF CLOVERFIELD FARM

BY

HELEN FULLER ORTON

_Author of "Prince and Rover of Cloverfield Farm"_


_WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND DECORATIONS BY R. EMMETT OWEN_


[Illustration]


NEW YORK

FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY

PUBLISHERS

_Copyright, 1922, by_

HELEN FULLER ORTON


_All Rights Reserved_

    First Printing, June 17, 1922
    Second Printing, November 3, 1922
    Third Printing, May 15, 1923
    Fourth Printing, April 25, 1924
    Fifth Printing, August 26, 1924
    Sixth Printing, February 27, 1926
    Seventh Printing, April 2, 1927
    Eighth Printing, August 1, 1928
    Ninth Printing, August 6, 1929
    Tenth Printing, January 31, 1931
    Eleventh Printing, August 10, 1933

_Printed in the United States of America_




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                         PAGE

I WHAT ROBIN REDBREAST KNEW       1

II BOBBY'S KITE                  10

III THE OLD BROWN HEN            21

IV THE SHEEP WASHING             29

V THE SHEEP SHEARING             38

VI RED TOP                       46

VII HAYING TIME                  54

VIII ON TOP OF THE WORLD         63

IX BOBBY FORGETS                 69

X ROVER GOES TO THE STORE        76

XI THE DUCKS A-SWIMMING GO       85

XII THE RESCUE                   91

XIII BOBBY'S HORSEBACK RIDE      98

XIV THE BIG SOUTH WINDOW        105

XV ONE STORMY NIGHT             119




ILLUSTRATIONS

"'I can't stop to play now, I'm on important business'"    _Frontispiece_

                                                            FACING PAGE

"'Hello, Robin Redbreast,' called Bobby, 'I'm glad
you are back again'"                                               7

"Up, up, went the kite into the sky"                              12

"When he saw it he cried, 'Somebody's been digging in
my garden and here she is fast asleep'"                           27

"Before they could run across the bridge, Old Bell
Wether walked up out of the creek and started for
home"                                                             35

"'Stop, Father, stop!' he said"                                   58

"Bobby clung to Rover's collar until they reached
shallow water"                                                    94

"Bobby felt happy and grand. Prince felt happy and grand"        100




[Illustration: WHAT ROBIN REDBREAST KNEW]

I


One cold morning in March, Bobby Hill was wakened by a sound he had not
heard since last Fall, "Chirp, chirp, cheer-up."

"That sounds just like a robin," he thought.

He sat up in bed and looked out of the window. It was a cold, dark,
stormy morning. Heavy clouds covered the sky. The North wind was blowing
the snow hither and thither.

Bobby leaned nearer the window so he could see the ground. There was the
snow like a blanket of white over the yard and the road and the fields.
There were the snowdrifts like mountains and castles along the fences.

Bobby shivered as he looked at it and snuggled back under the covers.

"I must have been dreaming," he thought. "It isn't time for robins."

But he had no sooner settled down for another nap than he heard it
again, "Chirp, chirp, cheer-up."

He got up and dressed quickly and went downstairs.

"Mother," he said, "I heard something that sounded just like a robin.
What could it have been?"

"It _was_ a robin," said Mother. "Come here and see him."

Bobby ran to the Big South Window. There on a branch of the maple tree
was Robin Redbreast singing merrily.

"I thought the robins always stayed down South until Spring," said
Bobby. "Why did he come back in the dead of Winter?"

"Spring is almost here," said Mother.

"Oh, indeed it can't be," said Bobby, "it is so cold and snowy."

"Robin knows," said Mother.

But Bobby looked out and saw the fields still covered with snow, and saw
the huge snowdrifts like mountains and castles along the fences and the
whirling snowflakes in the air, and thought, "Robin is mistaken this
time."

After he had finished his morning chores, Bobby took his sled and slid
down the little hill at the side of the house, as he had done nearly
every day all Winter. Twenty-seven times he slid down the hill.

Then he and Rover, the Big Shepherd Dog, went across the field to the
snowdrifts in the fence corners. Bobby slid down a huge snowbank, which
gave his sled such a start that he went skimming over the field on the
hard snow. Eight long slides he took there.

In the afternoon, he went skating on the Duck Pond. It was shiny and
smooth and beautiful for skating. Twenty times across the pond he went.

When he went into the house, Mother said, "Well, Bobby, you have had a
busy day."

"I've had lots of fun," said Bobby. "I shall go sliding and skating
every day all Winter."

"That will not be long," said Mother.

"Oh, yes, it will," said Bobby. "Just see all the snow and ice."

If Bobby had only noticed, he would have known that even then the wind
had changed to the south and it was becoming warmer. Soon the snow and
ice began to melt. All night they kept melting.

The next day, Bobby was wakened again by Robin Redbreast. He looked out
and saw the sun shining brightly. All that morning the snow melted so
fast that by noon there were little rivers and pools of water
everywhere.

Bobby tried to slide down the little hill; but there was a bare spot
half way down, so his sled stuck on the ground and would not go any
farther.

"This isn't any fun," thought Bobby. "I'll go over and slide down the
snowbanks." He and Rover started across the field; but at every step
they went down through the soft snow into the water beneath.

"This isn't any fun either. Is it?" said he to Rover.

Rover looked up into Bobby's face and seemed to say, "I don't care for
it much myself." So they went back to the house.

Rover lay down by the fire to dry off; but Bobby took his skates and
went to the Duck Pond. When he got there, he found the ice on the Duck
Pond covered with pools of water.

"I'll wait till another day to skate," he thought.

He was just starting back to the house, when there came to his ears the
same sound he had heard the last two mornings, "Chirp, chirp, chirp."

Bobby looked across the pond. There, on the ground under the willow
tree, was a robin.

[Illustration: "Hello, Robin Redbreast," called Bobby. "I'm glad you are
back again"]

"Hello, Robin Redbreast," called Bobby. "I'm glad you are back again.
But you'll be very cold up here. It isn't Spring yet."

"Chirp, chirp," said Robin. "Cheer-up, cheer-y." And he flew up to a
branch of the willow tree.

Bobby's eyes followed Robin into the willow tree. What were all those
little gray things on the twigs around Robin?

Bobby looked more closely. "Why I do believe--I do believe--can it be
those are pussy willows?" he exclaimed.

Around the pond to the tree he ran. Sure enough! Pussy willows they
were.

Bobby reached up and picked some of the twigs. Then he ran to the house
as fast as he could run.

"Oh, Mother," he exclaimed, "see the pussy willows! I believe Spring
_is_ almost here."

"Robin knew," said Mother.

"Good!" said Bobby. Then he added, "But there won't be any more
sleigh-rides, or sliding down hill, or skating."

"Just wait and see what fun Summer will bring," Mother replied.




[Illustration: BOBBY'S KITE]

II


The time of year had come when boys were flying kites. But around
Cloverfield Farm no one had started yet.

Perhaps the little white clouds, floating in the sky, beckoned to Bobby,
"Send a kite up to us, little earth boy."

Perhaps the wind, blowing in the tree tops, whispered, "Bring a kite and
try me. Just see how far I will take it up for you."

Anyway, Bobby suddenly stopped playing and looked up into the sky. Then
he ran into the house.

"I want to fly a kite," said he.

"I will help you make one," said Grandfather, who was visiting there.

Bobby hunted until he found the sticks and the string and the paper.
Then they made a fine kite.

Mother helped, too. She made the paste of flour and water, and found
bright strips of cloth for the tail. Then she wrote his name on the
cross-stick--Bobby Hill.

Sister Sue went along to help him start it.

Up, up, went the kite into the sky.

"Ha, ha!" said Mr. Wind. "Here's some fun. I'll take that kite up to the
clouds."

"Good!" said the little white clouds. "Here comes a kite to visit us."

[Illustration: "Up, up, went the kite into the sky"]

It was not long before the cord was all unwound, and the kite looked
like a speck against the sky.

"It must touch the clouds," said Bobby.

Mother came out on the porch to look at it. People driving along the
road saw Bobby holding the string and looked up into the sky. "What a
fine kite!" they said.

Mr. Hill had gone to the city that morning.

"You had better leave it up until Father comes home; he will want to see
it," said Sue, as she started back to the house.

Neighbor Newman's boy saw Bobby's kite and went into his house to make
one. Boys in the village saw it and began to make kites.

When it had been flying for some time, the wind began to blow harder,
and the kite tugged and tugged on the string.

Suddenly, there was a strong gust of wind.

Snap went the string.

Away went the kite.

Bobby ran after it, to catch it when it fell. But it soon blew out of
sight over the patch of woods. Then he sadly wound up the string that
was left and went slowly to the house.

"My kite flew away," said he to Mother. "And it was the best one I ever
had."

Meanwhile, the kite went sailing along.

"It's my kite," said the West Wind. And he tried to blow it toward the
Little Red Schoolhouse.

"No, it's my kite," said the North Wind. And he tried to blow it toward
the clouds.

In spite of them both, the kite began to fall. Zigzag it went, first one
way, then another, across the road where the Little Red Schoolhouse
stood, to an open field on the other side.

Mr. Hill was just coming home from the city on that road. As he was
driving along, he saw the kite falling.

"Whoa, Prince," he said to the horse.

Prince stopped. Mr. Hill got out of the buggy and climbed over the
fence. "Perhaps I can catch it," he thought. Just before he got to it,
the kite came to the ground. Mr. Hill picked it up.

"What a fine kite!" he said. "I wonder what boy lost it. I'll inquire at
the houses as I go along."

He wound up the string, gathered up all the tail and went back to the
buggy. He started to put it under the seat; but as he did so, his eye
fell on something written on the cross-stick. It was the name Mrs. Hill
had written there--Bobby Hill.

"Well, well!" said he. "So it's Bobby's kite, is it?"

He put it under the seat, got into the buggy and drove toward home.

Father meant to give the kite to Bobby as soon as he reached home, but
when he drove into the yard, there was a man waiting to see him on
business; so he forgot all about it.

Bobby's big brother John unhitched Prince, put him into the stable and
pushed the buggy into the carriage-house.

So there was Bobby's fine kite lying under the buggy seat, all unknown.

The next day, Grandfather helped Bobby make another kite. But perhaps it
was not made of the right kind of wood, or the cross-piece was not at
just the right place. Anyhow, it had not gone up far when it dived to
the ground and was broken.

That evening Bobby told Father all about his kites. Then Father
remembered something; but he said nothing about it just then.

The next morning, he called Bobby to him. "I have a present for you," he
said. "Come to the carriage-house and you may see it."

"What is it like?" asked Bobby, as they walked along.

"It is something that flies," said Father.

"A bird," said Bobby.

"Wrong," said Father.

"A ball?" guessed Bobby.

"No. One more guess," said Father.

"I don't know anything else that flies," said Bobby, "except a
butterfly."

"How about a bumblebee?" asked Father.

"Oh, Father, you couldn't catch a bumblebee," said Bobby. "And if you
did, it would sting you."

"How about a kite?" asked Father.

"That would be grand," said Bobby. "Did you get one in the city?"

"Look under the buggy seat," said Father.

Bobby climbed into the buggy and reached under the seat and began to
pull something out.

"Why, it looks just like the tail to my kite," said he.

"Why, it _is_ my kite," he shouted, as he saw his name on the
cross-piece. "Where did you get it?"

Father told him.

"I'll tie the string together and fly it again," said Bobby.

"You had better get some stronger cord," said Father. "I might not
happen to find it if it flew away again."

Bobby rode to the village when John went to the blacksmith shop. He went
to Mr. Brown's store and bought a ball of strong cord. Then he ran all
the way home with it, because he did not want to wait for the blacksmith
to finish shoeing the horse.

And it wasn't long before Bobby's kite had climbed high into the sky
again.

People driving along the road saw it and said, "What a fine kite!"

Father saw it this time.

As he was going down the lane, he stopped a few moments to watch it.
Then he waved his hand to Bobby and started on.

"I am glad it flew across my path," he said.




[Illustration: THE OLD BROWN HEN]

III


In the Spring, at Cloverfield Farm, all the family made gardens and
sowed seeds.

Mother sowed pansy seed in a round bed in the side yard. When the little
plants came up, she watered them and weeded them and kept the ground
soft and fine, so they could grow.

All the time she was tending them, she kept thinking, "How nice it will
be to have all these lovely pansies to look at this Summer!"

Father sowed some radish seed in the garden. When the little plants
came up, he weeded them and hoed them and kept the ground soft and fine,
so the little radish plants could grow.

All the time he was doing it, he was thinking, "How fine it will be to
have lots of good radishes for the table!"

Bobby had a little corner all his own in Father's big garden. He sowed
some onion seed in his garden. When the little plants came up, he weeded
them and hoed them and kept the ground soft and fine, so they could
grow.

All the time he was doing it, he was thinking, "How nice it will be to
have all these onions, so I can give them to Mother for the cooking!"

One day, while the family were all away, the Old Brown Hen, who had
stolen her nest, came along with her thirteen chickens.

She was hunting for a good place to scratch and find something for them
to eat.

First, she tried to scratch in the gravel driveway, but that was too
hard.

Next, she tried to scratch by the wood-pile, but the ground was covered
with little chips, so she could not scratch there.

Then she found Mother's pansy bed. The ground in it was so soft that it
was beautiful for scratching.

So she called, "Cluck, cluck, cluck!" and her thirteen chicks came
running, and she scratched all over the pansy bed, to find bugs and
worms for them to eat.

And all the little pansy plants were scratched up.

Next, she went over to the big garden and found Father's radish bed. The
ground in it was so soft that it was a fine place for scratching.

So she called, "Cluck, cluck, cluck!" and her thirteen chicks came
running, and she scratched all over the radish bed, to find something
for them to eat.

And all the little radish plants were scratched up.

One would think that the Old Brown Hen would not have needed to scratch
any more. But it takes a great deal to feed thirteen hungry, growing
chicks.

So she kept hunting for other places to scratch; and it was not long
before she found Bobby's onion bed.

Now Bobby had hoed in it and dug in it so much just the day before,
that it was _very_ soft and just beau-ti-ful for scratching.

"What good luck!" thought the Old Brown Hen. "A finer place for
scratching I never saw."

"Cluck, cluck, cluck!" she called; and her thirteen chicks came running,
and she scratched all over the onion bed, to find something for them to
eat.

And all the little onion plants were scratched up.

Then, because they had eaten all they wanted, she wallowed in the soft
earth until she had made a nice, comfortable place to sit.

There she sat, in the middle of Bobby's onion bed, and the thirteen
chicks went under her wings to have a mid-day nap.

The Old Brown Hen went to sleep, too.

Soon the family came home. As they drove into the yard, Mother spied her
pansy bed and cried, "Somebody has been digging in my garden and has dug
all my little pansy plants up."

Next, they came to the big garden, and when Father saw his radish bed,
he said, "Somebody's been digging in my garden and has dug all my radish
plants up."

Then Bobby ran to look at his garden. When he saw it, he cried,
"Somebody's been digging in my garden and here she is fast asleep."

When the Old Brown Hen heard Bobby shout, she woke up and ran away.

And her little chicks ran in all directions and called, "Peep, peep,
peep!"

"Let's catch her," said John.

[Illustration: "When he saw it he cried, 'Somebody's been digging in my
garden and here she is fast asleep'"]

Father and John and Bobby chased the Old Brown Hen and caught her and
put her in a chicken coop.

Then she called, "Cluck, cluck, cluck!" and her thirteen chicks came
running.

And there they lived until the chicks were grown up.

And they did not scratch up any more gardens that Summer.

And that is the end of the story of the Old Brown Hen.




[Illustration: THE SHEEP WASHING]

IV


One morning in May, Bobby saw the flock of sheep going along the gravel
driveway toward the road.

Rover and Bobby's big brother John were driving them. Hobson, the hired
man, went ahead.

"Where are you taking the sheep?" asked Bobby. "Have you sold them?"

"Come and you shall see," answered Father. "Do you want to ride with me
in the buggy, or help drive the sheep?"

"I'd like to help," said Bobby.

"Well, here is a long stick for you," said Father.

Bobby was off like the wind and soon caught up with the others.

The leader of the flock, the big bell wether, went ahead. All the other
sheep followed. Sometimes they tried to stop and eat grass by the
roadside. Bobby was after them with his long stick.

Sometimes they tried to go into a farmer's yard. Rover chased them back
into the road.

Once a big, black dog came from a farmyard, barking savagely. "Bow-wow,
bow-wow!" he said. The sheep were dreadfully frightened. Some ran up the
road and some ran down the road.

Rover ran at the big, black dog and drove him back into his yard. Then
he and John and Hobson and Bobby brought the frightened sheep together
again and started them down the road.

"I wonder where we are taking the sheep," thought Bobby.

About ten o'clock, they came to a creek with a bridge over it. Across
the bridge they drove the sheep. On the other side, Hobson stopped them
and drove them to one side of the road. Farmer Hill tied Prince to the
fence.

"Can you guess what we came for?" he asked.

Bobby looked all around. John and Hobson and Rover were driving the
sheep into a pen at the edge of the creek. The pen was surrounded by a
fence of rails, with a gate near the water.

Then the men put on the old clothes which they had brought in the
buggy, and went into the pen among the sheep.

Bobby looked puzzled.

"Let's take the bell wether first," said Mr. Hill; and John grabbed the
old sheep in spite of his ugly-looking horns.

They took him through the gate and started to pull him toward the water.

"Oh, Father, I know," shouted Bobby. "You are going to wash the sheep."

When Bobby found that he had guessed right, he danced for joy. Then he
settled down to see how it would be done.

Old Bell Wether was the largest sheep in the flock and had long, curved
horns. He had been washed every year of his life, but he never liked to
be dragged into the water. Now he held back with all the strength of his
four stout legs.

John was in front, trying to pull him along. Farmer Hill and Hobson were
behind, trying to push him along.

Suddenly, Old Bell Wether changed his mind. He lowered his head and
rushed forward, striking John a tremendous blow.

Into the water went John. Bobby could not see a bit of him.

Into the water, too, went Old Bell Wether. But his head was above water
and was moving out into the creek.

Bobby could not move or speak. He feared that big brother John would be
drowned.

Then he saw John rising out of the water and Father helping him back to
land.

"Old Bell Wether played us a sharp trick," said Mr. Hill.

"Oh, Father," shouted Bobby, "he is almost across the creek. He'll
surely get away."

Farmer Hill was watching the pair of horns.

"We'll get him," said he.

He started toward the bridge, catching up a rope as he went. Hobson
followed.

Before they could run across the bridge, Old Bell Wether walked up out
of the creek and started toward home. But he was tired after his swim,
and his wool was heavy with water.

They soon overtook him and drove him into a corner of the rail fence at
the side of the road.

"Now we have you," said Farmer Hill, as he threw the rope over his
horns.

[Illustration: "Before they could run across the bridge, Old Bell Wether
walked up out of the creek and started for home"]

Old Bell Wether had to submit and be led back over the bridge to the
sheep-pen.

"You won't do that again, old boy," said John. "I'll be ready for you
this time."

The men took him out into the water again. Keeping his head up so that
he could breathe, they washed his long wool until it was quite clean.

Then they led him out of the water, into another sheep-pen, which had
been built to hold the sheep after they were washed.

After all the sheep had been washed clean and white, they were started
home again. When they were part way home, they met another flock of
sheep coming down the road.

"Drive ours up next to the fence," said Farmer Hill, "so they will not
get mixed with that flock."

So they were driven up by the fence and kept there until the other flock
had passed on their way to be washed.

Bobby rode with Father in the buggy the rest of the way.

"How do they get the wool off the sheep?" he asked.

"That," said Father, "will be something more for you to see, another
time. You won't have to wait many days."

Bobby had a great story to tell Mother and Sue that night.




[Illustration: THE SHEEP SHEARING]

V


A few days after the sheep had been washed at the creek, a strange man
named Mr. Price came to Cloverfield Farm one morning.

"If you want to see something interesting," said Father to Bobby, "you
may come along with us."

They all went down to the Old Red Barn, and Bobby noticed that the flock
of sheep had been driven into the basement.

On the basement floor, near the gate which shut the sheep in their pen,
they put down a platform of boards, about six feet square.

Then Mr. Price took several strange-looking things out of his bag.

"What is that?" asked Bobby, pointing to one of them.

"That is a pair of shears," said Mr. Price.

"They do not look like my Mother's shears," said Bobby.

"No, they don't," said Mr. Price. "But these are sheep-shears."

"Oh, I know," shouted Bobby, jumping up and down; "you are going to
shear the sheep."

"Right, my boy," said the man. "Now keep your eyes open."

"You had better look out for Old Bell Wether," said Bobby. "He'll bunt
you over, as he did John down at the creek."

"I've sheared thousands of sheep in my time," said Mr. Price, "and no
sheep ever bunted me over yet."

The men brought out one of the smaller sheep through the gate, and
tipped her over on her side, on the smooth boards. Mr. Price, bending
over the sheep, began shearing off the wool close to the skin.

After he had sheared the wool from the upper side, he turned the sheep
over and sheared the other side.

Bobby was watching with all his eyes.

When he had finished and the fleece lay flat on the platform, very white
and clean, Mr. Price let the sheep get up and run out in the barn-yard.

"Ba-a-a--, Ba-a-a!" went the sheep, as she ran out, looking very small
and feeling very strange with her heavy coat of wool gone.

Farmer Hill gathered up the wool and carried it to another part of the
basement, while John and Mr. Price brought out the next sheep.

When Mr. Price had sheared four sheep, he said, "You might as well bring
the big wether next."

"You must lose your wool, Mr. Bell Wether," said Bobby. "We need it to
make our clothes."

"I think John had better help you hold him down," said Farmer Hill. "He
is a cantankerous old fellow."

So John helped hold him, while Mr. Price sheared him.

Old Bell Wether was a wise old sheep. He knew he could not get away from
two men. Besides, he was not sorry to lose the heavy coat which made him
so warm in the hot Spring days.

Perhaps he knew that when a sheep squirms and kicks, the shearer may cut
off a bit of the skin instead of just taking the wool.

At any rate, he lay very quiet until he was all sheared, and they let
him run out into the yard.

"Oh, Father, Old Bell Wether didn't make a single bunt," shouted Bobby,
bounding off to the place where Mr. Hill was taking care of the fleeces.

"Just see what I am doing," said Father.

Farmer Hill had a queer-looking thing made of boards joined together
with hinges. It looked flat when he laid a fleece of wool on it. Then he
folded it up until it looked like a box, and the wool was pressed
together inside of it.

There were pieces of strong wool twine in grooves on the inside of the
box. He tied them around the fleece so as to hold it firmly together.

At last he opened the box and out came a solid fleece of wool, in the
shape of a cube about eighteen inches on each side.

"Oh, let me feel of it," said Bobby. He pressed his hands and face
against the soft white wool.

"How much do you guess it weighs?" asked Mr. Hill, as he put it on the
scales.

"Fifty pounds," said Bobby.

"Too much. Eight and a half," said Father, as he put the number down in
a book.

"How do they make the wool into clothes?" asked Bobby.

"It is first spun into yarn," said Father. "Do you remember the old
spinning wheel we have up in the attic?"

"Oh, yes," said Bobby. "That is what I turn my buzz-saw with."

"Well," said Father, "your grandmother used that wheel to spin yarn from
wool like this."

"And then they knit stockings from the yarn," said Bobby.

"Yes," said Father; "but my grandmother used to weave the yarn into
cloth on a loom. And she made the cloth into clothes for her children to
wear."

"I wish Mother would spin yarn and make clothes," said Bobby.

"We find it cheaper to sell the wool and buy our clothes," said Father.

"And perhaps Mother has enough to do," said Bobby.

Then they went back to get another fleece.

When the sheep were all sheared, Rover drove them down the long lane to
their pasture.

And it was not long before the whole flock were once more nibbling grass
in the meadow.




[Illustration: RED TOP]

VI


The proudest creature on Cloverfield Farm was Red Top, the big rooster.

He was called Red Top because of his beautiful, big red comb.

Red Top was proud of his big red comb. He was proud of his glossy
reddish-brown feathers. He was proud of his crow.

"Just hear those silly hens," he would say. "All they can do is to
cackle. But listen to my beautiful song. Cock-a-doodle-doo,
cock-a-doodle-doo! Was there ever a grander sound?"

Every morning, on his perch in the hen-house, he would waken and crow
before the break of day. Then he would go out in front of the hen-house
and crow three or four times.

But the place he liked best for crowing was a little mound near the
house. Farmer Hill's window was just above the little mound. John's
window was near by.

Before they were awake, every morning in Summer, Red Top would go there
and crow at the top of his voice.

Farmer Hill would waken and say, "There is Red Top. It is time to get
up."

John would waken and say, "I wish Red Top would crow somewhere else."

Then there came a holiday when they did not need to get up so early.
The evening before, Farmer Hill said, "I wish some one would keep Red
Top from crowing under my window to-morrow morning, so I could sleep."

"I'll keep him away," said Bobby.

"You will have to watch or he will get there in spite of you," said
Father.

"I don't believe you _could_ keep him away," said John.

"You'll see that I can," said Bobby. "Red Top can't get the start of
me."

"If you keep him from crowing there to-morrow morning," said John, "I
will give you a dime."

"Goody! I'll do it," said Bobby. "I'll put the dime in the box for my
new express wagon."

Bobby put the alarm clock near his bed. It was set to wake him at four
o'clock.

The next morning, after Red Top had crowed in the hen-house, he went out
into the yard and crowed three times. Then he started toward the house.
Very proudly he strutted along the path.

He was just going around to the side of the house, when Bobby came out
of the back door.

"Shoo, shoo!" said Bobby. "You must not crow near the house this
morning."

And he drove Red Top back toward the corn crib.

"That is too bad," thought Red Top. "They will miss my nice crow. I must
go again."

So he went up the path again toward the little mound. Bobby was watching
and drove him back.

"I will not let you crow here this morning," he said. "Shoo, shoo!"

Six times Red Top tried to get to the little mound. Six times Bobby
drove him back. Finally, he drove him beyond the horse barn.

"Crow for the walnut tree this morning," he said.

"He won't get to the house again very soon," thought Bobby. So he went
over to the strawberry patch to see whether any strawberries were ripe.

Suddenly, in the apple tree, a robin began to sing. A thrush joined him
from a near-by thicket. Birds began chirping in all the trees.

The Eastern sky began to turn golden. The fleecy white clouds began to
look rosy.

Bobby forgot all about the rooster.

Soon there were birds singing everywhere--robins in the apple orchard,
an oriole in the elm tree, swallows flashing through the farmyard,
bluebirds and yellowbirds on every side. Bobolinks skimming over the
clover field, joined the chorus.

Then on a low limb of the crab-apple tree, a meadow lark began to sing.
Bobby tried to find him, but could not see him among the branches. Such
a wonderful song he had never heard.

The Eastern sky was getting more rosy and more golden.

"It must be the sunrise that makes him so happy," thought Bobby. "I wish
I could sing like that."

So there Bobby stood, golden sunrise in the East, singing birds around
him.

Meanwhile, Red Top was quietly making his way to the house. As far as
the wood-pile he came, and Bobby did not drive him back. As far as the
pump he came.

"I'll soon be there," he thought.

A rooster in the next barn-yard crowed. Then Bobby remembered.

He ran toward the house. There was Red Top on the little mound.

"Oh, I must stop him before he crows," thought Bobby. He shouted, "Shoo,
shoo!"

Just then a loud cock-a-doodle-doo rang out on the morning air.

"I beat you, Bobby," it seemed to say.

Father looked out of his window and said, "Red Top was smarter than you,
wasn't he?"

"I am sorry I let him wake you," said Bobby.

John put his head out of his window and called, "You have lost the
dime, Bobby."

"I don't care," said Bobby. "I heard the birds and saw the sunrise."

Then he chased Red Top down to the Old Red Barn, so Father could finish
his morning nap.




[Illustration: HAYING TIME]

VII


One of the many pretty sights on the farm in early June, was the clover
field, all covered with red blossoms.

It was an interesting place, too.

Bobby and Rover loved to romp in it. The honey bees came to it to get
honey. The bobolinks, like flashes of black and white, skimmed over it
as they sang. The ground-birds had their nests in it.

Bobby knew of three nests there.

But the time had come for cutting the clover.

One morning, Bobby saw Father and Hobson in the tool-shed and
went to see what they were doing. He found them busy about the
mowing-machine--oiling it, tightening the screws and sharpening the
knives.

"Oh, Father, you aren't going to cut the grass now, are you?" said
Bobby.

"Yes," said Father, "the clover is ready."

"I wish it could be left all Summer," said Bobby.

"But we must cut it," said Farmer Hill, "to make hay for the horses and
cows to eat next Winter."

When the mower was ready, they hitched Prince and Daisy to it, and
Father climbed to the seat and drove to the hayfield.

As the mower went around the field, it cut a wide swath of clover and
left it lying flat on the ground.

A humming sound the mower made, a pleasant sound to a person some
distance away, a very loud sound to one near by.

In one of the nests in the field, there was a mother bird and three
young birds. The little mother bird, there in the quiet clover field,
had never heard such a loud sound before.

"What can it be that makes that big noise?" the frightened mother bird
thought as the mower passed close by.

Then the sound grew fainter as the mower went to the other side of the
field. The little mother bird settled down happily in her nest.

But it was not long before the sound came back again, closer and louder
than before.

"What shall I do?" thought the mother bird. "What shall I do?"

She might have flown away herself. But there were the three young birds
not yet old enough to fly.

So she sat still while the terrible noise kept coming nearer.

All this time, Bobby was playing here and there with Rover. Suddenly,
Bobby thought of something. He ran toward the mowing-machine, waving his
hands and shouting.

"Stop, Father, stop!" he said.

The mower made such a loud noise that Father could not hear what Bobby
was saying, but he could see his arms waving.

"Whoa, Prince! Whoa, Daisy!" he said, and the horses stopped.

"What is the matter, Bobby?" he asked.

[Illustration: "'Stop, Father, stop!' he said"]

"The bird's-nest! There's a nest right ahead," shouted Bobby.

"A bird's-nest, is there?" said Father. "Well, we won't harm the nest.
Go and stand near it, Bobby, and I'll turn out for it."

Bobby hunted around until he found it in the clover. Then he took his
stand beside it.

Father clucked to the horses. "Get-up, Prince! Get-up, Daisy!" he said.
When he came near Bobby, he turned out and passed a few feet away,
leaving the nest all safe.

Bobby stood there until Father went around the field and came back
again, so that the wheels of the mower would not run over the nest or
the horses step on it when passing on the other side.

"Are there any more nests in the field?" asked Father.

"There is one at that end," said Bobby, pointing toward the west; "and
one down there," pointing toward the east.

"If you will set a tall stick in the ground near each one," said Mr.
Hill, "I can see where the nests are, and you won't have to stand
there."

"All right," said Bobby, and he started toward the house for the sticks.

As he was hunting for them, he remembered his little flags that always
stood in the corner of the parlor.

"Why not use the flags to keep the bird's nests safe?" he thought.

So he ran into the parlor, took three of the flags and ran back to the
clover field.

In the nest at the western end of the field were four little birds.
Bobby pushed one of the sticks into the ground beside it, and the flag
floated in the breeze.

Away to the other end of the field he ran, to the nest where there were
two little birds. He planted one of the sticks in the ground beside it,
and that flag floated in the breeze.

Then he went to the nest where he had stood guard. "You shall have a
flag, too," he said.

Farmer Hill kept driving around the field, cutting the clover. But when
he came near a flag, he turned out and left a patch of clover standing
around the nest.

The sun shone brightly and dried the clover. The breezes blew over it
and dried it. Together they changed it from fresh grass into
sweet-smelling hay.

The next day, John hitched Daisy to the hay-rake and drove it up and
down the field, raking the hay into long windrows.

The hired men came with their pitchforks and pitched it into little
stacks or haycocks.

But they were all careful not to touch the little patches of clover
where the flags flew.

People driving along the road wondered why Farmer Hill had left the
three little patches of clover standing and why the three little flags
were there.

But the three little mother birds knew and were happy.




[Illustration: ON TOP OF THE WORLD]

VIII


For a few days, Bobby and Betty and Rover had fun playing hide-and-seek
among the haycocks.

"Well, Bobby," said Father one morning, "can you and Betty spare the
hay, so we can draw it into the barn?"

"Oh, no; we want to play in it some more," said Bobby.

"We must put it into the barn before a rain comes," said Father. "Come
down to the field, you and Betty. Perhaps there will be some fun
to-day."

Prince and Daisy were hitched to the big lumber wagon. Father and Hobson
took the wagon box off and put the wide hay-rack on.

"Come, children, climb up on the rack for a ride to the field," said
Father.

Father held Betty; but Bobby, sitting in the bottom of the rack, went
jigglety, jigglety, shakety, shake.

And wasn't it fun!

When they came to the field, Father helped the children off. Then he
drove along beside a haycock and stopped the horses. Hobson pitched the
hay onto the rack with his pitchfork. Father placed the hay around, so
the load would be even on both sides. Then he drove on and stopped at
the next haycock.

Higher and higher the load grew.

"Look at Father, Betty," said Bobby. "He is almost up to the sky."

When the load was high enough, Father called to Hobson, "That will do."

In the middle of the load, Father pushed the hay aside to make a nest. A
very big nest it was, too big for a robin, too big for the old brown
hen.

Then he called down, "Bobby, how would you and Betty like to ride to the
barn on the load of hay?"

"That would be grand," said Bobby; "but we can't get up there."

Father said to Hobson, "I'm ready for the children now."

Hobson lifted Bobby to the foot of the little ladder which is at the
front of a hay-rack. Bobby climbed up the ladder and Father reached down
and pulled him up to the top of the load.

"Here's a safe place for you," said Father, as he put Bobby in the big
nest.

Then Hobson lifted Baby Betty. "You had better bring her all the way
up," said Father. "She is too little to climb the ladder."

Hobson carried her up the ladder and put her in the nest.

"You may drive," said Father to Hobson. "I'll stay with the children."
So there they were in the nest, Father and Bobby and Betty, on top of
the big load of hay.

All the way up the lane they rode.

"We must be close to the sky," said Bobby.

"We're on top of the world," said Father.

Finally, they came to the Red Barn. The big front doors were open. Very
wide and high they were, but the load of hay reached almost to the top.

"We must all scooch down," said Father, "or it will strike us."

So they all bent over flat on the hay, while Prince and Daisy drew them
safely into the big barn.

"Now we must climb down the ladder," said Bobby.

"Wait a minute," said Father. "Sit quietly until I call you."

Father climbed down.

"Ready, Hobson," he called.

Hobson took Bobby over to the side of the load. There was Father
standing below him, waiting with outstretched arms.

"Slide down, Bobby; I'll catch you," said Father.

Down the side of the load of hay slid Bobby, straight into Father's
arms.

Then it came Betty's turn.

"It's so high," she said. "I'm 'fraid."

"Don't be scared; I'll catch you," said Father.

"Father'll catch you," called up Bobby.

Betty took courage.

Down she slid, down the side of the load of hay, straight into Father's
arms.

After that load was pitched into the hay-mow, they went for another, and
then another, all day long.

Every time, Bobby and Betty rode in the nest on top of the load of hay.




[Illustration: BOBBY FORGETS]

IX


In a chicken coop in the back yard at Cloverfield Farm, lived Old
Speckle with her ten chickens.

It was Bobby's duty to feed them. Three times a day--morning, noon and
night--he would take the basin of corn meal and water which Mother had
stirred up, and would throw it by spoonfuls into the coop for the
chickens.

Old Speckle would call, "Cluck, cluck, cluck!" and the ten little chicks
would come running to eat.

He would throw some corn or wheat in for Old Speckle.

One morning Mother said, "Here is the breakfast for the chickens,
Bobby."

"I'll feed them right away," said Bobby.

And he meant to.

Taking the basin of meal in one hand and the basin of wheat in the
other, he started toward the chicken coop.

When he was about half way there, he spied his new white rabbit poking
her nose out between the slats of the rabbit-pen.

Bobby stopped. For a few moments he stood and watched her. Then he set
the two basins down on the ground and went over to the rabbit-pen.

"I'll be back in a minute," he said to himself. "It won't hurt the
chickens to wait a little while for their breakfast."

Bunny was so interesting with her long ears and her wiggly nose, that
Bobby stayed fifteen minutes, watching her. By that time, he had
forgotten all about Old Speckle and the chickens.

Next he went to a corner of the rail fence to see whether there were any
more eggs in the robin's nest. He found four blue eggs.

Then to the Duck Pond he went to see whether the little boat he had left
there the day before was still there. It was. He sailed it eleven times
across the pond.

When he was through sailing the boat, he saw Rover coming through the
orchard.

"Hello, Rover," he said, "let's go to the barn."

And they went down the lane to the Big Red Barn, leaving Old Speckle and
the ten little chicks still unfed.

"Why doesn't Bobby come with our breakfast?" thought the hungry little
chicks.

"Why doesn't Bobby come with our breakfast?" thought Old Speckle. "My
poor little chicks will starve."

Meanwhile the Big Rooster found the basin of meal and the basin of
wheat.

"What a nice breakfast!" he thought.

And he ate it all up.

When noon time came, the dinner bell rang.

"Come, Rover," said Bobby. "Let's go up to dinner right away. It's a
long time since breakfast."

Perhaps it was because he was hungry that Bobby suddenly remembered
something.

Anyway, he began to run as fast as his legs would carry him and ran all
the way up the lane, Rover at his heels.

And, as he ran, he kept thinking, "A long time since breakfast! But the
little chickens didn't have any breakfast at all."

When he came to the spot where he had left the two basins, there the two
basins were, but both empty.

He looked over toward the chicken coop.

There was Old Speckle walking back and forth, putting her head out
between the slats every once in a while, and looking greatly
distressed.

There were the little chicks saying, "Peep, peep, peep," as they tried
to find something to eat in the grass.

Bobby took the basins into the house.

"Mother," he asked, "did you feed the chickens?"

"No," said she, "that is your chore, Bobby."

"But how came the basins empty?" asked he.

Mother could not answer. But at that very moment, the Big Rooster
crowed, "Cock-a-doodle-doo! I had a fine breakfast."

Mother stirred up another basin of meal while Bobby got some more wheat.
He took them quickly to the chickens and threw the food into the coop.

"Cluck, cluck, cluck!" Old Speckle called.

"Peep, peep, peep!" cried the little chicks, as they came running to
eat.

Bobby watched them until it was nearly gone.

"Now you feel better, don't you?" said he. "And I feel better, too," he
added.

Which was strange, wasn't it?

For Bobby had not yet had his dinner.




[Illustration: ROVER GOES TO THE STORE]

X


Rover was useful in many ways about the farm. Sometimes he even went to
the village store on errands.

One morning in Summer, Mrs. Hill needed some meat for dinner. She wrote
a note and put it in a certain basket. With it she put a purse and
covered them with a white cloth. Then she went to the door and called,
"Rover! Rover!"

Rover came bounding up the path.

"I want you to go to the store," said Mrs. Hill, giving him the basket.

Rover took the handle in his mouth, trotted down the path to the road
and turned toward the village. As he passed the Allen farmhouse, he saw
Sport, a little brown dog with whom he often played.

Sport came running out with a few friendly barks which meant, "Come on,
Rover, I am ready for a frolic."

Rover turned his head toward his little friend, but kept trotting right
on, with a look that plainly said, "I can't stop to play now. I'm on
important business."

When he came to Mr. Brown's store, there were some men standing on the
steps.

"Well, Rover," said one of the men, "what did you come for to-day?"

Rover looked at the man, but walked right on, pushed the screen door
open and went into the store.

"Good morning, Rover," said Mr. Brown. "What can I do for you?"

Rover put the basket on the floor and then looked up. Mr. Brown took out
the white cloth and found the note Mrs. Hill had put there.

"Two pounds of beefsteak. Very well," said he.

He weighed a piece and wrapped it with paper and put it in the basket.
Out of the purse he took a bill and put some change back.

Then he covered them with the white cloth and put a brown wrapping paper
on top, to keep out the dust.

"You can take this home now, and mind you don't lose it," said he, as he
held the door open.

Rover took up the basket and went down the steps.

"A pretty smart dog!" said one of the men, as Rover trotted along.

Down the street he went, with the basket held high from the ground.

Rover could smell the meat, and it made him feel hungry. But he had
never touched anything that he carried in his basket and he did not do
it now.

When he came to the house where Ned Hopkins lived, he saw Ned sitting on
the fence, whittling a stick.

"I'll try to make Rover drop that basket," said Ned. He whistled and
called, "Here, Rover, get it," as he threw the stick across the road.

Rover stopped and looked longingly at it. One of his favorite games was
to fetch sticks that were thrown for him. But he did not run after it
this time.

"Come, Rover, old dog," said Ned, getting down from the fence; "let me
see what is in your basket." He patted Rover on the neck and then
reached over to take the basket.

Rover held the handle tightly in his teeth and growled, "Gr-r-r-"

Ned had never heard Rover growl like that before.

"Oh, well, if that is the way you feel about it, I won't bother you,"
said he.

"Gr-r-r-r! You had better not," growled Rover. And he started on up the
road.

After leaving the village, he came to a house where a man named Mr. Hook
lived all alone. Mr. Hook was sitting in his front yard as Rover came
along.

"I wonder what is in the basket to-day," he thought.

"Rover, old dog, wait a minute," he called.

Rover stopped and looked around. The basket felt quite heavy by this
time, so he was glad to set it down on the ground.

Mr. Hook came up and patted him on the head. "Nice old dog! Nice Rover,"
he said. "What is in your basket?"

He put out his hand to take it. But Rover seized the handle and started
toward home.

Mr. Hook looked up and down the road. There was no one in sight.

"Here, Ponto! Come, Ponto!" he called; and his own dog came running
out--a big, black dog.

"Get him, Ponto," said the man.

Ponto ran after Rover and attacked him savagely. Rover had to put the
basket down, to defend himself.

Ponto soon found he was getting the worst of it and turned to run.

Rover chased him down the road, leaving the basket alone on the ground.
That was exactly what Mr. Hook wanted. He went quickly up to it and
lifted the paper and the white cloth.

"Just what I thought!" he said to himself. "That would taste pretty good
for dinner. The dog won't know the difference."

He reached down to take the beefsteak out.

But Rover had finished chasing Ponto and was on the way back. When he
saw the man reaching into his basket, he ran back as fast as he could
go.

"Bow-wow! bow-wow!" he barked. He looked so big and savage, and he
barked and growled so loud, that Mr. Hook dropped the meat back into
the basket. But he did not wait to put the white cloth and the brown
paper over it.

Rover took the basket up and walked swiftly toward home. Mr. Hook stood
looking after him and thinking, "I wish that dog were not so big and
savage."

Bobby was waiting for Rover under the maple tree in the front yard, and
they walked to the house side by side.

As Rover set the basket on the floor, Mrs. Hill picked it up and said,
"I wonder why the meat is on top of the cloth and the paper."

But Rover did not tell.




[Illustration: THE DUCKS A-SWIMMING GO]

XI


"Quack, quack, quack!" said the Big White Duck, as he started down to
the Duck Pond below the orchard.

"Quack, quack, quack!" said the six other ducks, as they fell in line
behind the leader.

"Let's all a-swimming go," they said.

And away they all went, waddling along in a procession, one behind
another.

But when they got there, the Duck Pond was dry.

"It is very strange," thought the ducks. "What has happened to our
pond?"

But all they said was, "Quack, quack, quack!" as they walked on the dry
earth where the water had been.

Before long the leader started back toward the farmyard.

So all the ducks fell in line and waddled back, one behind another. They
drank from the tub of water at the pump, but they could not swim in it
because it was too small, and so they could not keep their feathers
clean and white.

Now this is why the Duck Pond was dry.

For weeks there had been no rain at Cloverfield Farm.

Every day the sun had shone brightly all day.

The ground was very dry. The grass was dead and brown. The cistern had
become empty. In the road the dust was several inches deep.

"The plums and peaches are falling from the trees," said Farmer Hill.
"If it doesn't rain soon, we won't have any fruit."

"My flowers are dying," said Mother.

They watched the sky every day, to see if there were any signs of rain.

"I see a little cloud," said Bobby every few days. "Perhaps it will rain
to-day."

But the little cloud would float lazily across the sky and bring no
rain.

Every day the ducks would go in a procession down to the Duck Pond to
swim. Every day they would find the Duck Pond dry and come back, one
behind another, and take a drink from the tub of water at the pump.

And so five weeks passed.

At last, one day, big clouds gathered in the sky.

Bobby saw them first and came running in to tell the news.

"It's going to rain," he shouted. "See the big, big clouds."

Mother and Sue went to the door and looked out.

"It's surely going to rain," they said.

"I'll help put the windows down," said Bobby. And he ran to do it.

The men stopped work and put the horses in the barn, so they would not
get wet. The hens and chickens went under the shed. The cows in the
pasture went under the big trees.

It was not long before the lightning flashed and the thunder crashed
and the rain came down.

They all went to the Big South Window to watch the storm--Father,
Mother, John, Sue, Bobby and Betty.

"I like to watch a storm," said Bobby.

"It is a good sight," said Father. "Now the corn and potatoes will grow
and the fruit will stay on the trees."

"My flowers will blossom again," said Mother, "and we'll have water in
the cistern."

"I hope it will make the grass green," said Sue.

"I hope it will fill the Duck Pond," said Bobby, "so I can sail my boats
and the ducks can have a swim."

As they stood there, suddenly Bobby called out, "Oh, see the ducks!"
There they were in the rain, waddling around in the pools of water.

"Quack, quack, quack!" said the Big White Duck. "Isn't this grand?"

"Quack, quack, quack!" said the six other ducks, as they shook their
feathers and waggled their tails.

After the rain had stopped and the pools had begun to dry up, Bobby saw
the Big White Duck start off toward the Duck Pond.

All the other ducks followed, one behind another.

Down to the Duck Pond they went and found it full of water.

So all the ducks a-swimming went and were content.




[Illustration: THE RESCUE]

XII


The day after the big rain, Bobby and Rover were down at the Duck Pond.

Bobby would throw a stick out into the middle of the pond and shout,
"Get it, Rover."

Rover would jump into the water, swim out to the stick and bring it back
in his mouth. Nine times Bobby threw the stick into the pond. Nine times
Rover brought it back.

When they had done that long enough, Rover shook himself to get the
water out of his coat, and lay down on the bank to dry.

Bobby spied an old raft, lying at one edge of the pond, under the willow
tree. "I'll play on the raft," he thought.

It was only a few days since Mother had said, "Never go on the raft,
Bobby, unless Father or John is at the pond with you."

"Oh, pshaw!" thought Bobby. "There is no danger; I'll have a little
fun."

For some time he was content to keep near the shore, just pushing the
raft around a little with a long pole. Then, growing bolder, he thought,
"I'll go clear across the pond. Mother will never find it out."

So across the pond he started. Near the middle the water was deeper, so
he had to go to the edge of the raft and lean over to make his pole
touch bottom.

A little farther, and a little farther, he leaned. The raft began to tip
and the first thing Bobby knew, he went head first into the water.

Down he went, to the bottom of the pond.

When he came up, he was lucky enough to be near the raft, and he grabbed
the edge of it.

"Help! help!" he shouted. He tried to climb up on the raft but could not
do it.

No one heard him shout, except the ducks that were swimming not far off.
They said, "Quack, quack, quack!" but they could not help him.

Rover, over on the bank, was dozing in the sun. The first time Bobby
called, Rover wiggled his ears but went on dozing.

Bobby shouted again, "Help! help!"

Rover heard this time and stood up and looked out over the water.

He saw Bobby clinging to the raft. Into the water he jumped and swam as
fast as he could.

When he came near, Bobby said, "Oh, Rover, can't you help me out?" He
took hold of Rover's collar with his right hand but still clung to the
raft with his left hand.

Rover tried to swim toward the shore but the raft was so heavy he could
not go very fast. So Bobby let go of the raft and then Rover could pull
him along.

Bobby clung to Rover's collar until they reached shallow water.

"I'm glad you were near, Rover," he said, when they were on dry ground.

[Illustration: "Bobby clung to Rover's collar until they reached shallow
water"]

Bobby did not want to go to the house and tell Mother what had happened,
but there was no other way.

So Bobby, all wet and drippy, and Rover, all wet and drippy, went to the
house together.

"Why Bobby Hill, what have you been doing?" asked Mother, when she saw
his wet, muddy clothes.

When he told her about getting on the raft she looked surprised. When he
told her what Rover did, she turned and patted Rover's neck and said,
"Good dog, good dog!"

"Of course, you will have to go to bed while your clothes get dry," she
said to Bobby.

"Can't I put on one of my clean suits?" he asked.

"No," said Mother. "When boys get on rafts and fall into the water,
they always go to bed while their clothes dry."

So to bed Bobby went in the middle of the day.

Mother washed his clothes and hung them to dry in the shade of the apple
tree.

Sue tied a blue ribbon on Rover's collar, and Mother gave him a plate of
cold roast beef with potatoes and gravy.




[Illustration: BOBBY'S HORSEBACK RIDE]

XIII


Of all the horses on Cloverfield Farm, Prince was the one the children
liked best.

Prince would take a lump of sugar from Bobby's hand and not bite him. He
would let Bobby and Betty come near and not kick them.

Sometimes Bobby rode on Prince's back, very slowly, with Father walking
along beside.

"When shall I be allowed to go trotting down the road all alone, like
John and Sue?" asked Bobby.

"Not until you are older," answered Father.

One day Bobby was down in the field where Hobson was working. When the
dinner bell rang, Bobby said, "Let me ride Prince up to the barn."

"You might fall off," said Hobson. "I think I had better not let you."

"I can hang on," said Bobby. "Father lets me ride sometimes."

Hobson thought a moment. "All right; if you'll be careful, I'll let you
ride this time," he said.

He let Daisy go on ahead, and then lifted Bobby to Prince's back with
the big, clumsy work harness still on.

"Hold on tight and go slow," said he, as he gave Bobby the check rein.

Through the gap into the lane went Daisy, up the lane toward the barn.
Prince and Bobby followed.

When Father let Bobby ride up to the barn, he always walked along
beside. But after Hobson had started them off, he went across lots to
the barn.

So there was Bobby riding Prince all alone.

How big and grand he felt!

When they were part way up the lane, Daisy, who was in a hurry for her
dinner, began to trot.

"Let us trot, too," said Bobby. "Get-up, Prince."

Prince was hungry and thirsty. So when Bobby said a second time,
"Get-up, Prince," and pulled on the check rein, Prince began to trot.

Father was in the farmyard at the head of the lane, fixing the drill for
the wheat sowing.

[Illustration: "Bobby felt happy and grand. Prince felt happy and
grand"]

"I can ride as well as John or Sue," thought Bobby. "I'll show Father I
can."

Up and down, up and down, he bounded as Prince trotted along.

Prince was enjoying it too.

"I'll give Bobby a good ride," he thought. And he arched his neck and
trotted proudly up the lane.

Bobby felt happy and grand.

Prince felt happy and grand.

Now along the sides of the lane, there were thistle patches; and in one
place near the head of the lane, there was a low stone pile with
thistles growing up between the stones.

Bobby always kept away from thistle patches when he was barefoot.

They had gotten almost to the head of the lane, when Prince began to
trot faster. Bobby bounded up and down higher than ever, his bare feet
hitting the horse's sides at every step.

And then, the first thing he knew, he began to slide off.

"Whoa! whoa!" he shouted.

He grabbed a piece of the harness and tried to hold on, but at every
step Prince took he slid farther.

"Whoa! whoa!" he shouted again.

Prince slowed up, but it was too late. He turned his head just in time
to see Bobby tumble to the ground. Then he stopped stock still.

Down on the stones and the thistles Bobby fell.

This was bad enough, but then he rolled against Prince's hind foot, a
little stunned by the fall.

Father saw Bobby fall and ran toward him, thinking as he ran, "Oh, what
if Prince steps on Bobby or kicks him?"

And Father ran faster than he had ever run before.

But there Prince stood and kept his foot as still as still could be,
until Father came and pulled Bobby away. Then Prince started on to the
barn.

"Are you hurt?" asked Father.

"Not much," replied Bobby, as he rubbed his bruises.

Father helped him get the thistles out of his bare feet and legs. There
were sixteen.

"That was a grand ride, though," said Bobby.

They went to the barn together and came up to Prince at the
watering-trough.

Father took Prince's face in his two hands and in his kindest voice
said, "You are a wonderful horse, Prince. Thank you for being careful of
my Bobby. You shall have some extra oats to-day."

When Sue was told about it, she found another blue ribbon and tied it on
Prince's bridle.




[Illustration: THE BIG SOUTH WINDOW]

XIV


Mother's favorite place in all the house was by the big window in the
sitting-room. It was on the south side of the house; so they called it
the Big South Window.

On bright days the sun shone through it and flooded the sitting-room
with golden sunshine. From it Mother could see green fields near by and
purple hills in the distance and the blue sky over all.

"I love my Big South Window," she often said.

She sat there to do the sewing and mending. She sat there to read and
sometimes just to enjoy the view--orchard and woods, green fields and
the big elm tree, purple hills and blue sky.

One day in Autumn, a letter came to Mother from her sister. "Please come
and make me a visit," the letter said.

"I do not see how I can go," said Mother. "There are so many things to
be done here."

"Oh, yes, you must go," said Father. "You have not had a vacation in a
long time. We'll get Aunt Martha to come and keep house."

"I'll look after the chickens and the ducks," said Bobby. "And I'll keep
the wood box full for Aunt Martha."

So one day in October Mother said good-by and went away on her long
journey. She was to be gone three weeks.

From the very first, Bobby missed her greatly. Most of all he missed her
at evening, when she was not there to tell him a good-night story. But
for the first week he stood it very well, his extra chores helping to
pass the time away.

After that it seemed such a long time since he _had_ seen her, and such
a very long time until he _would_ see her, that he could scarcely wait.

Every morning he counted the days until she would come home. When the
second week had passed, he could say, "Only seven more days until Mother
comes home."

That day, after he had fed the chickens and ducks and filled the wood
box, he went into the sitting-room and sat in Mother's rocker and
looked out through her favorite window.

Then he noticed how dirty it was.

"That will never do," thought Bobby. "Her window must be as bright and
shiny as if she were here to look at it."

Bobby washed the big window on the inside and then he went outside. By
standing on the kitchen stool and getting Aunt Martha to push down the
upper sash, he could reach the top.

So with feeding the chickens and the ducks, and romping with Rover, and
looking after Betty, and watching the men at work, and playing with his
blocks and trains, and reading a book which Mother sent him, another
week passed.

At last came the morning when it was only a few hours before she would
come.

Bobby could hardly eat any breakfast for the joy of it.

All the forenoon, he and Sue were sweeping and dusting and putting the
house in order.

Sue picked some pansies from Mother's pansy bed and put them in a dish
on the dining table.

Bobby went to the fence corners and picked some beautiful red
bitter-sweet for the sitting-room. Last of all, they washed the Big
Window.

After dinner, to pass the time away, Bobby took his ball and began to
bounce it on the side of the house.

"I'll see whether I can catch it a hundred times," thought he.

Ninety-seven times he caught it. "I'll soon have a hundred," he said.
"Won't that be fine to tell Mother?"

He screwed up his mouth and threw the ball again. But instead of hitting
the boards it hit the Big South Window.

Crash went the glass, in dozens of pieces, to the ground.

"Oh! oh!" moaned Bobby, as he stood looking at the ruined window.

"Why did I do it? Why _did_ I do it?"

Sue heard the crash and came to see what had happened.

"It is too bad," said she.

"I must get another glass put in before Mother comes home," he said.

"There is not time," said Sue. "And probably there is not so large a
pane without going to the city. But we can pick up the pieces and make
it look as tidy as possible."

So they picked up the pieces, and Bobby carried them off to the barrel
where they kept broken glass and dishes.

When Bobby had put the broken pieces of glass in the barrel, he went
into the sitting-room. How ugly the Big Window looked now, with the big,
jagged hole in it and the glass cracked in all directions. He felt the
chill November air coming in through the broken pane.

"It will never do," thought he. "I must get a new pane put in right
away."

He went to his bank, which was standing on the clock-shelf. In it he
found four dollars, which he had been saving for a long time to buy a
new Express Wagon.

"I hope it will be enough," he said.

There was only one man in the village who kept window glass--Mr. Barlow,
the carpenter. As fast as he could run, Bobby ran to the village, and as
he ran, he kept thinking, "Will he be at home? Will he have a big
glass?"

When Bobby reached Mr. Barlow's shop, as soon as he could get his
breath, he said, "Oh, Mr. Barlow, have you a big window pane? I've
broken our Big South Window."

"Broken your Big South Window, have you? Well, that is too bad. I think
I haven't one now, and to-morrow is Sunday; but I'll get you one on
Monday when I go to the city."

"Oh, but it must be put in to-day," said Bobby. "I have the money to pay
you. Would four dollars be enough?"

"I think that would be enough," said Mr. Barlow. "But I will have to
nail boards over it to-night and get a big pane Monday."

"But I do so want it put in to-day," said Bobby. "Mother is coming home
on the four o'clock train."

"So your mother's coming home, is she?" He saw the anxious look on
Bobby's face.

"I will see what I can find," he said.

Mr. Barlow's shop was piled full of all sorts of things for building
houses. Besides his work bench and tool chests, there were piles of
lumber, bundles of shingles, odd window sashes and, in one corner, some
window panes. He went to this corner and looked over the panes.

"No," he said, "there is nothing big enough."

Bobby began to look here and there. Back of a pile of lumber, he found
two window panes.

"Here, Mr. Barlow," he called. "Here are some big ones."

"Well! well! I had forgotten them," said Mr. Barlow. He came back there
and measured them. "Almost big enough," he said, "but not quite. I
remember just the size of your big window. These lack three inches.

"I'm afraid you will have to wait, sonny," he added.

Bobby tried to keep back the tears, but they would come; he was so
disappointed. Mr. Barlow thought a moment.

"I'll tell you what I'll do," said he. "I had some big windows taken
over to Mr. Martin's new house this morning. He is going to have two
windows just the size of yours. If they are not yet put in, I think Mr.
Martin will let me take one for you and get him another next week."

Bobby and the carpenter went over to Mr. Martin's house. They found that
one of the big panes had already been put in, and the man was just going
to start on the other.

"Wait a minute," said Mr. Barlow. "We may not want that one put in
to-day."

Then he said to Mr. Martin, "Will you let me put that big pane into Mr.
Hill's window? I'll get another one for you on Monday."

"Why not get Mr. Hill's on Monday?" asked Mr. Martin.

"Well, you see, Bobby broke their big window and his mother is coming
home to-day," said the carpenter.

"I see," said Mr. Martin. "Well, in that case, I'll help a little chap
out."

Mr. Barlow hitched up his horse and put the big pane of glass in the
wagon. They reached the house with the big pane all safe.

While Mr. Barlow put it in, Bobby stood watching him and looking at the
clock every once in a while. When it was all done, he handed the four
dollars to Mr. Barlow.

"And thank you ever so much for coming to-day," he said.

"It won't take as much as that," said the carpenter. And he handed a
dollar back to Bobby.

"What time did you say Mother was coming?" he asked.

"On the four o'clock train," answered Bobby.

"There is time to wash it if you will bring the things," said Mr.
Barlow.

Bobby washed the inside, while Mr. Barlow washed the outside.

And there was the Big Window, whole and bright and shiny again.

It was not long before Father and John came up to the house with Prince,
to go to the train. Bobby and Sue and Betty all got into the carriage.
Rover ran along beside it.

On the way to the station, Bobby told Father all about the window.

In a short time, the train came in sight down the track. In a few
moments more, Bobby saw Mother coming from the train and ran to meet
her.

And it was not long before she was home again, and they were all
visiting together in the sitting-room.

As she sat in the big rocker near the window, Mother said, "I saw many
beautiful sights on my trip, but none that I like better than the view
from my beautiful, shiny, big window."

And then wasn't Bobby Hill happy!




[Illustration: ONE STORMY NIGHT]

XV


A few weeks after Mother came home, they were all gathered in the
sitting-room after supper.

Outside, the rain beat against the window panes and the wind made a
mournful sound among the evergreens.

Inside, all was bright and cheery. In the coal stove a fire was burning.
On the table a big lamp sent a bright light through the room.

Baby Betty had been put to bed, but Bobby sat at the table, reading a
new book.

"It is almost bedtime for you," said Mother.

"Can't we have a game of dominoes before I go?" asked Bobby.

Mother looked at the clock. "Just one," she said.

So they all gathered around the table in the center of the room--Father,
Mother, John and Sue and Bobby.

Father and Bobby were partners. They got two hundred points first and so
won the game.

When the game was over, John went down cellar and brought up a pan of
apples. Bobby and Sue went to the attic and brought down a basin of
walnuts. And as they were eating the walnuts and the apples, they had a
merry time.

"I am glad we have such a comfortable place on this stormy night," said
Mother.

"I always like our long Winter evenings," said Father.

Bobby was cracking nuts. Suddenly he stopped and listened to the rain.

"I hope the squirrels in the apple tree have plenty of nuts to-night,"
said he.

At half past eight, Bobby went upstairs to bed. Mother tucked him in and
told him a good-night story. It was about Daniel in the Lion's Den that
night.

When she came down, Father was reading his paper on one side of the
table. Across from him, John sat reading a book. Sue was softly playing
on the piano.

Mother stopped a moment in the doorway to enjoy the scene.

"Winter time or Summer time, home is best," she thought.

Then she took her place in the easy chair which John had drawn up for
her near the lamp, and opened her book to read.

Upstairs, Bobby lay awake for some time, listening to the wind and rain.

Then he fell asleep and dreamed that he was in the hayfield playing with
Rover; and the sound he heard was not the storm but the hum of the mower
cutting the clover.


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's Bobby of Cloverfield Farm, by Helen Fuller Orton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOBBY OF CLOVERFIELD FARM ***

***** This file should be named 28652.txt or 28652.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/6/5/28652/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
