Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, April 27, 1880, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Harper's Young People, April 27, 1880
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: May 16, 2009 [EBook #28833]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, APR 27, 1880 ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S

YOUNG PEOPLE

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]


       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.--NO. 26. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, April 27, 1880. Copyright, 1880, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: SPANISH SAILORS IN A STORM.]

[Begun in No. 19 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, March 9.]

ACROSS THE OCEAN; OR, A BOY'S FIRST VOYAGE.

A True Story.

BY J. O. DAVIDSON.


CHAPTER VIII.

A "WHITE SQUALL."

Hurrah for the Mediterranean! Hurrah for the tideless sea! with its
sunny skies and sparkling waters, blue and bright as ever, while English
moors and German forests are being buried in snow by a bitter January
storm! Well might one think that these handsome, olive-cheeked,
barefooted fellows in red caps and blue shirts, who cruise about this
"summer sea" in their trim little lateen-rigged fruit boats, must be the
happiest men alive. Yet there was once an English sailor who, plunging
into a raw Channel fog on his return from a twelvemonth's cruise in the
Mediterranean, rubbed his hands, and cried, gleefully, "Ah, this is what
_I_ calls weather! None o' yer lubberly blue skies _here_!"

Frank, having seen for himself that the Straits of Gibraltar are
thirteen miles wide, instead of being (as he had always thought) no
broader than the East River, was prepared for surprises; but he could
not help staring a little when Herrick told him that this bright,
beautiful, glassy sea is at times one of the stormiest in the world, and
that many a good ship has gone down there like a bullet, "as you'll see
afore long, mayhap," added the old sailor, warningly.

The sunset that evening, however, seemed to contradict him point-blank.
It was so magnificent that even the careless sailors, used as most of
them were to the glories of the Southern sky, stood still to admire it,
and pronounced it "the finest show they'd ever seen, by a long way." Not
a cloud above, not a ripple below; the steamer's track lay across the
glassy water like a broad belt of light. All was so calm, so clear, so
bright, that it was hard to tell where the sea ended and the sky began.
The ship seemed to be floating in the centre of a vast bubble.

Suddenly the sun plunged below the horizon like a red-hot ball, and a
deep voice muttered in Frank's ear,

"We're a-goin' to catch it!"

At that moment, as if to bear out this gloomy prophecy, the boatswain's
hoarse call was heard:

"Stand by topsail sheets and halyards! Man the down-hauls! Clear away,
and make all snug!"

Instantly all was bustle and activity. While some stripped the yards and
clewed up the sails, others battened down the hatches, looked to the
lashings of the boats, and made everything fast. Still, though he
strained his eyes to the utmost, not the least sign of a storm could
Frank see, and at last he whispered to Herrick,

"How _can_ they tell that it's going to be rough?"

"The glass is falling, lad, and that's always enough for a sailor; but
there'll be more'n _that_ afore long. Ay, sure enough--see yonder!"

A streak of pale phosphorescent mist had just appeared on the port bow,
which spread and spread till it blotted out sea and sky, and all was one
dim, impenetrable pall. From the far distance came a strange, ghostly
whisper, while the sea-birds, which had hitherto kept close to the
vessel, flew away with dismal shrieks.

"Below there!" roared the boatswain. "Tumble up there, smart!"

Up flew the men, each darting at once to his own post--and not an
instant too soon. A huge white cloud seemed to leap upward through the
inky sky like smoke from a cannon, a long line of foam glanced like a
lightning flash across the dark sea, and then came a rush and a roar,
and over went the ship on her beam ends, and every man on board was
blinded, deafened, and strangled, all in one moment, while crash
followed crash, as doors, sky-lights, and port-shutters were torn away
or dashed to atoms.

Frank, who was just stepping out of one of the deck-houses when the
storm burst, was spun across the forecastle like a top, and would have
gone overboard had not a sailor clutched his arm, and pressed him down
on the deck by main force till the ship righted.

"Lie snug, young 'un," said his rescuer, "for them 'white squalls' ain't
to be sneezed at, that's a fact. Look at my shirt."

This was easier said than done, for honest Bill had no shirt left to
look at, except the collar and wristbands, all the rest having been torn
clean away.

But as Austin glanced round him he saw other proofs of the wind's force
even more convincing than this. Two of the boats had been literally
smashed to pieces, the strong-iron davits that held them being twisted
like pin-wire. Down in the engine-room the flying open of the furnace
doors had flooded the whole room with blazing coal, and four of the
tubes had burst at once, scalding several firemen so severely that they
had to be carried to the surgeon forthwith.

Suddenly a cry for help was heard from the wheel-house. Three or four
brave fellows rushed across the reeling deck at the risk of their lives,
and tearing open the door, found one quartermaster lying senseless and
bleeding in a corner, while the other, with a broken arm, was actually
keeping the wheel steady with _the remaining hand and his knee_, which
he had thrust between the spokes!

But the stout-hearted crew, not a whit daunted, coolly set about
repairing damages. The injured men were carried below, the decks cleared
of the fragments of wreck, and the coals drawn from the furnaces, into
which the firemen, swathed in wet blankets, crept by turns along a plank
(relieving one another as the stifling heat overpowered them) to close
the flues again by hammering strong wooden plugs into the leaks.

By twelve o'clock the gale was at its height. Even with four men at the
wheel, the _Arizona_ could barely hold her own against the tremendous
seas that came thundering upon her like falling rocks, and old Herrick
himself began to look grave.

"Get out a drag!" shouted the officer of the watch.

The boatswain repeated the order, to the no small amazement of our hero,
who, having always associated a drag with the wheel of a coach, was
puzzled to imagine how it could be applied to a ship.

But he was not long in finding out. Pieces of timber from the broken
boats, worn out sails, old iron, and various odds and ends were hastily
gathered into a heap, lashed together with chains, and launched
overboard, with two strong hawsers attached. The chains and pieces of
iron made the buoyant mass sink just deep enough, to steady the vessel,
and keep her head up to the wind, which toward night-fall began to show
signs of abating.

Just before darkness set in, a Spanish bark crossed their bows. The
storm had left its mark on her upper spars, which were terribly
shattered; but the crew, instead of clearing away the wreck, were
groaning and praying around a little doll-like image of the Virgin,
while their officers vainly urged them to return to their duty.

"Skulkin' lubbers!" growled old Herrick; "they should git what that
feller in the song got. D'ye mind it, Frank, my boy?

  "'The boatswain he rope's-ended him, and "Now," says he, "just work!
  I read my Bible often, but it don't tell men to _shirk_;
  The pumps they are not choked as yet, so let us not despair:
  When all is up, or when we're saved, we'll join with you in prayer."'"

The next morning they sighted the craggy islet of Zembra, which Jack
Dewey, the wit of the forecastle, said should be called "Zebra," for its
cliffs were curiously veined with stripes of blue, red, and black, as
regular as if painted with a brush. A few hours later appeared the
larger island of Partellaria, standing boldly up from the sea in one
great mass of cloud-capped mountain, with the trim white houses of the
little toy town scattered along its base like a game of dominoes.

By sunset that evening the gale seemed to have fairly blown itself out.
But now came another enemy almost as dangerous. A little after midnight
the ship was hemmed in by a perfect wall of fog, through which neither
moon nor star was to be seen; and all that could be done was to set the
bells and fog-horns to work, making an uproar worthy of a Chinese
concert.

About three in the morning came a faint answering chime of church bells;
and the _Arizona_, "porting" her helm, kept circling about the same spot
for two hours more ("playin' circus," as Jack Dewey said), till the
morning breeze suddenly parted the fog, displaying to Frank's eager eyes
the rocky shores of Malta, and the entrance of Valetta Harbor.

"There's _one_ thing here as you're bound to see, lad," said Herrick,
"and that's a sort o' under-ground tunnel, like ever so many streets
buried alive, and pitch-dark every one of 'em. They calls it the
Cat-and-Combs [Catacombs]. I never could tell why, for it ain't got
nothin' to do with combs, nor yet with cats neither. But you've got to
take guides and lights with yer, and stick mighty close to 'em, or ye're
a gone 'coon. Guess _I_ ought to know that!"

"Why, did _you_ ever get lost there?"

"That's jist what I did, sonny, though I can't think how; but, anyway,
there I was, all to once, right away from the rest, and all alone in the
dark. I tried to holler, but my throat was so dry with the dust and what
not that I made no more noise nor a frog with a sore throat. 'Twarn't
pleasant neither, I can tell ye, to feel my feet kickin' agin skulls and
bones in the dark, and to think how _my_ bones 'ud be added to the
collection 'fore long, when the rats had picked 'em clean. At last I
concluded that I'd jist make matters worse by steerin' at hap-hazard,
and that my best way was to anchor, and wait for the rest o' the convoy.

"Jist then I spied _two eyes_ a-shinin' in the darkness, and 'fore I
could say 'Knife,' slap came somethin' right in my face, givin' me sich
a start that I jumped five ways at once. But by the soft, furry feel, I
guessed what 'twas; so I sang out, 'Puss! puss!' and the thing came
rubbin' agin my feet, and what should it be but a stray cat! Thinks I,
'Here's somethin' to keep off the rats, anyhow!' and I sat down in a
corner, and took the cat in my lap, and, if you'll b'lieve me, off I
went sound asleep! Fust thing I knew after that, all my mates was around
me agin, laughin' like anythin' to find me nussin' a cat that way. But I
wouldn't go that job over agin, not to be made a Cap'n!"

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




SOMETHING ABOUT FANS.


Kan Si was the first lady who carried a fan. She lived in ages which are
past, and for the most part forgotten, and she was the daughter of a
Chinese Mandarin. Who ever saw a Mandarin, even on a tea-chest, without
his fan? In China and Japan to this day every one has a fan; and there
are fans of all sorts for everybody. The Japanese waves his fan at you
when he meets you, by way of greeting, and the beggar who solicits for
alms has the exceedingly small coin "made on purpose" for charity
presented to him on the tip of the fan.

In ancient times, amongst the Greeks and Romans, fans seem to have been
enormous; they were generally made of feathers, and carried by slaves
over the heads of their masters and mistresses, to protect them from the
sun, or waved about before them to stir the air.

Catherine de Medicis carried the first folding fan ever seen in France;
and in the time of Louis the Fourteenth the fan was a gorgeous thing,
often covered with jewels, and worth a small fortune. In England they
were the fashion in the time of Henry the Eighth. All his many wives
carried them, and doubtless wept behind them. A fan set in diamonds was
once given to Queen Elizabeth upon New-Year's Day.

The Mexican feather fans which Cortez had from Montezuma were marvels of
beauty; and in Spain a large black fan is the favorite. It is said that
the use of the fan is as carefully taught in that country as any other
branch of education, and that by a well-known code of signals a Spanish
lady can carry on a long conversation with any one, especially an
admirer.

The Japanese criminal of rank is politely executed by means of a fan. On
being sentenced to death he is presented with a fan, which he must
receive with a low bow, and as he bows, _presto_! the executioner draws
his sword, and cuts his head off. In fact, there is a fan for every
occasion in Japan.




THE BOYS' SCHOOLS OF ENGLAND.

BY AMELIA E. BARR.


I suppose there are few boys who have not heard of Westminster Abbey,
and who do not know that within its ancient and splendid walls the Kings
of England are crowned, and the great, the wise, and the brave of every
age are buried. But few, perhaps, are aware that the Abbey also contains
the oldest and one of the most famous boys' schools in the world. It is
true that the statutes of the school, as they now exist, are of a less
remote date than those of Eton and Winchester schools--being framed by
Henry the Eighth and Elizabeth--but they no more represent the origin of
Westminster School than the Reformation represents the origin of the
English Church.

Westminster Abbey was built by Edward the Confessor, and the Master of
the Novices sitting with his disciples in the western cloister was the
beginning of Westminster School. It was, without doubt, this school that
Ingulphus--the writer of a famous chronicle (A.D. 1043-1051)--attended;
for he tells us that Queen Edith often met him coming from school, and
questioned him about his grammar and logic, and always gave him three or
four pieces of money, and then sent him to the royal larder to refresh
himself--two forms of kindness that a school-boy never forgets.
Ingulphus afterward became the secretary of William the Conqueror. In
his day there was no glazing to this cloister, and the rain, wind, and
snow must have swept pitilessly over the novices turning and spelling
out their manuscripts. They had, indeed, a carpet of hay or rushes, and
mats were laid on the stone benches, but it must have been a bitterly
cold school-room in winter.

At the Reformation, Henry the Eighth drew up new plans for Westminster
School, and Elizabeth perfected the statutes by which the school is
still governed. It was to consist of forty boys, who were to be chosen
for their "good disposition, knowledge, and poverty, and without favor
or partiality"; and even at the present day there is no admission as a
"Queen's Scholar" at Westminster except by long and arduous competition
between the candidates for the honor.

No one who has witnessed the mode of election will ever forget it. The
candidates are arranged according to their places in the school, and the
_lowest two boys_ first enter the arena. The lower of these two is the
challenger. He calls upon his adversary to translate an epigram, to
parse it, or to answer any grammatical question connected with the
subject. Demand after demand is made, until there is an error. The
Master is appealed to, and answers, "It was a mistake." Then the
challenger and the challenged change places, and the latter, with fierce
eagerness, renews the contest. Whichever of the two is the conqueror,
flushed with victory, then turns to the boy above him, and if he be a
really clever lad, he will sometimes advance ten, fifteen, or twenty
steps before he is stopped by a greater spirit. This struggle--which is
peculiar to Westminster, and highly prized by its scholars--frequently
extends over six or eight weeks, and the ten who are highest at its
close are elected "Queen's Scholars," in place of those advanced that
year from Westminster to Oxford or Cambridge.

This mental tournament is a very ancient custom, for Stow says that the
Westminster scholars annually stood under a great tree in St.
Bartholomew's Church yard, and entering the lists of grammar,
chivalrously asserted the intellectual superiority of Westminster
against all comers; and Stow, as you very likely know, died about A.D.
1600. There is, therefore, as you may see, a very great honor in being a
"Queen's Scholar"; besides which, the prizes to be divided among them
are very valuable. These consist of three junior studentships of Christ
Church, Oxford, tenable for seven years, and worth about L120 a year;
Dr. Carey's Benefaction, which divides L600 a year among the most needy
and industrious of the scholars in sums of not less than L50, and not
more than L100; and three exhibitions at Trinity College, Cambridge, of
yearly value about L87, tenable until the holder has taken his Bachelor
of Arts degree. The Queen's Scholars are partially maintained by the
school; but all other boys, of which the average number is about one
hundred and fifty, pay very handsomely for their education.

[Illustration: A VIEW OF WESTMINSTER.]

The government of this school is an absolute monarchy in the hands of
the Head-Master, though the Dean and Chapter of Westminster can exercise
a certain control of the Queen's Scholars, and the reigning sovereign of
England is by the statutes Visitor of the School. In 1846 the father of
one of the Queen's Scholars complained to her Majesty that his boy had
been cruelly treated by three of the other scholars, and she ordered an
immediate trial, and punishment of the guilty parties.

Westminster, from its earliest records, has been famous for its Masters.
Before the great Camden--the Pausanias of England--were Alexander
Nowell, Nicholas Udall, and Thomas Browne. Nowell was Master in Queen
Mary's reign, and Bonner intending to burn him, he fled for his life. On
Elizabeth's accession he again became Master, and was also one of
Elizabeth's preachers, and reproved her so plainly that on one occasion
she bade him "return to his text." You know, boys, it is so easy and so
natural for school-masters to tell people when they are wrong, and the
Masters of Westminster have been noted for the habit.

Dr. Busby's name is forever associated with Westminster, and he ruled
the school with his terrible birch rod for upward of fifty-seven years.
"My rod is my sieve," he said, "and who can not pass through it is no
boy for me." So many able boys, however, passed through it, that he
could point to the Bench of Bishops, and boast that sixteen of the
spiritual lords sitting there at one time had been educated by him. The
height to which he carried discipline is exemplified by his accompanying
King Charles through the school-room _with his hat on_, because "he
would not have his boys think there was any man in England greater than
himself." Dryden was one of Busby's scholars, and received from the
great Master many a severe flogging, yet Dryden always spoke of Dr.
Busby with the greatest reverence. Flogging is now only administered on
very grave occasions, by the Head-Master, and in the presence of a third
party, who must be one of the boys.

In Dr. Busby's time the upper and lower schools were divided by a
curtain, about which there is a remarkable story. A boy, having torn
this curtain, was saved from one of Busby's terrible floggings by his
school-mate assuming the fault, and bearing the rod in his place. This
brave lad in the civil war took the King's side, became implicated in a
futile rising, and was condemned to death at Exeter. But his judge
happened to be the very boy whose place he had taken under Busby's rod,
and he was not unmindful of the favor, for he hastened to London, and
begged from Cromwell his friend's life. If you will get No. 313 of the
_Spectator_, you can read the whole story, and it is a very beautiful as
well as truthful one.

[Illustration: THE SCHOOL-ROOM.]

The school-room at Westminster is one of the most interesting rooms in
the world. It was the dormitory of the old monks; and when I saw it,
thirty years ago, its walls were quite covered with the names of boys
who had studied there, and who had cut with their penknives these rude
autographs. Many of the names have since become famous all over the
world, and will never be forgotten. At that time "John Dryden" was deep
and plain in the solid bench where he cut it, for not one of all the
thousands of Westminster boys who have sat in his place since have been
mean or thoughtless enough to deface it.

The dormitory of the Queen's Scholars stands where the granary of the
monks stood, and is a chamber one hundred and sixty-one feet long by
twenty-five broad. It is interesting because it is the theatre where for
centuries the "Westminster Play" has been acted. This "play" was
expressly ordered by Queen Elizabeth for "her boys," and those of
Terence were chosen by her. In 1847 there was a movement to abolish the
"Westminster Play," but a memorial, signed by more than six hundred old
Westminsters, pleaded for its continuance, and it is still one of the
great features of a London Christmas.

Westminster is pre-eminently a classical school, but no school has a
longer or more splendid list of great scholars. Of Church dignitaries it
counts nine Archbishops and more than sixty Bishops: among the latter
Trelawney, Francis Atterbury (the friend of Pope, Swift, and Gay), Isaac
Barrow, and the witty, loyal Dr. South, who, when but an Upper Boy at
Westminster, dared to read the prayer for Charles the First an hour
before he was beheaded. Still more famous was Prideaux, the great
Oriental and Hebrew scholar, and the wise Dr. Goodenough, whose sermons
before the House of Lords elicited the lively epigram from some
Westminster boy,

  "'Twas well enough that Goodenough before the Lords should preach,
  For sure enough that bad enough were those he had to teach."

Among famous lawyers, Westminster educated Lane, the eloquent defender
of Strafford; Glynne, the great Commonwealth lawyer; the Earl of
Mansfield, the pride of Westminster School, and the glory of Westminster
Hall, Lord Chief Justice of England for more than thirty years; and the
late Sir David Dundas. Among statesmen, Westminster counts the younger
Vane, whom Milton so nobly eulogizes, as

      "young in years, but in sage counsel old,
  Than whom no better senator e'er held
  The Roman helm";

Halifax, the accomplished "Trimmer" of the Revolution, about whom you
must consult Macaulay; Warren Hastings; Sir Francis Burdett; Sir James
Graham; and John, Earl Russell.

Among warriors, five of the seven officers not of royal blood who rose
to the rank of Field-Marshal between 1810 and 1856 were Westminster
boys, and one of these five was Lord Raglan.

Her list of literary sons is so long that I can only name a few of the
best-known names--Rare Ben Jonson, Cowley, George Herbert, John Dryden,
Christopher Wren, John Locke, the two Colmans, Richard Cumberland,
Cowper, Gibbon, and the all-accomplished Robert Southey.

The chief amusement of Westminster boys is boating; for which the
proximity of the Thames affords great advantages; also cricket, racket,
quoits, sparring, foot-races, leaping, and single-stick. The school has
always been noted, also, for the strong bond of fraternity uniting the
boys: to the end of life Westminster boys acknowledge this tie, and in
many a national crisis it has been, "All Westminsters together!"




THE LOST CHECK.

BY MRS. W. J. HAYS.


"I have hunted high and low for that check, Sam, and I can not find it."

"I thought it was careless, when I saw you parading it about here."

"Well, you see, I felt rich. Father never sent me such a lot of money
before."

"It was your birthday, wasn't it?"

"Yes, and the governor came down handsomely. He knows I am saving up for
a trip to the Adirondacks. Well, if it is gone, it is gone."

"It could not go without hands; but I hope it will turn up yet. In
future you had better put such documents in a safe place."

Will Benson heard this conversation between two fellow-clerks in the
warehouse where he also was employed, and it troubled him much. He was a
young fellow about fifteen or thereabouts, but so steady and reliable a
youth that already many matters of importance were intrusted to him. He
had seen Charlie Graham nourishing a check about, and had heard him
talking very largely of his plans, etc. He had also seen the valuable
bit of paper lying about, and had asked Charlie to pocket it; but he had
also seen some one else do that in a very quiet way, and it had so
peculiarly affected him that when Charlie asked him about it, he had
colored up violently, and was so confused, that had Charlie been of a
suspicious nature, he would have had good reason to suppose that Will
knew more about the affair than he cared to tell--which was the truth.
But Charlie was neither suspicious nor careful, and, in addition to
leaving the paper about, he had also indorsed it.

[Illustration: WILL CONSIDERS THE SITUATION.]

Will listened to the inquiries and the comments in silence, not knowing
what to say. Had he been very impulsive, he would have come out
instantly with his suspicions; but he had a habit of reflection, and was
inclined to consider before acting or speaking. At this moment, however,
his thoughts were confused, and finding that his writing was suffering
in consequence, he thrust his pen behind his ear, and sat down on a box
at the office door to see if he could not think himself out of his
difficulty.

He was quite sure that a theft had been committed, and that he had
witnessed it. What should he do?--tell Charlie Graham, have the man
arrested and sent to prison, as he deserved, or keep the matter quiet,
wait, and see how the thing would turn out?

As he sat there in the soft spring morning a little bird perched itself
on a budding bough, and began to chirp. As it turned its head from side
to side, and peeped coyly at him, it reminded him, by one of those
unconscious flights of association, of another bird, which hung in a
gilded cage very near the couch of his invalid mother. He could see the
little warbler doing his best to entertain the weary moments of one who
seldom heard the wild birds, or set her foot in the woods. He could also
see the soft draperies about the window, the climbing ivy and growing
ferns, and the much-used books and work-table, and from all these homely
but precious belongings came uppermost the sweet smile of affection, the
placid face which, in spite of age and sorrow and suffering, had always
so tender a beauty for him. Quickly he turned back to his desk, and
wrote a long letter to his mother. She would set him aright, she would
solve his difficulty. Happy the boy who has such a mother!

Of course he had to wait some time for the answer, and the waiting was
tedious. Charlie gave up the check as lost, and said no more about it,
and Will took so great an aversion to the porter, who he was sure was
the thief, that he hated to come in contact with him. But the mother's
letter was worth waiting for, and Will acted on its advice.

Late one afternoon he wended his way to the narrow street where lived
Grimes, the porter. It was a noisome locality. Will could not help
thinking what a contrast it was to the quiet, clean town where he was
born, and where his mother still lived! These dirty, narrow, crowded
city slums, what wonder that all sorts of crime are born in them!

He found the house, and through the dark wretched stairway at last came
to a door, at which he knocked.

"Come in," was the response.

He entered, stumbling over heaps of unwashed clothing. Two or three
forlorn-looking children were eating at a wretchedly uninviting table in
the midst of these surroundings. A feeble-looking woman was on a bed.

"Is Grimes at home?" asked Will.

"No, sir, he's not; and I beg pardon for letting you come in. My washing
was half done when I was took down with a turn, and Grimes is looking
now for some one to do what I am unable to do."

"Will he soon be in, do you think?"

"Yes, sir; have a chair; he'll be in presently."

"I will wait outside," said Will, glad of the excuse to get out. He
waited in the dim light of a dirty window outside, and wished he had
about a gallon of Cologne water at hand. Soon Grimes came, looking tired
and cross. When he saw Will he grew pale, but asked him, in a smothered
voice, what he wanted.

"I have come to speak about that check of Charlie Graham's," said Will.

Grimes grew red and angry, swore roundly that he knew nothing of it, and
threatened to pitch Will down stairs.

Will very firmly replied that he had seen Grimes take it, and that
unless he was willing to make reparation, his employers would have to be
told of it.

At this the man wavered a little, but still stoutly denied the theft. At
this moment the door, which was ajar, was pushed wider open, and the
woman's head came peering out; then the children followed, but they were
speedily sent down into the street.

Grimes retreated into the room; Will followed, not without some tremors,
but that letter of his mother's was in his pocket.

"Sure and are ye found out?" said the woman, impetuously. "Didn't I tell
you so? didn't I say no good could come of stalin', Grimes, my man?"

Grimes tried to hush her, but she would not listen to him. She had drawn
a shawl about her, and was the picture of woe, with her pale face, her
unkempt hair, and her glittering eyes. She took Will by the hand. "As
you are a gintleman, and the son of a lady, have mercy on Grimes. If
it's the bit of paper ye want, I have it; here it is;" and she drew it
from the folds of her dress. "I knew no good could come of it, and I
would not let him use it, miserable as we are. But spare him, and God
will bless you."

"I have no wish to injure him," said Will, "and my mother thinks if this
is a first offense, and he is at all sorry, I had better not make his
dishonesty known."

Grimes was hanging his head in sullen silence, but at this he raised it
eagerly. "Never in my life before have I taken anything--but you see our
misery. I thought she would be the better for something this money could
buy."

"Hush!" said the woman. "I might better die than live by stalin'. You
will forgive him, misther; I know you will; I see it in your kind eyes."

Will promised silence, except to Charlie Graham, to whom he should be
obliged to reveal the theft, as well as to make restitution; and gladly
turned away from this scene of misery.

Charlie and he had a long talk that night. They concluded to abide by
Mrs. Benson's advice.

"It was very wrong as well as silly for me to leave that check where it
could tempt a poor fellow; and if it wasn't for the Adirondacks I'd send
the whole amount to Mrs. Grimes," said Charlie, generously.

"No, that would not be wise," said Will; "but I tell you what, let's
club together and send her some decent food and clothing."

Their kindness was not thrown away. Grimes never repeated the
wrong-doing. With better times came better health and strength for his
wife, and when Will went home for a holiday he took to his mother a bit
of Irish lace, which Mrs. Grimes had begged him to carry to her.




A CHEAP CANOE.

BY W. P. S.


The labor and ingenuity expended in one season by a boy who has any
taste for the water in building rafts, and converting tubs and
packing-boxes into sea-going vessels, would, if well directed, build a
good-sized ship; but, from lack of knowledge and system, the results of
such attempts are generally failures.

After some experience with rafts that _would_ sink, scows that _would_
leak, and other craft that showed a strong preference for floating with
keels in the air, we found in the canvas canoe a boat at once handsome,
speedy, and safe, and capable of a great variety of uses, while the
small cost and easy construction place it within reach of all young
ship-builders.

To produce a good canvas boat care and patience are more necessary than
great skill with tools, though it is supposed that the young mechanic
can use his rule correctly, saw to a line, and plane an edge reasonably
straight.

The first proceeding in any building operation, after the plans are
decided on, is to make out a "bill of materials" and an "estimate," and
ours will read as follows:

  Keel, oak, 1 in. square, by 15 ft.  }
      long.                           } Sawed from an oak
  10 rib-bands, oak, 1 x 1/4 in., by  } board 15 ft. X 6
      15 ft. long                     } in. = 7-1/2 ft. @ 5c.
  2 gunwales, oak, 1 x 3/4 in., by    }
      15 ft. long                     }                            $0.38
  Keelson, 3 x 1 in., 10 ft. long.       } 10 in. pine board
  Bow, stern, coaming, and ridge pieces. }                           .35
  Moulds.       } 2 pine boards 12 x 1/2 in., 13 ft.
  Floor boards, }   long = 26 ft.,@ 3c.                              .78
  Paddle, 1-1/4 in. spruce plank, 6-1/2 in. X 13 ft.                 .25
  Canvas, 5 yds., 40 in., @ 45c.                                    2.25
  Canvas deck, 5 yds., 28 in., @ 25c.                               1.25
  1 package 1 in. No. 7 iron screws.                                 .30
  Tacks, nails, and screws.                                          .50
  Rubber cloth for apron.                                            .50
  Sawing moulds and paddle.                                          .50
  Paint.                                                            1.00
                                                                   -----
                                                                   $8.06

Having all our material ready, it will be best to mark out the different
pieces, and have them all sawed at once by a steam-saw.

Beginning with the bow and stern, we will lay off on one corner of the
ten-inch board a line two feet long, representing the dotted line
_c_ _d_ in Fig. 1.

A line is drawn half an inch from the edge from the point 11 to 12,
making a notch for the end of the keelson; and the two feet are divided
into four parts, and perpendiculars drawn at each point.

Now measure off on the line _a_ _d_ nine and a half inches, giving the
point _a_; on the others three and a quarter inches, an inch, and a
quarter of an inch; then draw a line from _a_ to _c_ through all these
points.

The shape of the inner line is not important, so it may be drawn by eye,
making it thick enough for strength.

As the bow and stern are alike, two of these pieces are needed.

The keelson must be cut from the same board, being three inches wide at
the centre, tapering to one inch at the ends.

To obtain the shapes of the moulds or sections we must enlarge Fig. 4
four times to its full size.

The horizontal lines in the drawing are one-fourth of an inch apart, so
in our large drawing they will be one inch; then taking the line marked
2 (Nos. 1 and 13 require no moulds), we find the distance of the point
_g_ to be one and seven-sixteenths inches from the centre line, so we
make it four times as much, or five and three-fourths inches, and
continue with the other points until we have enough to determine the
line pretty closely, after which we join them with the line _g_ _h_,
giving the shape of one-half of our first mould.

The lines on the right represent the half sections in the fore end of
the boat, and those on the left the after end.

When all are drawn, they should be transferred to the half-inch board,
each mould, however, being a whole and not a half section.

The outline of the paddle being drawn also, all may be taken to a
saw-mill and sawn out, or else they may be sawn by hand with a
compass-saw.

Having all cut out, we will first screw the bow and stern to the
keelson, and secure the three pieces on a plank set upright, the upper
edge being curved to fit the keelson, which is a little rockered.

Moulds Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, and 12 are next notched to fit the
varying widths of the keelson, the first and last also fitting over the
bow and stern; then they are put in place, and the gunwales notched into
them, and also into the bow and stern.

The moulds for Nos. 6, 7, and 8 are sawn from three-quarter-inch oak or
ash, each being in two pieces. The inner edge of No. 6 is shown by the
dotted line K C, Fig. 4, and of Nos. 7 and 8 by _m_ _b_. They are put in
place the same as the others.

Now the rib-bands are planed off and tacked in place, being spaced
amidships as shown in Fig. 4; then the points where they cross the bow
and stern and all the moulds are marked, and notches one inch by
one-fourth of an inch cut to receive them, the edges of the bow and
stern being tapered off at the same time to half an inch; then all the
parts are placed in position again, and fastened with one-inch screws,
except where the keelson joins the bow, stern, and moulds, where one
inch and a half screws are used. Each screw is dipped in white lead
before inserting, and the head afterward puttied over.

The highest point of the deck is at No. 6, where a deck beam is placed,
the shape of it and of the deck at No. 9 being shown in Fig. 4.

The other moulds may be easily shaped by using these as guides; then
pieces two inches wide and three-fourths of an inch thick are notched
into each mould, down the centre of the deck, from No. 6 to the bow, and
from No. 9 to the stern, making a ridge over which the canvas is
stretched.

A piece of one-inch pine is next set in between Nos. 9 and 6, and
screwed to each, as well as to Nos. 7 and 8 and the gunwales, and
forming the sides of the well.

The frame is now carefully smoothed off, and painted with two coats;
then a floor of half-inch pine is screwed to moulds Nos. 6, 7, and 8.

The canvas, forty inches wide, is first oiled, and then laid on the
frame-work, and tacked along the centre of the keelson from No. 2 to No.
12; then it is tacked lightly to the gunwales; then cut to fit the
curved bow and stern, and tacked, the edges overlapping half an inch,
after which it is stretched tightly over the gunwales, and tacked on the
_inside_.

The deck is of drilling, twenty-eight inches wide, tacked around the
gunwale (a half-round head being screwed over the joint), and turned up
and tacked around the coaming, which is of three-eighth inch pine,
rising an inch and a half above the deck, and screwed to the side
pieces, mould No. 9, and the deck beam at No. 6.

The keel is of straight-grained oak, one inch deep from No. 3 to No. 11,
tapering to one-half by three-eighths of an inch at the ends, and may be
soaked in hot water before bending. When cold, it is screwed to the
keelson and the bow and stern, the canvas under it being painted.

The stretcher for the feet rests against a strip nailed to the floors,
and a small block on each gunwale.

A half-inch hole is bored in bow and stern for the painter.

The paddle is seven feet long, six and a half inches wide, and
three-sixteenths of an inch thick at the edges; the handle being an inch
and a quarter in diameter at the middle, tapering to seven-eighths where
it joins the blades. A rubber ring is slipped over each end to prevent
the water running down. In using, it is grasped about seven inches on
each side of the centre, keeping the hands about the width of the body
apart. The stroke should be as long and steady as possible.

It will be found at first that the boat will rock from side to side in
paddling, and the paddle will throw some spray; but both these faults
disappear with practice, and the boat should be perfectly steady at any
speed. A slight twist as the paddle leaves the water, hard to describe,
but easily found on trial, shakes off all drip.

For an apron, a strip of pine one-quarter by one and a half inches is
fastened to each side of the well by brass straps hooking over the
coaming, shown in Fig. 6.

A piece of rubber cloth is gored to fit around the body, and is tacked
to each side piece, a rubber cord fastened to each strip, and running
around the front of the well, serving to keep it down, and the after
ends being tucked in between the backboard and the body, all falling off
in an upset.

The backboard, Fig. 5, is seventeen inches long, the strips being two
and one-fourth inches wide, and the same distance apart; it swings on
the coaming at the back of the well.

Two coats of paint should be put on, and the paddle varnished.

A deck of half-inch pine, laid from No. 9 to No. 10, under the canvas,
allows the canoeist to sit on deck sometimes in paddling.

In entering the boat, step in the centre (facing the bow), and, with a
hand on each gunwale, drop into the seat.

When not in use the canoe should be sponged out and stored on shore.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: WORKING PLANS FOR A CANVAS CANOE.--[SEE PAGES 350 AND
351.]]




MAHMOUD THE SYCE.

BY SARA KEABLES HUNT.


[Illustration: THE SYCE ON DUTY.]

One of the most novel and interesting sights which attracts the
traveller's attention when he first arrives in Egypt is the syce running
before the horses as they go through the narrow, closely packed streets.
How the crowd scatters, and the donkey-boys hustle their meek property
out of the way as one of those runners comes bounding along, shouting,
in the strange Arabic tongue, "Clear the way!" The sun shines upon his
velvet vest, glittering with its spangled trimmings, the breeze fills
the large floating sleeves till they wave backward like white wings.
Then on dash the spirited horses, dogs bark, children squeal, beggars
dodge, men swear, and women, holding their face-veil closer, ejaculate
fiercely.

On springs the syce; what cares he for man or beast? while proudly
following rolls the rich equipage, or prances the Arab steed with its
turbaned rider and Oriental robes.

Mahmoud, the subject of this little sketch, was the syce of a rich Pasha
in Cairo; he was a favorite with his master, and everybody loved
him--even the horses would neigh joyfully at his approach, and eat from
his hand as gently as a dog. His life was an easy one, for, being a
favorite, no arduous duties were placed upon him, and his strength was
encouraged and sustained by the master for the swift running which
commands so much admiration. So agile did he become, that no name among
the syce of Egypt was more renowned than that of Mahmoud. Often at the
latticed windows bright eyes of hidden beauties followed him through the
narrow streets, and watched for his coming as he led the way for his
master each morning in his rides. Sometimes they threaded their way
through the crowded bazars amid scenes of the _Arabian Nights_,
breathing wonderful Eastern perfumes, gazing on rare gems and exquisite
embroideries; and again, down the road to the Pyramids, with the soft
air blowing in his face, trees waving overhead, and birds singing
merrily; or, in the blood-red sunset, passing down the Choubra Road, the
fashionable drive of Cairo, with its shade of gnarled old sycamores, and
crowded with conveyances of every description. Sometimes he led the way
for the harem carriage, very proud of the honor.

One morning the Pasha sat in his garden under the blossoming
orange-tree, smoking his chibouque, and talking with his friend the Bey
from Alexandria, whose horse stood in the path champing impatiently at
his bit, and held by his syce, Abdullah, in his gay costume. They talked
of politics, the condition of the country, its financial troubles; they
spoke of their religion and their mosque, of the Suez Canal, the
improvements of the city, the Khedive's new palace, their own
dwelling-places. By-and-by the conversation ran upon their horses and
their favorite syce.

"Abdullah can outrun them all," said the Bey.

"Not so," replied the Pasha; "my Mahmoud is the finest runner in
Cairo--ay, in all Egpyt."

"Sayest thou so?" cried the Bey. "Come and let us test their skill."

"Most surely," answered the Pasha, "and I will give a prize to the boy
who wins."

The news soon spread over Cairo that Mahmoud and Abdullah were to run a
race, the winner to receive a costly girdle of rich embroidery, finished
with a clasp set with gems. Great was the interest, and on the day
appointed crowds assembled to see the race, gathering long before the
competitors appeared.

What a motley group there was! Camels with their riders, stylish
carriages with pretty French children, rosy-cheeked English girls,
Italian singers, American officers and tourists, English lords, wild
desert Arabs, swarthy-faced fellaheen, pistachio and pea-nut dealers,
donkey-boys, beggars, and peddlers. A Turkish band played a quick
reveille. Here they come! The crowd cheers--the signal is given--they
are off! The general sympathy is with Mahmoud, but Abdullah is a strong
fellow, of tremendous muscle, more experience, and mighty will, so that
little Mahmoud has a rival of no mean powers.

Every eye is fixed upon those two figures, side by side, leaping onward
in graceful bounds. Forward they fly, past the cotton field, around the
curved path; but look!-- Abdullah is ahead; Mahmoud seems far behind.
The band plays quicker. Abdullah is flying; he will win; he-- But no;
Mahmoud is gaining; he nears his rival. Abdullah sees and strains every
nerve, but in vain. Mahmoud swings his light wand over his head, and
shoots by like an arrow. It is over; the goal is reached. Mahmoud has
won, and amid the loud cheers of the crowd the Pasha descends from his
carriage, and places the glittering sash around the victor's waist.
Abdullah approaches, gives his successful rival a hearty salam, which
awakens fresh applause. Somebody scatters a shower of gold coins over
them, and the crowd disperses.




[_By special arrangement with the author, the cards contributed to this
useful series, by W. J. ROLFE, A.M., formerly Head-Master of the
Cambridge High School, will, for the present, first appear in HARPER'S
YOUNG PEOPLE._]

CAMBRIDGE SERIES

OF

INFORMATION CARDS FOR SCHOOLS.


The English Language.

BY

W. J. ROLFE, A.M.

The inscription on the Soldiers' Monument in Boston, written by the
President of Harvard College, has been much admired. It reads thus:

       TO THE MEN OF BOSTON
    WHO DIED FOR THEIR COUNTRY
    ON LAND AND SEA IN THE WAR
    WHICH KEPT THE UNION WHOLE
         DESTROYED SLAVERY
  AND MAINTAINED THE CONSTITUTION
         THE GRATEFUL CITY
      HAS BUILT THIS MONUMENT
   THAT THEIR EXAMPLE MAY SPEAK
       TO COMING GENERATIONS

What is to be said is here said in the simplest way. There is no waste
of words, no attempt at display. It is a model of good English, brief,
clear, and strong. If a school-boy had written it, he would have thought
it a fine chance for using big words. He would have said, "The citizens
of Boston who sacrificed their lives," not "the men who died"; and
"preserved the integrity of the Union," not "kept the Union whole"; and
"erected," not "built." And some men who have written much in newspapers
and books would have made the same mistake of choosing long words where
short ones give the sense as well or better.

A great preacher once said that he made it a rule never to use a word of
three or two syllables when a word of two syllables or one syllable
would convey the thought as well; and the rule is a good one. In reading
we want to get at the sense through the words; and the less power the
mind has to spend on the words, the more it has left for the thought
that lies behind them. Here the simple words that we have known and used
from childhood are the ones that hinder us least. We see through them at
once, and the thought is ours with the least possible labor.

Those who urge the use of simple English often lay stress on choosing
"Saxon" rather than "Classical" words, and it is well to know what this
means.

The English is a mixed language, made up from various sources. Its
history is the history of the English race, and the main facts are
these:

Britain was first peopled, so far as we know, by men of the Celtic (or
Keltic) race, of which the native Irish are types. The names of the
rivers, mountains, and other natural features of the land are mostly
Celtic, just as in this country they are mostly Indian. About fifty
years before the Christian era the Romans conquered Britain, and held it
for about 500 years. They brought in the Latin language; but few traces
of it now remain except in the names of certain towns and cities. The
mass of the people kept their old Celtic tongue. Between the years 450
and 550 A.D. Britain was invaded and conquered by German tribes, chiefly
Angles and Saxons. It now became _Angleland_, or _England_; and the
language became what is called _Anglo-Saxon_, except in the mountains of
Wales and of Scotland, where Celtic is found to this day. In the ninth
and tenth centuries the Danes invaded England, and ruled it for a time,
but they caused no great change in the language. In the year 1066 the
Norman Conquest took place, and William the Conqueror became King of
England. Large numbers of the Norman French came with him, and French
became the language of the court and of the nobility. By degrees our
English language grew out of the blending of the Anglo-Saxon of the
common people and the Norman French of their new rulers, the former
furnishing most of the _grammar_, the latter supplying many of the
_words_. Now the French was of Latin origin, and the English thus got an
important Latin or "Classical" element, which has since been increased
by the adding of many Greek and Latin words, especially scientific and
technical terms.

The two great events in the history of the English language, as of the
English people, are the Saxon and the Norman conquests. To the former it
owes its grammatical frame-work, or skeleton; to the latter much of its
vocabulary, or the flesh that fills out the living body.

It must not be inferred that our grammar is just like the Anglo-Saxon
because this is the _basis_ of it. The Anglo-Saxon had many more
_inflections_ (case-endings of nouns and pronouns, etc.) than the
French, and in the forming of English most of these were dropped,
prepositions and auxiliaries coming to be used instead. It was not until
about A.D. 1550 that the language had become in the main what it now is.
Some words have since been lost, and many have been added, but its
grammar has changed very little. Our version of the Bible, published in
1611, shows what English then was (and had been for fifty years or
more), and has done much to keep it from further change.

As a rule the most common words--those that chiefly make up the language
of childhood and of every-day life--are Saxon; and very many of them are
words of one syllable. In the inscription above, every monosyllable is
Saxon, with _Boston_, _grateful_, and _coming_; the rest are French or
Latin. In the case of pairs of words having the same meaning, one is
likely to be Saxon, the other Classical. Thus _happiness_ is Saxon,
_felicity_ is French; _begin_ is Saxon, _commence_ is French; _freedom_
is Saxon, _liberty_ is French, etc. The Saxon is often to be preferred,
though not always; but, as has been implied above, if a short and simple
word conveys our meaning, we should never put it aside for a longer and
less familiar one. In such cases the chances are that the former is
Saxon, and the latter Classical. Thus above, _citizens_, _sacrificed_,
_preserved_, _integrity_, and _erected_ are all Classical.




THE STORY OF GEORGE WASHINGTON.

BY EDWARD C. CARY.


CHAPTER III.

Washington spent about nine months with the army around Boston. Several
times he was ready to attack the British, and to try and drive them from
the city; but his officers were afraid the army was not strong enough.
So Washington had to wait and watch--he had a good deal of waiting and
watching to do all through the war, for that matter. At last, in March,
1776, the Americans around Boston having gradually pushed closer and
closer, the British found that they must either leave or fight. Their
General did not feel strong enough to fight, so he put his men on ships
and sailed away to Halifax. Of course the Americans were greatly
rejoiced. Washington got much praise, and deserved it, for he had shown
great good judgment and skill in his management of the army.

Washington knew that the British would soon come back, and thought they
would come to New York. So he took nearly all his army, and marched them
westward to that city.

Early in July the British came, as Washington had expected, and made
their camp on the beautiful hillsides of Staten Island. They brought
with them what they called propositions for peace. These were simply
offers to pardon the Americans for resisting the British tax laws, if
they would now obey them. But this would only have left things exactly
as they were in the beginning; it came too late. The Americans had
already made up their minds that they would not obey the British laws
which taxed them, nor any laws of Great Britain, but that in the future
they would make their own laws in such manner as seemed to them most
just. This purpose was written out in a long paper called the
Declaration of Independence, and was signed on the Fourth of July, 1776,
by the members of Congress. General Washington caused the Declaration of
Independence to be read to his soldiers. "Now," he said to them, "the
peace and safety of our country depend, under God, solely on the success
of our arms," and he appealed to "every officer and soldier to act with
fidelity and courage."

The year 1776 was a very gloomy one. All efforts to hold New York
failed. A hard battle was fought around Brooklyn (August 27), and the
Americans were badly beaten. Washington had to give up New York, and
content himself with trying to keep the British from going to
Philadelphia. Late in the fall he got across the Delaware River, with
the British close on his heels. Soon the river filled with ice, as the
cold weather came on, and the two armies lay one on one side and the
other on the other. The American troops had dwindled away until there
were only about three thousand of them.

Washington resolved that something must be done to raise the spirits of
the country, or the people would lose all hope of resisting the British
with success. At Trenton, on the opposite side from his own army, lay a
force of Hessians, who were German soldiers, hired by Great Britain to
come to America to fight, and Washington formed the plan of capturing
them.

On Christmas-eve, 1776, he crossed the Delaware with 2400 men. The night
was bitterly cold; a pelting hail-storm was falling; ice in great blocks
was running down the stream, and hindered the boats, so that the army
did not get across until four o'clock in the morning. Then the soldiers
formed in ranks in the darkness, and being divided into two parties,
started for Trenton, nine miles below. Washington led one of the
parties, and General Sullivan the other. As they plodded along through
the hail and snow, some of the men, exhausted, fell by the road-side,
and of these two froze to death before they could be rescued.

As the men under Washington reached Trenton, and began to capture the
Hessian soldiers set as sentinels to watch the road, they heard firing
on the other side of the town, and knew that Sullivan's men had come up.
Then both parties rushed swiftly toward the centre of the town, and with
very little bloodshed a thousand prisoners were taken. This was a great
success of itself, and had the effect which Washington had hoped for: it
gave the whole country new courage.

Washington then started back toward New York, and so rapid was his march
that the British commander became frightened lest the Americans should
retake the city, and he too went quickly back, and gave up all thought
of reaching Philadelphia that year.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




A DISOBEDIENT SOLDIER.

BY DAVID KER.


"Now, lads, there's the battery; remember the Emperor himself is
watching you, and carry it in true French style. The moment you get into
it, make yourselves fast against attack; and mind that any man who comes
out again to pick up the wounded, even though I myself should be among
them, shall be tried for disobedience as soon as the battle's over."

So spoke Colonel Lasalle to his French grenadiers just before the final
charge that decided the battle of Wagram. Then he waved his sword, and
shouted, "_En avant!_"

Forward swept the grenadiers like a torrent, with the shout which the
Austrians opposed to them already knew to their cost. Through blinding
smoke and pelting shot they rushed headlong on, with mouths parched,
faces burning, and teeth set like a vise. Ever and anon a red flash rent
the murky cloud around them, and the cannon-shot came tearing through
their ranks, mowing them down like grass. But not a man flinched, for
the same thought was in every mind, that they were fighting under the
eye of their "Little Corporal," as they affectionately called the
terrible Napoleon.

Suddenly the smoke parted, and right in front of them appeared the dark
muzzles of cannon, and the white uniforms of Austrian soldiers. One last
shout, which rose high above all the roar of the battle, the bayonets
went glittering over the breastwork like the spray of a breaking wave,
and the battery was won.

"Where's the Colonel?" cried a voice, suddenly.

There was no answer. The handful of men that remained of the doomed band
looked meaningly at each other, but no one spoke. Strict disciplinarian
as he was, seldom passing a day without punishing some one, the old
Colonel had nevertheless won his men's hearts completely by his reckless
courage in battle; and every man in the regiment would gladly have
risked his life to save that of "the old growler," as they called him.

But if he were not with them, where was he? Outside the battery the
whole ground was scourged into flying jets of dust by a storm of bullets
from the fight that was still raging on the left. In such a cross-fire
it seemed as if nothing living could escape, and if he had fallen
_there_, there was but little hope for him.

"_I_ see him!" cried a tall grenadier. "He's lying out yonder, and
alive, too, for I saw him wave his hand just now. I'll have him here in
five minutes, boys, or be left there beside him."

"But you mustn't disobey orders, Dubois," said a young Captain (now the
oldest surviving officer, so terrible had been the havoc), hoping by
this means to stop the reckless man from rushing upon certain death.
"Remember what the Colonel told you--that even if he _were_ left among
the wounded, no one must go out to pick them up."

"I can't help that," answered the soldier, laying down his musket and
tightening the straps of his cross-belts. "Captain, report Private
Dubois for insubordination and breach of discipline. I'm going out to
bring in the Colonel."

And he stepped forth unflinchingly into the deadly space beyond.

They saw him approach the spot where the Colonel lay; they saw him bend
over the fallen man, shielding him from the shot with his own body. Then
he was seen to stagger suddenly, as if from a blow; but the next moment
he had the Colonel in his arms, and was struggling back over the
shot-torn ground, through the dying and the dead. Twice he stopped
short, as if unable to go farther; but on he came again, and had just
laid his officer gently down inside the battery, when, with his
comrades' shout of welcome still ringing in his ears, he fell fainting
to the earth, covered with blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the next morning Colonel Lasalle had recovered sufficiently to amaze
the whole regiment by putting under arrest the man who had saved his
life; but the moment it was done, the Colonel mounted his horse, and
rode off to head-quarters at full gallop. In about an hour he was seen
coming back again, side by side with a short, square-built man in a gray
coat and cocked hat, at sight of whom the soldiers burst into deafening
cheers, for he was no other than the Emperor Napoleon.

"Let me see this fellow," said Napoleon, sternly; and two grenadiers led
forward Pierre Dubois, so weak from his wounds that he could hardly
stand.

"So, fellow, thou hast dared to disobey orders, ha?" cried the Emperor,
in his harshest tones.

"I have, sire. And if it were to be done again, I'd do it."

"And what if we were to shoot thee for insubordination?"

"My life is your Majesty's, now as always," answered the grenadier,
boldly. "And if I must choose between dying myself and leaving my
Colonel to die, the old regiment can better spare a common fellow like
me than a brave officer like him."

A sudden spasm shook the old Colonel's iron face as he listened, and
even Napoleon's stern gray eyes softened as few men had ever seen them
soften yet.

"Thou'rt wrong _there_," said he, "for I would not give a 'common
fellow' of thy sort for twenty Colonels, were every one of them as good
as my old Lasalle here. Take this, _Sergeant_ Dubois"--and he fastened
his own cross of the Legion of Honor to Pierre's breast. "I warrant me
thou'lt be a Colonel thyself one of these days."

And sure enough, five years later, Pierre Dubois was not only a Colonel,
but a General.




[Illustration: READY TO MOVE--MAY-DAY IN THE CITY.]




THE NAUGHTY CUCKOO AND THE BOBOLINKS.

BY AGNES CARR.


Spring had come, with its buds and blossoms, warm bright days and gentle
showers, and the old apple-tree at the end of the garden was putting on
its new spring dress of green leaves and tiny pink buds, which before
long would open into sweet blossoms, and still later turn into ripe
golden fruit, when a pair of Bobolinks came flying through the garden
one fine morning house-hunting, or rather looking for a nice place to
build a nest and go to housekeeping.

"Here is a good spot," said the little husband, whose name was Robert,
perching on a limb of the old apple-tree and poking his bill into a
crotch formed by a crooked branch.

"So it is," said Linny, his wife, "for the leaves will soon be out and
hide the nest from sight:" and they began to chatter so fast about the
nice home they would have there, that it sounded like nothing but
"Bob-o-link, bob-o-link, spink, spank, spink," so that two little girls
who were playing with their dolls under the tree said, "What a noise
those Bobolinks make! what are they chattering so about?"

Soon, however, they saw the little birds flying back and forth, back and
forth, with bits of hair and straw in their bills, and then they said to
one another, "The Bobolinks are building a nest," and they hung pieces
of cotton and bunches of thread on the lower limbs of the tree, and
watched to see Robert carry them off to weave into the outside of the
nest, while Linny made a soft lining of hair inside. And at last the
little home was finished, and three pretty eggs laid snugly inside; when
one day, while Robert and Linny had gone to stretch their wings by a
short flight around the garden, an ugly old Cuckoo, who had seen the
Bobolinks flying in and out of the tree, came and laid a big egg in the
nest; for Cuckoos are lazy birds, and never build houses for themselves,
but steal places to lay their eggs, and let somebody else take care of
their children.

Now Robert and Linny had never been to school, and could not count; so
when they came back they did not notice that there were four eggs in the
nest instead of three, and Linny settled down on them, quite happy,
while Robert sang a merry song to her, all about birds and flowers, and
brought her nice fat worms and flies to eat, and was just the best
little Bobolink husband in the whole garden.

And after a while a faint "_peep-peep_" was heard, the eggs all cracked,
and out came four little blind birdies, without any feathers, and ugly
enough, you would have said, but their papa and mamma thought them
lovely. One, however, was as large as the other three put together, and
took up so much room that Linny said: "Oh dear, we have made the nest
too small! When the children grow larger, some will be crowded out."

"That is strange," said Robert, "for it is the same size as the other
Bobolinks have built, and they have plenty of room."

"Yes, but just see how big one of the babies is," said Linny.

Just then Robert saw the Cuckoo on a tree near by, winking one eye, and
laughing until her sides shook, and exclaimed: "I see how it is: that
old thief of a Cuckoo has laid an egg in our nest. I will throw her ugly
child out, and she can look after it herself;" and he made a dive for
the little Cuckoo, but Linny caught him by his tail-feathers, saying:

"No, no; poor little fellow, he will die if you throw him on the ground.
Let him stay until he gets too big for the nest."

So the Cuckoo staid. But he was a very bad bird, for after a while, when
he and the little Bobolinks got their eyes open, and had nice coats of
feathers, he would peck at his companions, and take away all the best
bits of bread and fattest worms that their papa and mamma brought them
home for dinner, and was so cross and greedy that Robert would have
pitched him out on the grass if Linny had not begged he might stay a
little longer, and tried to make him behave better.

The apple-tree was now covered with pink and white blossoms, which grew
around the little nest and made it like a bower. And now the birdies
were learning to fly, and could go to the outer branches of the tree,
where they sat in a row, while their father taught them how to sing.

"Bob-o-link, bob-o-link, spink, spank, spink," sang Robert. And the
little ones, who could not speak plain, all repeated, "Bob-o-link,
bob-o-link, pink, pank, pink"--all except the biggest bird, who would
only say, "Cuckoo, cuckoo," in a harsh voice.

At last, one day, Robert said, "Now, children, you are old enough to
leave the tree, and to-day you must begin to go a little way into the
garden."

"Yes," said their mother, "but take care, and never sit on the ground,
for there is a great yellow cat who will surely eat you up."

"We will be very careful," said all the little Bobolinks.

After Billy, Bobby, and Jenny, as well as Cuckoo, had had their feathers
brushed nice and smooth, they were sent out to try their wings; but the
Cuckoo was stronger, and could fly farther than the Bobolinks.

Bobby flew over to the fence, to see what was on the other side, and the
first thing he spied was the yellow cat creeping slowly along, and she
fixed her eyes right on him. He tried to fly back, but just then the
Cuckoo came behind, and gave him a push which sent him fluttering to the
ground, right in front of Mrs. Pussie. Poor Bobby gave himself up for
lost; but as the cat was about to spring on him, a great dog came
bounding across the yard, which sent the cat scampering off in a hurry,
and saved Bobby, who hastened home as fast as his little wings could
carry him.

"Pshaw!" said the Cuckoo; "I thought there would be one out of the nest.
But there is the cat under a bush, and Jenny is tilting on a twig just
above, without seeing her." So the naughty bird flew to the rose-bush,
and said, "Jenny, you look as if you were having a nice time."

"I am," said Jenny; "but don't come on this twig, it won't hold you."

"Oh yes, it will," said Cuckoo, leaning on the slender spray, which
broke, and fell with Jenny, who was too frightened to fly; and quick as
lightning the cat seized and carried her off in her mouth.

"Ha, ha, ha," laughed Cuckoo; "there will be room in the nest now." But
at that moment the two little girls came out of the house, saw the cat
with the bird, and made her drop Jenny on the grass. She was not much
hurt, and they carried her gently back to the apple-tree, and gave her
to her papa and mamma. The Cuckoo then went to look for Billy; but as he
was passing the flower garden he saw a juicy white angle-worm lying in a
bed of violets, and feeling hungry, stopped to take a little lunch.

The worm was very nice, and Cuckoo enjoyed it very much, when, just as
he was swallowing the last morsel, the cat came stealing softly from
under a wood-pile, and thinking if birds could lunch on worms, she could
lunch on birds, pounced upon Cuckoo, and carried him off; and nothing
more was ever seen of him, except a few feathers scattered near the door
of the wood-shed. These Billy saw, and went home to tell the sad story.




[Illustration: ROBINSON CRUSOE JAP.]




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.]


  ORISKANY, NEW YORK.

     I am a little boy, and I take YOUNG PEOPLE, which I like very
     much. I enjoy reading the children's letters, and I want to tell
     you about my squirrel that I caught the 26th of March, while
     hunting with one of my playmates. His dog chased it into a hollow
     stump. He put his hat on top of the slump, and we built a little
     fire at the bottom, and the smoke drove the squirrel into the hat.
     I carried it home, and a few days ago I found in the cage five
     little baby squirrels. One of them died, but I hope the rest will
     live. I think they will, for their mother takes good care of them.
     I feed her with all kinds of nuts, and she is getting very tame.

  ALFRED H. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  LANSING, MICHIGAN.

     I think that YOUNG PEOPLE is a very nice paper. I am making a
     collection of birds' eggs, shells, stones, and other curiosities.
     Papa made me a birthday present of some minerals, nicely labelled.
     I saw some willow "pussies" on March 21. Now we have robins,
     bluebirds, blackbirds, and many other birds singing. We have a
     great deal of fun with "Misfits," given in YOUNG PEOPLE No. 22.

  JESSIE I. B.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.

     I have been very sick, and can not go to school, so I will write
     you about my turtles. I brought them from Kiskatom last summer.
     There were five, but the smallest one died. The largest was two
     inches long, and the smallest one only an inch and a quarter. They
     are in the cellar, in a tub half filled with mud and water, in
     which they buried themselves last fall. I am anxious to see if
     they will come out again this spring. I fed them on flies and
     earth-worms, and they became very tame. I am going to take them
     back to their native place this summer, and let them go.

  EDDIE W.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CARDIFF, SOUTH WALES, ENGLAND.

     I read HARPER'S WEEKLY and YOUNG PEOPLE in a subscription
     reading-room opposite my house, and some time ago I saw an
     invitation to English boys to write, which invitation I beg to
     accept. You invited correspondents to write about their pets. I
     have a paroquet. It was brought me by a captain. It was captured
     in India. It can not quite talk, but I often think it tries to. It
     imitates my whistle very well. Its usual note is a sort of
     chirping whistle. It always knows when meal-times are, and cries
     out until it has a share. About ten o'clock in the morning it
     becomes very talkative in its own language, and I answer it.

  LEWIS G. D.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I am a little girl seven years old. I go to a lovely place on the
     sea-shore in summer. Crabbing is the best fun you can have there.
     It is best to go on a rainy day. You take a crab-net, which is a
     long pole with an iron ring at one end, and a net dropping from
     it. Another person takes a line with some meat on it, and lets it
     down into the water. When the crab comes to eat, you catch it with
     the net. I went crabbing with my nurse one day, and we caught a
     peach-basketful of crabs.

  N. D.

       *       *       *       *       *

  GREENVILLE, OHIO.

     I want to tell you about some Punch-and-Judy figures I made
     myself. I give a Punch-and-Judy show every Saturday, and I make
     from five to ten cents each time. The boys tease me to play it all
     the time. I am eleven years old, and I can play Punch and Judy
     very well.

  WILLIE G. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  HARTFORD, CONNECTICUT.

     I was very much interested in Gertrude Balch's letter in No. 17,
     because her name is the same as my own. I have a little brother,
     who asks every day if that is not the day for YOUNG PEOPLE to
     come. At grandma's, where I am visiting, there are two cats, named
     Nancy and John, and my aunt has an Esquimaux dog that is very
     large and handsome. He sleeps under my bed every night. I wish
     some little girl would please tell me how I can tame birds.

  DAISIE BALCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I thought, perhaps, you would like a letter from Tallahoma,
     Tennessee; and I want to tell you that YOUNG PEOPLE is a very
     welcome visitor at our house. The story "Across the Ocean" is just
     splendid. Spring is here. Peach-trees were in bloom before the
     middle of March, and now we have a great many flowers.

  ROBERT H. D.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BROOKSIDE FARM, MISSOURI, _March 30, 1880_.

     I heard a whip-poor-will this morning for the first time this
     year, and would be very glad if others would inform me if they
     have heard the bird this spring. I heard a cat-bird trilling its
     notes about a week ago, and bluebirds, martins, and other birds
     have made their appearance. Pewits are building their nests.
     Brother Le Verne gets YOUNG PEOPLE, and we have all the numbers
     published. We all like it very much. I like the articles on
     natural history best, and as I have seen some of the animals
     described, it makes it more interesting to me.

  WROTON K.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CHAMBERSBURG, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I am very fond of reading; and when I go to my father's office
     every Wednesday evening to get YOUNG PEOPLE, the first thing I
     look at is the Post-office Department. Nearly all of your
     correspondents have pets. I have a dear little dog named Sport. He
     is very playful and mischievous, and is exceedingly fond of taffy
     and pea-nuts.

  EMMA M.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ANGELS CAMP, CALIFORNIA.

     We like YOUNG PEOPLE ever so much. Mamma reads us the stories. I
     read the letters, and try to find out the puzzles. I have a pet
     dog named Rover. He plays hide-and-seek with me; and he will eat
     corn like a dog I read about in the Post-office of No. 18. My
     little sister has a pet hen named Tansie, and a boy who lives next
     door has two guinea-pigs.

  WILLIE H. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WILMINGTON, DELAWARE.

     I was nine years old last October. Papa subscribed for YOUNG
     PEOPLE for my New-Year's gift for 1880, and I like it so much! The
     puzzles are very interesting, and make many a pleasant evening for
     us children. I think the story of "A Boy's First Voyage" is grand.
     I have had two pets this winter--a beautiful English rabbit and a
     very handsome kitty. Kitty can open any of the doors in the house
     that has a latch, and walk in as independent as you please. Bunny
     was very jealous of her, and would chase her and tease her so that
     I gave him to Cousin Georgie, for kitty had the oldest right. Now
     she has three of the fattest little baby kittens you ever saw.
     When they begin to run around, they will make lots of sport for
     us. Old kitty has to give them several boxings a day with her paw.

  STIMMIE H. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FAIRFIELD, NEW YORK.

     I am eight years old. My sister Fannie and I have a pet cat. We
     were all at tea one evening, when we heard the piano in the other
     room. We ran in there, and kitty was sitting on the stool playing
     her best piece.

  JESSIE V. W.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FARMINGTON, MAINE.

     I am a little girl eleven years old. I have a cat named P. T.
     Barnum. He always knows when the meat-man comes. Even if he is
     asleep, he will wake up, and begin to cry until he gets a piece of
     meat. He is a very handsome Maltese. I call him P. T.

  MABEL S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  EDGEWOOD PLANTATION, LOUISIANA.

     I am a little girl eight years old, and I live on the banks of the
     Mississippi River. My mamma takes YOUNG PEOPLE for me. I ride a
     pony to school every day. I wanted to tell you about my pets, and
     my dolls too, but I must not make my first letter too long.

  LIZZIE C. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two following communications were written in big capitals:

  NEW YORK CITY.

     There was a little girl who had four dolls. One of them was
     French; the other three were wax. There was a parrot in the house
     where the little girl lived. This little girl had a nurse she
     loved very much. The little girl had a brother whose name was
     Harry. He had a little boat that went by steam. He sailed it in
     the bath-tub.

  BESSIE HYDE.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.

     I have two canary-birds, but one of them will not sing. I had two
     pretty little guinea-pigs, but a big dog killed one of them, and
     ate it up. I am glad when the newsman brings YOUNG PEOPLE. Mamma
     reads all the stories to me.

  NANNIE HAYES.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI.

     I am eight years old. I am sick now with the measles, and mamma
     has read all the stories in the last YOUNG PEOPLE to me. I wish
     the next one would come. I have a little dog named Frolic. He will
     sit up, and turn over, and speak for something to eat.

  NED BISHOP.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS.

     My name is "Wee Tot." My papa writes this letter for me. By-and-by
     I will write myself. I have shells, and ocean mosses, and stuffed
     birds that don't sing, and a big owl, and some alligators,
     and--oh! I don't know--lots of things. I wish some little boy or
     girl would send me some pressed flowers and grasses, and some
     pretty stones and leaves. Then I will send them some of my pretty
     things. I will put them in a tin case, and papa will send them in
     the Post-office.

  "WEE TOT" BRAINARD,
  257 Washington Street (Room 20), Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I see the children telling about their pets. I have a little dog
     that can turn somersaults. He shuts doors when you tell him to,
     and gives you his paw if you ask him in French. He is a black and
     tan. Then I have a pet kitten, and I tie a blue ribbon round its
     neck. It jumps through my arms; but it is too fond of staying out
     all night on the fences. I have seventeen dolls. The largest is a
     Japanese baby, and is as large as a live one. Another doll is nine
     years old, and is named Shawnee. I have a very large baby-house. I
     wrote to Mamie Jones, and sent her some flower seeds to exchange.
     Will some other little girl exchange some with me?

  GUSSIE SHARP,
  438 Grand Avenue, Brooklyn, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I live in Springwells, Detroit, Michigan. I have a little dog
     named Phanor. He is not as big as a rabbit. Je parle Francais
     aussi bien que l'Anglais.

  MARCEL FERRAND.

       *       *       *       *       *

     If "Genevieve" will wait until summer, I will be very glad to
     exchange some of our pressed flowers for hers.

  BESSIE BARNEY,
  142 Lake Street, Cleveland, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     If "Genevieve," of Galt, California, will send me her address, I
     will be pleased to exchange specimens of pressed flowers with her.

  LOU PORTER,
  Corry, Erie Co., Pennsylvania.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Rosenbaum, of Raleigh, North Carolina, wishes for "Genevieve's"
address, for the purpose of exchanging pressed flowers with her.

       *       *       *       *       *

     If "Genevieve" will send me her address, I will send her a bouquet
     when our flowers bloom.

  MAGGIE E. DEARDORFF,
  Canal Dover, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _April 8, 1880_.

     I am a little girl eleven years old. I was out in the woods
     to-day, and I found this little hepatica which I send you.
     Although I live farther north than many of the children, I have
     found a spring flower as early as most of them. If that little
     girl named Genevieve, in California, will send me her address, I
     will be very glad to exchange pressed flowers with her.

  JESSIE KILBORN,
  Petoskey, Michigan.

       *       *       *       *       *

  DETROIT, MICHIGAN.

     I thought I would tell you about our goat Minnie. She is one year
     and a half old, and is pure white. In the winter we hitch her to a
     little sleigh, and she pulls us all around. She runs on the
     curb-stone very fast, and does not fall off, and what we think
     very strange is that she will come to no one but me. She plays
     cross-tag with us, and when she is "it," no one can tag her back.
     Will you please tell me in what month the crow builds its nest?

  JOSEPH E. G.

The crow makes its nest at the beginning of warm weather. In England it
is often at work collecting sticks by the first of April, but in this
country, especially in the northern portion, it rarely begins its labors
before the last of May. Its nest is in the top of very high trees, and
when viewed from below resembles a shapeless bundle of sticks, but the
inner nest, which is made of hair and wool, is a beautifully smooth and
soft resting-place for the five green, spotted eggs. Young crows are
very ugly and awkward, and make a singular noise like a cry, but they
are very easily tamed, and make very affectionate although mischievous
pets.

       *       *       *       *       *

W. M. CHAPMAN.--"_Zoe mou, sas agapo_" the refrain of Byron's poem to
the "Maid of Athens," means "My life, I love you."

       *       *       *       *       *

ERNEST K.--The letter you inquire about is genuine, as are all the
others we print.

       *       *       *       *       *

MABEL G. H.--You will find the recipe of a pot-pourri in the BAZAR for
February 2, 1878.

       *       *       *       *       *

EMMA S. and LYMAN C.--A pretty ornamental cover for YOUNG PEOPLE will be
ready on the conclusion of the first volume.

       *       *       *       *       *

LILY B.--If your poor canary allows you to handle it, you can hold it
for a moment in tepid water, which will refresh it very much.

       *       *       *       *       *

  TECUMSEH, MICHIGAN.

     I like to draw the "Wiggles" in YOUNG PEOPLE. We have a little
     black pony, and we call him "Nig." When he is hungry, he paws with
     his foot. I am twelve years old. Will you please tell me what
     fid-dle-de-dee is in French?

  NELLIE M. C.

There is no French translation of that word. If a Frenchman wished to
express the same idea, he would probably shrug his shoulders and say,
"Bah!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Favors are acknowledged from Charlie Markward, Bessie H. S., Johnnie S.,
K. V. L., Perley B. T., R. Crary, Charles W. L., James B. E., Marion
King, Bessie Longnecker, T. Horton, Lourina C., George Paul,
T. H. V. T., Willie, Tom W. S., Miss E. P., Carrie Rauchfuss, Ida King,
Willie Orcutt, M. L. Cornell, Mamie H., Elvira D. H., Rita F. Morris,
Carrie H. and Olive R., Carrie Pope, E. M. Rosenberg, Louie, Edith W.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles are received from Frank MacDavitt, Louisa
Gates, William S., T. K. Durham, H. F. Phillips, Emma L. C., W. G.
Warner, Willie H. Lane, "Tout ou rien," John Inghram, Jun., Mary
Kingsbury, Jennie, George Fisher, Reginald F., "Hope," Lloyd Clark,
Marion Norcross, Rosie Macdonald, Marie M., Jennie Yatman, Mary Randol,
Emma Schaffer, Katie Gould, Emily Theberath, L. Mahler, Cora Frost, W.
Kenney, Lizzie Chapman, Nellie W. and Birdie S., J. B. Whitlock, William
and Mary Tiddy, W. S. Naldrett, J. R. Glen, E. A. Cushing, Gertrude R.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

ENIGMA.

  My first is in run, but not in walk.
  My second is in shout, but not in talk.
  My third is in barn, but not in house.
  My fourth is in pheasant, and also in grouse.
  My fifth is in April, but not in May.
  My sixth is in night, but not in day.
  My seventh is in bud, but not in flower.
  My eighth is in rain, and also in shower.
  My ninth is in flute, but not in fife.
  My tenth is in cousin, but not in wife.
  My eleventh is in circle, but not in ring.
  My whole was the name of a Scottish king.

  W. K.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

RIDDLE.

What familiar motto is composed of four E's, three M's, two R's, and one
B?

  C. L. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

NUMERICAL CHARADE.

  I am composed of 14 letters.
  My 13, 14, 12, 10 is seen at night.
  My 9, 11, 8 is a resting-place.
  My 10, 12, 14 is a troublesome animal.
  My 3, 12, 1, 2, 5 is a title.
  My 3, 6, 4, 5, 7 is a word often applied to the sea.
  My whole is a sweet name for a bird.

  REBECCA.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

RHOMBOID.

Across--A tree; adjacent; a peculiar pace; a boy's name. Down--In pint;
a preposition; a snare; a title; a species of deer; a preposition; in
pint.

  RIP VAN WINKLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5.

ANAGRAMS.

[The letters contained in each of these sentences, if correctly
arranged, spell one word.]

1. Pin a poor bat. 2. There we sat. 3. Trust in coin. 4. Pear root. 5.
Rome's gate. 6. Go, let a cat run.

  C. P. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 6.

ENIGMA.

  My first is in fame, but not in glory.
  My second is in lie, but not in story.
  My third is in aged, but not in old.
  My fourth is in heat, but not in cold.
  My fifth is in boy, but not in child.
  My sixth is in rampant, but not in wild.
  My seventh is in sane, but not in fool.
  My whole is much studied in college and school.

  N. L. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN NO. 23.

No. 1.

Sapphire.

No. 2.

  N O N E
  O V E N
  N E E D
  E N D S

No. 3.

      H
    Y O U
  H O U S E
    U S E
      E

No. 4.

  A  r   T
  T  a   R
  L  y   E
  A  n   N
  N  u   T
  T  w   O
  A mazo N

Atlanta, Trenton.

No. 5.

Christopher Columbus.

No. 6.

  N A I L S
  A N N I E
  I N M A N
  L I A R S
  S E N S E




ADVERTISEMENTS.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be issued every Tuesday, and may be had at
the following rates--_payable in advance, postage free_:

  SINGLE COPIES                     $0.04
  ONE SUBSCRIPTION, _one year_       1.50
  FIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS, _one year_     7.00

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY ORDER or DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

ADVERTISING.

The extent and character of the circulation of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
will render it a first-class medium for advertising. A limited number of
approved advertisements will be inserted on two inside pages at 75 cents
per line.

  Address
  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




FINE TROUT TACKLE.

[Illustration]

We offer a fine 3 Joint Fly Rod, 15 yard Brass Reel, 100 ft. Linen Line,
3 Flies, 3 Hooks to gut, & Leader, complete, by express for $5.00; by
mail, postpaid, $5.50; sample Flies by mail, postpaid, 10c. each; per
doz., $1.00; complete Catalogue Free.

  PECK & SNYDER, Manufacturers,
  124 and 126 Nassau St., N. Y.




FREE BY MAIL.

[Illustration]

  12 Roses, all of the best named sorts, including
     Duchess of Edinburgh, Nephetos
     or Cornelia Cook,                                 $1.00
  13 Geraniums, including New Life and
     Happy Thought,                                     1.00
  16 Tube Roses,                                        1.00
  16 Gladiolas, all flowering bulbs,                    1.00
   8 Of each of the above two,                          1.00
   4 Palms, nice plants, all different,                 1.00
  12 Begonias, all different,                           1.00
  10 Ferns, all different,                              1.00
   6 Crotons, the best sorts for high colors,           1.00
  12 New Fancy Coleus, all different,                   1.00
   6 Fancy Caladiums, in sorts,                         1.00
   8 Dahlias, in sorts,                                 1.00
  24 Sorts of Annual Flower Seeds,                      1.00
  12 Sorts of Perennials and Greenhouse Seeds,          1.00

Our =$5.00 Collection= of Fancy Plants for the Conservatory is
unsurpassed.

To clubs we make special rates. =6= of the above collections for
=$5.00=; all sent by mail. _Send for Catalogue._

  B. P. CRITCHELL,
  197 West Fourth St., Cincinnati, Ohio.




FISHING OUTFITS.

CATALOGUE FREE.

R. SIMPSON, 132 Nassau Street, N. Y.




The Child's Book of Nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

     The Child's Book of Nature, for the Use of Families and Schools:
     intended to aid Mothers and Teachers in Training Children in the
     Observation of Nature. In Three Parts. Part I. Plants. Part II.
     Animals. Part III. Air, Water, Heat, Light, &c. By WORTHINGTON
     HOOKER, M.D. Illustrated. The Three Parts complete in One Volume,
     Small 4to, Half Leather, $1.31; or, separately, in Cloth, Part I.,
     53 cents; Part II., 56 cents; Part III., 56 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

A beautiful and useful work. It presents a general survey of the kingdom
of nature in a manner adapted to attract the attention of the child, and
at the same time to furnish him with accurate and important scientific
information. While the work is well suited as a class-book for schools,
its fresh and simple style cannot fail to render it a great favorite for
family reading.

The Three Parts of this book can be had in separate volumes by those who
desire it. This will be advisable when the book is to be used in
teaching quite young children, especially in schools.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




Old Books for Young Readers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arabian Nights' Entertainments.

     The Thousand and One Nights; or, The Arabian Nights'
     Entertainments. Translated and Arranged for Family Reading, with
     Explanatory Notes, by E. W. LANE. 600 Illustrations by Harvey. 2
     vols., 12mo, Cloth, $3.50.

Robinson Crusoe.

     The Life and Surprising Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, of York,
     Mariner. By DANIEL DEFOE. With a Biographical Account of Defoe.
     Illustrated by Adams. Complete Edition. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

The Swiss Family Robinson.

     The Swiss Family Robinson; or, Adventures of a Father and Mother
     and Four Sons on a Desert Island. Illustrated. 2 vols., 18mo,
     Cloth, $1.50.

     The Swiss Family Robinson--Continued: being a Sequel to the
     Foregoing. 2 vols., 18mo, Cloth, $1.50.

Sandford and Merton.

     The History of Sandford and Merton. By THOMAS DAY. 18mo, Half
     Bound, 75 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




CHILDREN'S

PICTURE-BOOKS.

     Square 4to, about 300 pages each, beautifully printed on Tinted
     Paper, embellished with many Illustrations, bound in Cloth, $1.50
     per volume.

The Children's Picture-Book of Sagacity of Animals.

     With Sixty Illustrations by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Bible Picture-Book.

     With Eighty Illustrations, from Designs by STEINLE, OVERBECK,
     VEIT, SCHNORR, &c.

The Children's Picture Fable-Book.

     Containing One Hundred and Sixty Fables. With Sixty Illustrations
     by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Picture-Book of Birds.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

The Children's Picture-Book of Quadrupeds and other Mammalia.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




SOLUTION OF THE BOSSY PUZZLE.


[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

The Bossy Puzzle given in No. 23 of YOUNG PEOPLE is solved by relieving
the Bossy of her disfiguring black patches, and arranging them as in
Fig. 1. Fig. 2 shows the rustic group that the artist had in his mind
when he invented the puzzle. The only correct solution to this puzzle
that we have received was sent in by Eddie S. Hequembourg.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]




OPTICAL TESTS.


[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

The eye is an organ which is very easily deceived, and needs constant
training to enable it to judge correctly of the relative proportions of
objects of different forms. Most of our readers are probably familiar
with the optical test of guessing the height of an ordinary stove-pipe
hat by measuring off the supposed height on the wall of a room. Those
who have not heard of it will find it interesting to try the experiment.
Take a stick, or walking-cane, and measure off on the wall of a room a
height to which you suppose a stove-pipe hat would reach if placed on
the floor immediately underneath, as represented in Fig. 1. Nine times
out of ten the point selected will be a great deal too high.

Another point in which the proportions of a hat are very deceptive is
this: The diameter, or distance across the crown, of a silk hat is
greater than the height of the crown of the hat from the brim. Most
people will be very positive that just the reverse is the case. We have
all heard that a horse's head is as long as a flour barrel, and felt
very much inclined _not_ to believe it, though such is the fact.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

There is also an optical test which is little known, and far more
surprising: Take three tumblers of the same size, and place them in a
row on the table, as represented in Fig. 2; then withdraw the middle
tumbler, and request any one present to place it at such a distance on
the table from the other two tumblers--as represented in Fig. 3--that
the measurements from C to D and from E to F shall be the same as from A
to B. This test will prove very amusing at any small gathering. Each
person in turn tries his hand; the distance he guesses is marked off on
the table. Then the real distance is measured off, and the tumbler put
in its right place, when it will probably be found that every one has
fallen far short of the right measurement. In Fig. 3 we have only
represented the relative positions of the tumblers; the correct distance
is not given. Try it before you measure.




AUNT FLORA.

A BROKEN RHYME.


  Aunt Flora was a precious ____
  Her sympathies were ever ____
  Her cranberry pies were always ____
                          Aunt Flora.

  Her homespun dress was neat and ____
  Her favorite conversation ____
  Kept her employed like Solomon's ____
                          Aunt Flora.

  I do not think she had a ____
  But everything she did was ____
  How much I've felt her blessed ____
                          Aunt Flora.

  Her heart was sweet and warm as ____
  And you would know from any ____
  Among the wise she was not ____
                          Aunt Flora.




[Illustration: A BOY'S POCKETS.]

SCHOOL-MASTER. "Are you quite sure you have got nothing more in your
Pockets?"

BOY. "I've got a Hole in my Vest Pocket, Sir."

SCHOOL-MASTER (_sternly_). "Take your seat, Sir."





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, April 27, 1880, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, APR 27, 1880 ***

***** This file should be named 28833.txt or 28833.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/8/3/28833/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
