Project Gutenberg's The Leader of the Lower School, by Angela  Brazil

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Leader of the Lower School
       A Tale of School Life

Author: Angela  Brazil

Illustrator: John Campbell

Release Date: May 17, 2009 [EBook #28854]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEADER OF THE LOWER SCHOOL ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










The Leader of the

Lower School




BY ANGELA BRAZIL

"Angela Brazil has proved her undoubted talent for writing a story of
schoolgirls for other schoolgirls to read."--=Bookman.=


         =A Patriotic Schoolgirl.=

         "A capital story for girls--breezy, healthy, and
         full of interest."--=Ladies' Field.=


         =For the School Colours.=

         "Angela Brazil knows what schoolgirls like to read
         and she gives it to them."--=Scottish Educational
         Journal.=


         =The Madcap of the School.=

         "A capital school story, full of incident and fun,
         and ending with a mystery."--=Spectator.=


         =The Luckiest Girl in the School.=

         "A thoroughly good girls' school story."--=Truth.=


         =The Jolliest Term on Record.=

         "A capital story for girls."--=Record.=


         =The Girls of St. Cyprian's=: A Tale of School
         Life.

         "St. Cyprian's is a remarkably real school, and
         Mildred Lancaster is a delightful girl."--=Saturday
         Review.=


         =The Youngest Girl in the Fifth=: A School Story.

         "A very brightly-written story of schoolgirl
         character."--=Daily Mail.=


         =The New Girl at St. Chad's=: A Story of School
         Life.

         "The story is one to attract every lassie of good
         taste."--=Globe.=


         =For the Sake of the School.=

         "Schoolgirls will do well to try to secure a copy
         of this delightful story, with which they will be
         charmed."--=Schoolmaster.=


         =The School by the Sea.=

         "One always looks for works of merit from the pen
         of Miss Angela Brazil. This book is no
         exception."--=School Guardian.=


         =The Leader of the Lower School=: A Tale of School
         Life.

         "Juniors will sympathize with the Lower School at
         Briarcroft, and rejoice when the new-comer wages
         her successful battle."--=Times.=


         =A Pair of Schoolgirls=: A Story of School-days.

         "The story is so realistic that it should appeal to
         all girls."--=Outlook.=


         =A Fourth Form Friendship=: A School Story.

         "No girl could fail to be interested in this
         book."--=Educational News.=


         =The Manor House School.=

         "One of the best stories for girls we have seen for
         a long time."--=Literary World.=


         =The Nicest Girl in the School.=


         =The Third Class at Miss Kaye's=: A School Story.


         =The Fortunes of Philippa=: A School Story.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON: BLACKIE & SON, Ltd., 50 OLD BAILEY, E.C.

[Illustration: A SUCCESSFUL CLIMB]

The Leader of the Lower School

A Tale of School Life

BY

ANGELA BRAZIL

          Author of "The Youngest Girl in the Fifth"
          "A Pair of Schoolgirls" "The New Girl at St. Chad's"
          "A Fourth Form Friendship" &c.


_ILLUSTRATED BY JOHN CAMPBELL_


          BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED
          LONDON GLASGOW AND BOMBAY




Contents


          CHAP.                                     Page

              I. GIPSY ARRIVES                         9

             II. THE _QUEEN OF THE WAVES_             21

            III. GIPSY MAKES A BEGINNING              31

             IV. A MASS MEETING                       44

              V. A PITCHED BATTLE                     55

             VI. AMERICAN FUDGE                       68

            VII. GIPSY TAKES HER FLING                80

           VIII. DAISY FORGETS                        96

             IX. GIPSY GROWS ANXIOUS                 108

              X. THE MILLIONAIRESS                   122

             XI. GIPSY TURNS CHAMPION                137

            XII. A SPARTAN MAIDEN                    150

           XIII. A LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION          162

            XIV. MOUNTAINEERING                      173

             XV. A SCHOOL MYSTERY                    187

            XVI. A FRIEND IN NEED                    204

           XVII. A TANGLED STORY                     215

          XVIII. GIPSY AT LARGE                      226

            XIX. THE UNITED GUILD FESTIVAL           241




Illustrations


                                                          Page

          A SUCCESSFUL CLIMB              _Frontispiece_   177

          THE LOWER SCHOOL FIND A LEADER                    50

          "GIPSY GENERALLY RESPONDED WITH SPIRIT"          118

          AN INTERVIEW WITH MISS POPPLETON                 188

          "HE PAUSED AND PEERED AT GIPSY"                  230




THE LEADER OF THE LOWER SCHOOL




CHAPTER I

Gipsy Arrives


ONE dank, wet, clammy afternoon at the beginning of October half a dozen
of the boarders at Briarcroft Hall stood at the Juniors' sitting-room
window, watching the umbrellas of the day girls disappear through the
side gate. It had been drizzling since dinner-time, and the prospect
outside was not a remarkably exhilarating one. The yellow leaves of the
oak tree dripped slow tears on to the flagged walk, as if weeping
beforehand for their own speedy demise; the little classical statue on
the fountain looked a decidedly watery goddess, the sodden flowers had
trailed their heads in the soil, and a small rivulet was running down
the steps of the summer house. As the last two umbrellas, after a brief
and exciting struggle for precedence, passed through the portal and the
gate was shut with a slam, Lennie Chapman turned to her companions and
heaved a tragic sigh.

"Isn't it withering?" she remarked. "And just on the very afternoon when
we'd made up our minds to decide the tennis championship, and secured
all the courts for the Lower School. I do call it the most wretched
luck! I'm a blighted blossom!"

"We'll never persuade the Seniors to give us all the courts again!"
wailed Fiona Campbell. "They said so emphatically that it was only to be
for this once."

"I believe they knew it was going to be wet!" growled Dilys Fenton.

"You don't think if it cleared a little we might manage just a set
before tea?" suggested Norah Bell half hopefully.

"My good girl, please to look at the lawn! Do you think anyone in her
senses would try to play on a swamp like that?"

"It's getting too late in the year for tennis," yawned Hetty Hancock.
"Don't believe we shall get another game at all. We'd better resign
ourselves."

"Resign ourselves to what?" asked Daisy Scatcherd.

"Why, to leaving the championship till next summer, and to not going out
to-day, and to sitting stuffing here and moaning our bad luck, and
feeling as cross as a bear with a toothache--at least, that's how I
feel: I don't know what the rest of you do!"

"I should like to have gone home with the day girls," sighed Dilys
Fenton.

"No, you wouldn't!" snapped Norah Bell. "You know it's jollier to be a
boarder; we do have some jolly times, even if it does rain. You can't
expect it always to keep fine, and as for----"

"Oh, Norah, don't preach! We must have our growls--it lets off steam. I
think it's the wretchedest, miserablest, detestablest, most altogether
sickening afternoon that ever was--there!"

"If only something would happen, just to cheer us up a little!" said
Lennie Chapman, opening the window rather wider and putting her head out
into the rain.

"What do you want to happen?"

"Why, something exciting, of course--something interesting and jolly,
and out of the common, to wake us up and make things more lively."

"You'll fall out of the window if you lean over like that, and that
would be lively, in all conscience, if you were picked up in fragments.
Come in; you're getting your hair wet."

"Let me alone! I shan't! I say, what's that? There's a cab turning in at
the gate; it's coming up the drive!"

Five extra heads immediately poked themselves out of the window
regardless of the rain, for the Juniors' sitting-room commanded an
excellent view both of the carriage drive and of the front steps.

"It is a cab!" murmured Dilys excitedly.

It certainly was a cab, just an ordinary station four-wheeler, with a
box on the top of it, bearing the initials G. L. painted in large white
letters. As the vehicle came nearer they could see a girl's face inside,
and--yes, she apparently caught sight of the row of heads peering out
of the window, for she smiled and turned to somebody else who sat beside
her. There was a grinding of wheels on the gravel, the cab drew up at
the steps, the door opened, and out hopped a dark-haired damsel in a
long blue coat. She gave one hurried glance at the window, smiled again
and waved her hand, then vanished inside the porch, where she was
instantly followed by her companion, a middle-aged gentleman, who
carried a bag. The cabman began to take down the box, and the sound of
the front door bell could be heard plainly--a loud and vigorous peal,
forsooth--enough almost to break the wire! The six Juniors subsided into
their sitting-room. Here, at least, was something happening.

"Who is she?"

"Where's she come from?"

"Is she a new girl?"

"Haven't heard of anybody new coming. Have you?"

"She looks jolly."

"I hope she's going to stay."

"I say, let's go downstairs and ask if anyone knows anything about her,"
said Hetty Hancock, suiting her action to her words, and hurrying out of
the room with her five schoolmates following close at her heels. But
nobody knew; not even the Seniors could give the least information.
Indeed, the six who had seen the newcomer from the window had the
advantage, for none of the others had witnessed the arrival. The girls
were consumed with curiosity. A scout, who ventured ten steps into the
forbidden territory of the front hall, came back and reported that
talking could be heard in the drawing-room.

"A big, deep voice, like a man's, and Poppie's saying 'Yes'. I daren't
stop more than a second; but somebody's there, you may be sure of that.
And the box is standing in the vestibule too."

"I believe she's come to stay!" said Dilys.

"The cab's waiting at the door still, though," objected Norah Bell. "She
may be going back in it."

At tea-time Miss Poppleton's accustomed place was empty, and speculation
ran high among her pupils. All kinds of wild rumours circulated round
the table, but there was no means of verifying any of them, and the
girls were obliged to go to preparation with their curiosity still
unsatisfied. At seven o'clock, however, when the Juniors had finished
their work and trooped back to their own sitting-room, they found the
mystery solved. In front of the fire, warming her hands between the bars
of the high fender, and looking as comfortably at home as if she owned
the place, stood the stranger who had skipped so quickly out of the cab
that afternoon. She was a girl who, wherever she was seen, would have
attracted notice--slim and erect and trim in figure, and a decided
brunette, a real "nut-brown maid", with a pale olive complexion, the
brightest of soft, dark, southern eyes, and a quantity of fluffy, silky,
dusky curls, tied--American fashion--with two big bows of very wide
scarlet ribbon, one on the top of her head and one at the nape of her
neck. She smiled as the others entered, showing an even little set of
white teeth, and four roguish dimples made their appearance at the
corners of her mouth. She seemed to have assumed proprietorship of the
room so entirely that the Juniors stopped short in amazement, too
dumbfounded for the moment to do anything but stare. The stranger
stepped forward with almost an air of welcome and, dropping a mock
curtsy, announced herself.

"Glad to make your acquaintance!" she began. "Miss Poppleton said she'd
introduce me to the school, but I guessed I'd rather introduce
myself--thought I'd do the thing better than she would, somehow. I don't
like stiff introductions--I'm not at all a starchy sort of person, as I
dare say you can see for yourselves; and I prefer to make friends after
my own fashion. My name's Gipsy Latimer, and I'm American and British
and Colonial and Spanish all mixed up, and I've travelled half round the
world, and been in seven different schools, and I was fourteen last
birthday, and I arrived here this afternoon, and I'm going to stop on a
while, and I just adore cricket, and I detest arithmetic in any shape,
and I'm always ready for any fun that's on the go. There! I've told you
all about myself," and she curtsied again.

The girls laughed. There was something decidedly attractive and breezy
about the newcomer. Her dark eyes danced and twinkled as she spoke, and
there was an unconventional jollity in the very high-pitched tone of her
voice, and an infectious merriment in her dimples.

"What did you say your name was?" asked Hetty Hancock, by way of making
the first advances.

"That's right--fire off your questions! I've been at seven schools
before this, and everybody starts with the same catechism. I'm ready to
answer anything within reason, but perhaps I'd best take a seat while
you're at it. No, thanks! I prefer the table--always like the highest
place, you see! I've sat on the mantel-piece before now. Yes, I said my
name was Gipsy--G--I--P--S--Y."

"But it's not your real name, surely?"

"You weren't christened that?"

"Only wish I had been! No, my godfather and godmothers didn't know their
business, and they went and gave me the most outlandish, sentimental,
ridiculous, inappropriate name you could imagine. You might try a dozen
guesses, and you'd never hit on it. Don't you want to guess? Well, I'll
tell you, then--it's Azalea."

"Azalea--why, I think that's rather pretty," ventured Lennie Chapman.

"Pretty enough in itself, perhaps, but it doesn't suit me. Do I look
like an 'Azalea' with my dark hair and eyes? They should have had more
sense when they christened me. Why, an Azalea ought to be a little,
pretty, silly thing, with blue eyes and pink cheeks and golden hair--all
beauty, you know, and no brains, like this girl! What's your name?
You're more an Azalea than I am."

"I'm Barbara Kendrick!" gasped that flaxen-headed member of the Upper
Third, not quite knowing whether to be flattered or offended.

"There you are--not a bit like a Barbara! Nothing in the least
barbarous about you. I think there ought to be a law against naming a
girl till she's old enough to choose for herself. Well, as I told you, I
was christened Azalea, but everybody saw from the first it didn't fit.
'She's a regular little gipsy!' Dad said; so they called me Gipsy, and
Gipsy I mean to be. I made Dad tell Miss Poppleton so, and enter me
Gipsy on the school books. I wasn't going to start in a new place as
Azalea."

"So you've been to school before?" said Dilys Fenton.

"Rather! I told you I've been to seven schools--three in America, two in
New Zealand, one in Australia, and one in South Africa. This is the
first English school I've tried."

"Seven--and you're only fourteen! Why, you must have been to a fresh one
every year!"

Gipsy nodded.

"You're just about right there. Never stayed more than two terms at any
of them. No--they didn't expel me! I tell you, I'm an absolute miracle
of good behaviour when I like. It was simply because Dad and I were
always moving on, and whenever he went to a fresh place I had to go to a
fresh school. You don't think I'd let him leave me in America when he
was going to Australia, do you?"

"Haven't you got a mother?" asked Barbara Kendrick.

"Shut up, you stupid!" murmured Dilys Fenton, giving Barbara a nudge.

Gipsy rolled her handkerchief into a tight ball, and unrolled it again
before she replied.

"I've nobody in the world but Dad," she answered, and there was just a
suspicion of huskiness in her voice. "He's never gone far away from me
before, but he's starting to-morrow for South Africa, and I'm to stop
here till he comes back. He says it won't seem long. I hope I'm going to
like it. I've only been three days in England, and you're the first
English girls I've spoken to. Dad said England ought to feel like home,
but it's a queer kind of home when one's all alone. Tell me what this
school is like. Is Miss Poppleton nice? She gushed over me before Dad in
the drawing-room, but she looks as if she could be a Tartar, all the
same. I've had a little experience with schoolmistresses. I can
generally take their measure in five minutes. She's got a sister, hasn't
she--a Miss Edith, who showed me my bedroom? I expect I shall like her.
Have I hit the mark?"

The girls looked at one another and laughed.

"Just about," said Fiona Campbell. "Poppie's temper varies like the
barometer. One day she's at 'set fair', and calls everybody 'dear', or
'my child'; and the next she's at 'stormy', and woe betide you if you so
much as drop your serviette at dinner, or happen to sneeze in the
elocution class! Miss Edie's ripping! She doesn't teach much--only one
or two classes. She does the housekeeping, and sees we keep our clothes
tidy, and change our wet stockings, and all that sort of thing."

"And how many are there of you? Remember, I've been dumped down here at
a day's notice, and I know absolutely nothing at all about the school
yet. Is it a big one?"

"Twenty boarders and seventy-two day girls--that's ninety-two, and
you'll make the ninety-third. There are eight Senior boarders, and
they've got a sitting-room of their own, with a carpet on the floor. We,
the common herd, are only provided with linoleum, as you see."

"Eight from twenty leaves twelve! You're not all here."

"No; two of us are practising, and the kids have half an hour with Miss
Edith before they go to bed."

"Shouldn't mind half an hour with Miss Edith myself. By the by, are you
keen on Fudge here?"

The girls stared.

"I don't know what you mean," returned Hetty Hancock rather stiffly.
"What is Fudge?"

Gipsy threw out her arms in mock horror.

"Shades of Yankee Doodle!" she exclaimed. "These benighted Britishers
have actually never heard of the magic name Fudge! Why, in the States
it's a word to conjure with! I've known some girls who absolutely lived
for it."

"You haven't told us what it is yet. Is it a game?"

Gipsy laughed till she nearly collapsed off the table.

"A game? No; Fudge is candy--the most delicious adorable stuff you ever
tasted. Get me a pan, and some sugar, and some milk, and some butter,
and I'll make some for you this instant. How you'll bless me!"

"Don't I wish you could!" sighed Norah Bell. "But we're not allowed to
make toffee except on the 5th of November. They let us have a pan then,
and we boil it over this fire."

"We'll have a pan of our own here," said Gipsy cheerily. "I'll go out
and buy one to-morrow. I can't exist without Fudge."

"But we aren't allowed to go out and buy things," exclaimed the girls in
chorus.

"Do you mean to tell me we mayn't go on the least scrap of an errand if
we ask leave?"

"Not if you ask ever so!"

"Why, that's dreadful! I can't be boxed up like that. I'd as soon be in
prison. I'm afraid you'll find me walking out on my own sometimes."

"You'll get into an uncommonly big scrape if you do!"

"Dad warned me I'd have to be very prim and proper in England," said
Gipsy, looking serious, "but I didn't know things were as bad as that.
I'll begin to wish I hadn't come here. Oh dear! we were going right
through to Chicago if we hadn't been shipwrecked, and I love America."

"Shipwrecked!" shrieked the girls. "Do you mean to tell us you've been
in a real wreck?"

"Only just come from it," replied Gipsy calmly. "A very wet, cold,
unpleasant affair it was, too! Especially in only one's nightdress!
Every rag of clothing I possessed went to the bottom. Dad had to rig me
out again at Liverpool. That's why I've come to this school in such a
hurry. Dad lost his papers, and had to go back to South Africa, and he
wouldn't take me with him this time. So you see I've been sprung upon
you suddenly--an unexpected blessing, you might call me."

"Oh, do tell us about the wreck!" implored Hetty Hancock. "I've never in
all my life met anybody who'd really and truly been shipwrecked."

"All right! Come and squat by the fire. I'm tired of the table, and
prefer the floor for a change. Please don't expect anything extra
blood-curdling, for you won't get it, unless you'd like me to romance a
little. Where do you want me to begin? All my adventures in all the
places I've lived at? That's rather a big order. You'll have to be
contented with a piece. Here goes!"

But as Gipsy's descriptions, though graphic, were not of a remarkably
lucid character, it will perhaps be well to omit her version of the
story, and, for a better understanding of her independent, whimsical
little self, give a brief account of her previous career in a separate
chapter.




CHAPTER II

The "Queen of the Waves"


INTO the fourteen years of her life Gipsy had certainly managed to
compress a greater variety of experiences than falls to the share of
most girls of her age. She had been a traveller from her earliest
babyhood, and was familiar with three continents. Her father was a
mining engineer, and in the course of his profession was obliged to
visit many out-of-the-way spots in various corners of the globe. As
Gipsy was all he had left to remind him of her dead mother, he never
could bear to be parted from her for long, and he would generally
contrive to put her to school at some place within tolerably easy reach
of the vicinity of his mining operations. In the holidays he would
sometimes take her up to camp, and Gipsy had spent long delightful weeks
in the hills, or the bush, sleeping under canvas, or in a log cabin or a
covered wagon, and living the life of the birds and the rabbits as
regards untrammelled freedom.

She had grown up a thorough little Colonial, self-dependent and
resourceful, able to catch her own horse and saddle it, to ride
barebacked on occasion, and to be prepared for the hundred and one
accidents and emergencies of bush life. She had taken a hand at camp
cookery, helped to head cattle, understood the making of "billy" tea,
and could find her own way where a town-bred girl would have been
hopelessly lost. The roving life had fostered her naturally enterprising
disposition; she loved change and variety and adventure, and in fact was
as thorough-hearted a young gipsy as any black-eyed Romany who sells
brooms in the wake of a caravan. At her various schools she had of
course learnt to submit to some kind of discipline, but her classmates
were Colonials, accustomed to far more freedom, than is accorded to
English girls, and the rules were not nearly so strict as in similar
establishments at home.

After a year spent in South Africa, Mr. Latimer was prepared to return
to America, and, wishing to do some business in London _en route_, had
booked passages for himself and Gipsy on the _Queen of the Waves_, a
steamer bound from Durban to Southampton. Gipsy was an excellent sailor,
and thoroughly enjoyed life at sea. She would cajole the captain to
allow her to walk upon the bridge, or peep inside the wheelhouse; or
persuade the second mate to take her to inspect the engines, or teach
her flag-signalling on the upper deck: and wheedled marvellous and
impossible stories of sharks and storms from the steward. The voyage had
passed quickly, and until the headlands of the north coast of Spain were
sighted had been quite uneventful.

"Only a few days more, and we shall be in port," said Mr. Latimer,
looking through his pocket telescope at the outline of Cape Finisterre.
"I think we may congratulate ourselves on the splendid weather we've had
the whole time."

"We mustn't boast too soon," returned Captain Smith. "There are some
ugly clouds gathering, and I shouldn't be surprised if we had a rough
night of it in the Bay. What would you say, Gipsy, if we had the fiddles
on the table at dinner?"

"Those queer racks to keep the plates from slipping about? Oh, I'd love
to see them on! I've never been in a big storm. The wind may just blow,
and blow, and blow to-night. The old sailor who sits on the top of the
North Pole can untie all the four knots in his handkerchief if he
likes."

"Don't wish for too much. One knot will be quite sufficient for us if
we're to get across the Bay in comfort. You'll tell a different tale by
to-morrow morning, I expect."

As the captain had prophesied, the dark clouds gathered quickly, and
brought both a squall and a shower. The vessel was entering the Bay of
Biscay, and that famous stretch of water was already beginning to
justify its bad reputation. Gipsy had the satisfaction, not only of
seeing the racks used at dinner, but of witnessing half the contents of
her plate whirled across the table by a sudden lurch of the ship. The
rolling was so violent that she could not cross the cabin without
holding tightly to solid objects of furniture.

"I'm afraid we're going to have a terrible tossing," said Mr. Latimer,
as he bade Gipsy good night. "Mind you don't get pitched out of your
bunk. We're having bad weather with a vengeance now."

"The old sailor on the North Pole has untied all four knots," said Gipsy
to herself, as she lay awake listening to the blowing of the gale. It
was indeed a fearful storm. The vessel was tossed about like a cork: one
moment her bows would be plumped deep in the water, and her stern lifted
in mid-air, with the whirling screw making a deafening noise overhead;
then all would be reversed, and the timbers seemed to shiver with the
effort the ship made to right herself.

Gipsy found it impossible to sleep when her heels were continually being
raised higher than her head, and sometimes a sudden roll would threaten
to fling her even over the high wooden side of her berth. Everything in
the cabin had fallen to the floor, and her boots, clothes, hairbrush,
books, and indeed all her possessions were chasing one another backwards
and forwards with each lurch of the vessel. The noise was terrific: the
howling of the wind and the roaring of the waves were augmented by the
creaking of timbers, the clanking of chains, and an occasional crashing
sound that appeared to come from below, where the cargo had broken
loose, and was being knocked about in the hold.

For an instant there seemed to be a lull; then, as if the storm had been
waiting to gather fresh fury, a tremendous sea swept down upon the ship,
dashing across the decks with a roar like thunder. Gipsy hid her face in
her pillow. It would pass, she supposed, as the other waves had passed,
and they would steam on as before. Then all at once she sat up in her
berth. The great throb, like a pulsing heart to the vessel, that had
never ceased day or night since they left Durban was suddenly still. The
engines had stopped working. A moment afterwards her father burst into
the cabin.

"Gipsy, child!" he exclaimed. "We must go on deck! Here, fling this coat
round you! No, no! You can't wait to dress! We've sprung a bad leak, and
the captain says we must take to the boats. Hold tight to my arm, and be
a brave girl!"

It was with the utmost difficulty that the pair made their way up the
lurching stairs on to the deck. Here the wind was furious, and would
have blown them overboard had they not clung to the railings for
support. In the fitful gleams of moonlight Gipsy could see towering
waves rise like great mountains, and fall against the ship. The sailors
were already lowering the boats, and she could hear the sound of the
captain's speaking-trumpet as he shouted his orders above the noise of
the storm. Were they indeed to trust themselves to the mercy of that
terrible sea? Gipsy watched with alarm as the first frail-looking boat
was successfully launched on the seething water.

"Have I time to fetch my papers?" asked Mr. Latimer, as the captain came
in their direction.

"No; only to save yourself and your child," was the hasty reply. "Come
at once; the vessel is filling fast, and may settle even before we can
get off her."

When Gipsy afterwards recalled the various events of that night, she
decided that the most dreadful moment of all was when, with a lifebelt
fastened round her waist, she was lowered over the ship's side. Both
the vessel and the lifeboat were so pitched about by the enormous waves
that it was a perilous passage; for a few seconds she swung in mid-air,
with only blinding foam and spray around her. Then there was a shout,
she was grasped by strong hands from below, and drawn down into a place
of comparative security. In another minute her father had followed her,
and was seated by her side. The captain waited till all the boats were
launched and he had seen the last of his crew off in safety, and he had
scarcely left the deck himself and taken his place in the lifeboat
before the doomed vessel heeled over, and with no further sign or
warning disappeared into the depths.

All night long, through the cold and darkness, the little party was
tossed upon the surface of the swirling waters; but towards dawn the
storm abated, and when day broke, the sea, though still running fast,
was sufficiently calm to enable the sailors to make some use of their
oars. They put up a signal of distress, and waited anxiously, hoping
that some passing vessel might notice them, and stop to pick them up.
Hour after hour went by. Cold, hungry, and drenched to the skin, Gipsy
tried to be brave, and to bear patiently what she knew must be endured
equally by all. The sun rose high, and shone down warmly upon them, but
there was still no sign of either land or a ship. It was long past noon
when one of the crew, with a jubilant shout, pointed eagerly to a tiny
black streak of smoke on the horizon, which they knew must issue from
the funnel of some distant steamer. With frantic energy they waved
jackets and handkerchiefs, to try to attract the attention of those on
board. Would they be seen, or would the ship pursue her course without
noticing the small speck far away on the water? There was a minute of
horrible uncertainty, then: "They've sighted us!" yelled the captain.
"They're turning her about and putting her back!"

"Thank God we're saved!" exclaimed Mr. Latimer.

The rest seemed like a dream to Gipsy. She could remember afterwards
that she was helped by two sailors up the companion way of a tall liner,
and that she saw a long row of excited passengers staring at her over
the railings; then all became a blur, and when she came to herself she
was lying on a couch in a strange cabin, with her father and a doctor
bending over her.

"She only fainted from exhaustion," she could hear the doctor saying.
"We'll soon have her all right again. Ah, here comes the beef tea! A few
hours of sound sleep will make all the difference. When she wakes,
you'll find she's almost herself again."

Five days later found Gipsy seated at breakfast with her father in the
coffee-room of a Liverpool hotel, none the worse for her adventures. The
liner that had picked up all the survivors of the ill-fated _Queen of
the Waves_ had been on her way to Liverpool, and Mr. Latimer decided to
make a brief stay there, to secure new clothes for himself and Gipsy,
and to gain time to make fresh plans for the future. Though he had
fortunately been able to bring a certain sum of money away with him, all
their other possessions had gone down with the wrecked vessel, and it
was this loss which he and Gipsy were discussing as they drank their
morning tea.

"It was distinctly awkward to be left with nothing in the world but a
nightdress that I could call my own!" laughed Gipsy. "Wasn't it funny on
the _Alexia_? People were ever so kind in lending me things, but they
didn't fit. Mrs. Hales' skirt swept the deck, and Mrs. Campbell's jacket
was miles too big for me. I must have looked an elegant object when we
reached the landing stage! I don't wonder you bundled me into a cab in a
hurry, and drove straight off to an hotel. Yes, it's decidedly
unpleasant to lose one's clothes."

"If it were only clothes we'd lost, Gipsy, I shouldn't mind, but it's a
far more serious affair than that. All my valuable papers are gone,
child! You don't realize yet what that means. It makes such an enormous
difference to my affairs that for the next few years it may entirely
alter the course of my life."

"What do you mean, Dad?" asked Gipsy quickly, for her father's tone was
grave.

"What I say. The loss of those papers will necessitate a complete change
of all my plans. Instead of our going on to America, I shall be obliged
to return to South Africa at once."

"More voyaging! All right, Dad; I'm game for another wreck, if you are!
It'll seem rather funny to go back to where we've just come from, won't
it?"

Mr. Latimer was silent for a moment or two.

"Gipsy!" he said at last, "I've got to break the news to you somehow.
I've decided not to take you back with me to the Cape. I want to go
up-country, into some rather wild places, places where you couldn't
possibly come to camp. You'd be far best at school here in England."

"Dad! Dad! You're never going to leave me behind!"

"Now be sensible, Gipsy! Remember all I've lost. Your passage would be a
quite unnecessary expense; schools are better, too, over here, and you'd
have more advantages in the way of education than in South Africa. It
can't be helped, and we must both try to make the best of it. I'll not
be gone long, I promise you that. Then I'll come back to England again
and fetch you. For goodness' sake don't make a scene!"

Gipsy blinked hard, and with a supreme effort contrived to master
herself. Her knockabout life had taught her self-control and sound
common sense in many respects, and she was old enough to appreciate the
expediency of the altered plans.

"What school am I to go to?" she asked rather chokily.

"I spoke to Captain Smith about it, and he recommended one at a place
called Greyfield. He said his niece used to be there once, and liked it.
I'm going to take you to-day. We must get the 11.40 train."

"So soon! Oh, Dad! couldn't we have just one more day together?"

"Impossible, Gipsy! I want to catch the mail steamer for Cape Town
to-morrow. This wreck has been a great disaster to us. But
there!--things might have been worse, and I suppose I shall manage to
pull my affairs round in course of time. It's no good crying over spilt
milk, is it? When one's castle comes crashing down about one's ears,
there's nothing to be done but to set one's teeth firmly, and try to
build it up again."

"If only I could help you, Dad! Couldn't I help the least little atom of
a scrap out there?" pleaded Gipsy wistfully.

"You'll help me best by stopping here in England, and making yourself as
happy as you can."

"All right! I'll try to be a Stoic! Only--we've never been six thousand
miles apart before, and--well, it will seem queer to be left all alone
in a country where I simply don't know one single soul."

It was owing to the course of events just narrated that Mr. Latimer,
obliged to choose a school in a hurry, had, on Captain Smith's
recommendation, selected Briarcroft Hall, and, taking Gipsy to
Greyfield, had arranged to leave her in Miss Poppleton's charge until
such time as he could come again and fetch her. How she got on in her
new surroundings, and how her independent Colonial notions contrasted
with more sober English ways, it is the purpose of this story to
chronicle.




CHAPTER III

Gipsy makes a Beginning


BRIARCROFT HALL was a large private school which stood on the outskirts
of the town of Greyfield, close to the border of the Lake District in
Cumberland. It was a big, rather old-fashioned red-brick house, built in
Queen Anne style, with straight rows of windows on either side of the
front door, and a substantial porch, surmounted by stone balls. Years
ago it had been the seat of a county magnate; but as the town began to
stretch out long, growing fingers, and rows of villas sprang up where
before had been only green lanes, and an electric tramway was started
for the convenience of the new suburb, the owner of Briarcroft had
retreated farther afield, glad enough to escape the proximity of
unwelcome neighbours, and to let the Hall to a suitable tenant. As Miss
Poppleton announced in her prospectuses, the house was eminently fitted
for a school: the situation was healthy, yet conveniently near to the
town, the rooms were large and airy, the garden contained several tennis
courts, and there was a field at the back for hockey. Visiting masters
and mistresses augmented the ordinary staff of teachers, and Greyfield
was well provided with good swimming baths, Oxford Extension lectures,
high-class concerts, art exhibitions, and other educational privileges
not always to be met with in a provincial town. On the other hand, the
country was within easy reach. Ten minutes' walk led on to comparatively
rural roads, and within half an hour you could find yourself beginning
to climb the fells, with a long stretch of heather for a prospect, and
the pure moorland air filling your lungs.

Miss Poppleton, the Principal of the school, irreverently nicknamed
"Poppie" by her pupils, was a double B.A., for she had taken her degree
in both classics and mathematics. She was a rather small, determined
little lady, with a bright complexion, sharp, short-sighted,
greenish-grey eyes, which peered at the world through a pair of round
rimless spectacles, but seemed nevertheless to see everything ("too
much", the habitual sinners affirmed!), what the girls called "an
enquiring nose", grey hair brushed back quite straight from a square,
"brainy"-looking forehead, and a mouth that had a habit of pursing and
unpursing itself very rapidly when its owner was at all irritated or
disturbed in mind. She was a good organizer, a strict disciplinarian,
and a clever teacher--everything that is admirable, in fact, in a
headmistress, from the scholastic point of view; and her vigorous,
intellectual, capable personality always made an excellent impression
upon parents and guardians. By the girls themselves she was regarded in
a less favourable light: the very qualities which gave her success as a
Principal caused her to seem distant and unapproachable. Her pupils
held her in wholesome awe, but never expanded in her presence; to them
she was the supreme authority, the "she-who-must-be-obeyed", but not a
human individual who might be met on any common ground of mutual tastes
and sympathies.

Miss Poppleton had a younger sister, whose name did not appear on the
prospectuses, and who took a very back seat indeed in the school. Among
intimate friends Miss Poppleton was apt to allude to her as "poor
Edith", and most people concurred in a low estimation of her capacities.
Certainly Miss Edith was not talented, neither would she have shone in
any walk of life requiring brains. She was the exact opposite of her
sister--tall, with big, round, blue, surprised-looking eyes, a weak
chin, and a mouth that was generally set in a rather deprecating smile.
She held a poor opinion of herself, and was more than willing to fill a
secondary place; indeed, she would have been both alarmed and
embarrassed if called upon to take the lead. For her elder sister she
had an admiration and devotion that amounted to reverence. She
cheerfully performed any tasks set her, and was perfectly content to be
a kind of general help and underling, without attempting the least
interference with any of the arrangements. Critical friends sometimes
hinted that Miss Edith's position at Briarcroft was hardly a fair one,
and that Miss Poppleton took advantage of her good nature and affection;
but Miss Edith herself never for a single instant entertained such a
disloyal notion, and continued to sing her sister's praises almost _ad
nauseam_. Among the girls she was a distinct favourite; her patience
was endless, and her good temper unflagging. What she lacked in brains
she made up for in warmth of heart, and though she faithfully upheld
discipline, she was apt somewhat to tone down the severity of the rules,
and indeed sometimes surreptitiously to soften the thorny paths of the
transgressor.

Four resident mistresses and a certain number of visiting teachers
completed the staff at Briarcroft Hall. The greater proportion of the
pupils were day girls, and the boarders, though they gave themselves
airs, were decidedly in the minority. Such was the little community into
which Gipsy was to be launched, and where for many months to come she
would have to make and keep her own position.

Gipsy started with the most excellent intentions of exemplary behaviour,
and if her conduct, regulated according to American codes, hardly
harmonized with Briarcroft standards, it was more her misfortune than
her fault. On the first day after her arrival she betook herself to the
Principal's study, and after a light tap at the door, entered
confidently with a breezy "Good morning". Miss Poppleton looked up from
her papers in considerable surprise. Her private room was sacred to
herself alone, and unless armed with a most warrantable errand nobody
ever ventured to disturb her.

"Who sent you here, Gipsy?" she enquired rather sharply.

"Nobody," replied Gipsy, quite unaware of having given any occasion for
offence. "I only came to ask leave to run out and buy a pan, and some
sugar, and a few other things. I reckon there's a store handy, and I
wouldn't be gone ten minutes. There's heaps of time before nine."

Miss Poppleton gasped. She had grasped the fact, at the beginning, that
Gipsy was likely to prove an unusual pupil, but she had not anticipated
such immediate developments.

"What you ask is perfectly impossible," she replied. "The boarders here
are never allowed to go out alone to do shopping."

"So some of them told me last night, but I didn't believe them. I
thought they were ragging me because I'm new, and I'd best ask at
headquarters," returned Gipsy. "I wouldn't lose my way, and I'm
accustomed to taking care of myself. I'd engage you'd find you could
trust me."

"That's not the question at all, Gipsy. I cannot allow you to break
school rules."

"Not just this once?"

"Certainly not. If I made an exception in your case, the others would
expect the same privilege."

"Is that so?" said Gipsy slowly. "It seems a funny rule to me, because
in Dorcas City we might always go to the store if we reported first."

"You're not in America now: you'll have to learn English ways here, and
English speech too. You must make an effort to drop Americanisms, and
talk as we do on this side of the Atlantic."

Miss Poppleton's tone was rather tart, and her mouth twitched ominously.
Gipsy's eyes twinkled.

"I'll do my best," she answered brightly. "I picked up a few words from
the other girls last night that I didn't know before. There was
'ripping' for one, and--what was the other, now, that caught on to me?
Oh, I know!--'rotten'. I won't forget it again."

Miss Poppleton's face was a study.

"Of course I don't mean slang words like those. The girls had no
business to be using them. You must copy the best, and not the worst."

"I guess it will take me a while to learn the difference."

"You'll have to expunge 'guess' and 'reckon' from your vocabulary."

Gipsy heaved an eloquent sigh.

"I'll make a mental note of what I've got to avoid, but I expect they'll
slip out sometimes. But about that pan, please! Might the janitor go out
and buy it for me? I can't make any Fudge till I get it, and I
reck--that is to say, I mean to teach those girls to make Fudge. They've
not tasted it."

Miss Poppleton glared at her irrepressible pupil with a glance that
would have quelled Hetty Hancock or Lennie Chapman, but Gipsy did not
flinch.

"They've actually never tasted Fudge!" she repeated, with a smile of
pity for their ignorance.

But Miss Poppleton's patience was at an end.

"Gipsy Latimer, understand once for all that these things are not
allowed at Briarcroft. While you are here you will be expected to keep
the rules of the school, or, if you break them, you will be punished.
Leave my study at once, and don't report yourself here again until you
are sent for."

Gipsy left the room as requested, but she stood for a moment or two on
the doormat outside, shaking her head solemnly.

"It's a bad lookout!" she said to herself. "I'm afraid there are
breakers ahead. That's not a very difficult matter to foresee. She's got
a temper! I've not had any previous experience of English schools, but
it rather appears as if this one's run on the lines of a reformatory. If
I don't want to get myself into trouble, I shall have to lie low, and
mind what I'm doing. Well, I've sampled the teachers, and I've sampled
the boarders. Now for the day girls and my new Form!"

Gipsy had already made the acquaintance of the elect twenty who were to
be her house companions, but that was a comparatively slight affair
compared with the ordeal of her introduction to the school as a whole.
In spite of her outward appearance of sangfroid, she felt her heart
thumping a little as she marched into the large lecture hall for "call
over". It needs a certain courage to face seventy-two critical
strangers, and her past experience had taught her that a new girl on her
first day is like "goods on approval", and has to run the gauntlet of
public opinion. She tried to look airy and unembarrassed, and talked
desperately to Lennie Chapman, who had been told off to "personally
conduct" her to her Form; but all the same she was conscious that she
was the observed of all observers. It was only natural that the little,
erect, dark figure, with its bright eyes and big scarlet hair ribbons,
should attract attention. Gipsy was about as different from the
ordinary run of British schoolgirls as a parakeet is from a flock of
pigeons; and the others were quick to note the difference.

"I say, who's that foreign kid?" enquired Madeleine Newsome, a member of
the Fifth, pausing in a friendly quarrel with a Form mate to take a
quick, comprehensive survey of the stranger's personal appearance.

"Can't say, I'm sure," responded Emily Atkinson, "but we'll soon find
out. Hello, you kid, what's your name? And what part of the globe do you
spring from?"

"She's Spanish and American and New Zealand and South African and
several other things, and she's been shipwrecked dozens of times," began
Lennie Chapman, who was prone to exaggerate, and liked to act showman.

"Let her speak for herself," interrupted Madeleine bluntly. "I suppose
she understands English, doesn't she? What's your name, kid? Don't stand
staring at me with those big black eyes!"

But here Gipsy's momentary bashfulness took flight. Seven schools had
taught her to hold her own, and she was soon imparting information about
herself with a volubility that left no doubt of her acquaintance with
the English tongue. Other girls hurried up to listen, and in less than a
minute she was the centre of a crowd, answering a perfect fire of
questions with a beaming good humour and a quickness of repartee that
rather took the fancy of her hearers.

"She's sharp enough, at any rate," commented Mary Parsons. "Not very
easy to take a rise out of her, I should think."

"Awfully pretty, I call her," responded Joyce Adamson. "Those big red
bows are immense in more ways than one."

"She's not the sort to play second fiddle evidently," grumbled Maude
Helm a trifle enviously. "New girls oughtn't to have such cheek, in my
opinion. When I was new----"

"Oh, yes! We all remember how you stood looking black thunders, and no
one could drag a single word out of you, not even your name! Can't see
where the sense came in! I like a girl with plenty to say for herself."

"This one's got enough, at any rate!" snapped Maude. "She talks away
like a Cheap-Jack. Now if I were----"

"Hold your tongue, can't you? I want to hear what she's saying."

"What Form's she in?"

"I believe Poppie's put her in the Upper Fourth."

"Hush! Here's Poppie herself!"

As the Principal stepped upon the platform and rang the bell, the girls
hastily scurried to their seats, deferring further catechism of their
new schoolfellow till eleven o'clock. Gipsy's name had been placed on
the roll call of the Upper Fourth, so as a member of the Lower School
she marched in the long line that filed from the lecture hall to the
right-hand wing of the house. The preliminary part of her ordeal might
be considered successfully over. Schoolgirls are quick to take likes
and dislikes; with them, first impressions are everything, and a few
minutes are often sufficient to decide the fate of a newcomer. By the
end of the day Gipsy had won golden opinions; her whimsical humour and
free Colonial manners, however unfavourably they might impress Miss
Poppleton, pleased the popular taste, and except by an envious few she
was pronounced "ripping". Even Helen Roper, the head of the school,
condescended to notice her.

"Hello, you new girl!" she said patronizingly, "you may join our
Needlework Guild if you like. You've got to subscribe a shilling, and
promise to make a garment every year. They're sent to the hospitals, you
know."

"Thanks," replied Gipsy, not too utterly overwhelmed by the honour. "I'm
a bad sewer, but I dare say I'd manage to cobble up something."

"Then I'll put your name down, and you can bring me the shilling
to-morrow. Have you got a camera? Then I expect you'll like to belong to
the Photographic Guild--the subscription's a shilling for that too.
Remind me to give you a card of the rules if I forget."

"You'll do!" whispered Lennie Chapman, who had watched over Gipsy's
introduction with anxious interest. "If Helen Roper's spoken to you,
you're sure to get on. You'll join the Guilds, of course? There's the
Dramatic as well, and the Musical, and the Athletic."

"If they want a shilling for each, it will soon run away with one's
pocket-money," laughed Gipsy.

"Why, yes, so it does, but then one has to join. It is the thing to do."

"I don't mind the subscriptions if the Guilds are fun."

"Well--um! I can't say they're very much fun for us. We're only Lower
School, you see, and we don't get a look-in."

"What do you mean?"

"Why, of course it's all in the hands of the Sixth. They arrange
everything. We mayn't so much as express an opinion."

"No, it's really rather too bad," said Hetty Hancock, joining in the
conversation. "We Lower School aren't fairly treated. The Photographic
Guild spent all the society's money on a gorgeous developing machine
last term, and no one's allowed to use it except the Committee."

"But aren't any of the Lower School on the Committee?" asked Gipsy.

"No, we're not counted 'eligible'. We vote, but we may only elect
members of the Sixth. And the Sixth just have it all their own way."

"How monstrously unfair!"

"It's just as bad in the Dramatic," continued Hetty, airing her
grievances. "The Sixth arrange all the casts, and of course take the
best parts for themselves, and only give us Juniors little, unimportant
bits."

"But don't the Lower School act plays by themselves?"

"They haven't, so far; you see, it's always been one big Society. But I
can tell you we've grumbled when our subscriptions have all gone to buy
wigs and costumes for the Sixth."

"But why do you let them?" protested Gipsy.

Hetty shrugged her shoulders.

"How are we going to prevent it, when we've no voice in the matter? I
told you the Committee arrange everything. We're supposed to be allowed
to give our views at the General Meeting, but it's the merest farce--the
Sixth won't condescend to listen to us."

"I'd make them listen!" said Gipsy indignantly.

"You'd better try, then!" laughed Hetty. "It's the Annual Meeting of all
the Guilds on Friday week. We have to elect officers for the year. I
should like to see you tackle Helen Roper!"

Gipsy turned away without further comment. Her past experience of
schools had taught her that it was unwise to begin by criticizing
well-worn institutions too soon. During the next few days, however, she
asked many questions, and by diligently putting two and two together
managed to arrive at a tolerably accurate estimate of the general state
of affairs. The result caused her to shake her head. Though she said
little, like the proverbial parrot she thought the more, and her
thoughts gradually shaped themselves into a plan of action. At the end
of a week she faced the situation.

"Look here, Gipsy Latimer!" she said to herself, "there are abuses in
this school that need reforming. Somebody's got to take the matter up,
and I guess it's your mission to do it! I don't believe it's ever
occurred to those girls to make a stand for their rights. They may
support you, or they may call you an interfering busybody for your
pains; you'll have to take your chance of that. With your free-born
democratic standards, it's impossible for you to sit still and see
things go on as they are. This annual meeting's your opportunity, so
you'd best pluck up your courage and nerve yourself for the fray."




CHAPTER IV

A Mass Meeting


A LARGE school is a state in miniature. Quite apart from the rule of the
mistresses, it has its own particular institutions and its own system of
self-government. In their special domain its officers are of quite as
much importance as Members of Parliament, and wield an influence and an
authority comparable to that of Cabinet Ministers. Tyrannies, struggles
for freedom, minor corruptions, and hot debates have their places here
as well as in the wider world of politics, and many an amateur "Home
Rule Bill" is defeated or carried according to the circumstances of the
case. At Briarcroft Hall there had hitherto existed a pure oligarchy, or
government of the few. The Sixth Form had jealously kept the reins in
their own hands, and, while granting a few privileges to the Fifth, had
denied the slightest right of interference to the Lower School. So far,
though the Juniors had grumbled continually, they had never taken any
steps to redress their grievances. Here and there one of them would
offer an indignant protest, which was treated with scorn by the Seniors,
and things would go on again in the old unsatisfactory fashion.

Gipsy, with the unbiased judgment of an entirely new-comer, had formed
her opinion of the Briarcroft code, and deeming reform necessary, set to
work to preach a crusade. She expounded her views to Hetty Hancock,
Lennie Chapman, and a few other sympathizers, and organized a plan of
campaign.

"What we want to do is to combine," she announced. "It's not the
slightest scrap of good a few single girls going and airing their woes
to the Sixth. They're not likely to listen. If we could show them that
the whole of the Lower School is one big united body, pledged to
resist,--well, they'd just have to give way."

"All the lower Forms feel the same," said Hetty. "I was speaking to the
Third about it this morning."

"How are we going to begin?" asked Lennie.

"We must call a mass meeting of Juniors, and put the thing to them
fairly and squarely," said Gipsy. "Explain what we want, and draw up a
programme of what we mean to do, then see if they'll give their
support."

"Best lose no time about it, then. I'll post up notices at once, and
we'll have a meeting at two o'clock to-morrow afternoon in the
play-room. It's no use letting the grass grow under our feet. Have you a
pencil and a scrap of paper there, Lennie? Give them to me, and I'll
make a rough draft. How will this do, do you think?

          "'A Mass Meeting of all Members of the Lower
          School will be held in the Junior Play-room on
          Wednesday at 2 p.m. prompt. Business: To consider
          the question of readjusting the Management of the
          various Guilds.

                                "'Speaker: GIPSY LATIMER.'"

"First rate!" said Lennie. "I'll help you to make some copies. We must
pin one up on the notice board of each Junior classroom, and one in the
dressing-room. It'll make a stir, and no mistake!"

"Rather!" chuckled Hetty. "Gipsy, you're an Oliver Cromwell!"

"You might add: 'Chairman, Hetty Hancock', then I guess it will do,"
said Gipsy, scanning the scrap of paper.

As Lennie had prophesied, the announcement caused a great stir
throughout the Lower School. Excited girls crowded round the notices
discussing the question, and for that day the talk was of nothing else.
Gipsy had rather taken the popular fancy; and though a few considered it
impertinence on the part of a new girl to offer any criticisms on
existing institutions, all were anxious to hear what she had to say on
so absorbing a topic. At 2 p.m. on the Wednesday, therefore, the
play-room was crowded. Juniors of all sorts and conditions were there,
from the tall girls of the Upper Fourth to giggling members of the
Third, and small fry of the First and Second, who felt themselves vastly
important at being included in the proceedings. The instigators of the
movement were determined that the meeting should be held in strict
order. They had placed a table to serve as a platform, and arranged
benches that would accommodate at least a part of the audience.

"Lennie, you make them take their seats properly," commanded Hetty; "big
ones at the back, and little ones in front: those First Form kids can
sit on the floor. Don't stand any nonsense with the Third. Now, Gipsy,
are you ready? Then we'll mount the platform."

Hetty had been studying up her duties as "Chairman", and was anxious to
do the thing in style. She had prepared her speech carefully beforehand.

"Ladies and gentlemen," she began glibly, "at least, I mean girls and
fellow members of our Junior School, my pleasant business this afternoon
is to introduce to you the speaker, Miss Gipsy Latimer. Though she is a
newcomer amongst us, I'm sure we all realize that by her wide experience
of American and Colonial schools she is particularly fitted to speak to
us on the subject in hand. She has had the opportunity of studying the
working of other Societies and Guilds, and she will no doubt be able to
offer us many valuable suggestions. I will not take up the time of the
meeting by any further remarks, but will at once call upon the speaker
to address us."

Hetty sat down, consciously covered with glory. Her own Form cheered
lustily, and even the unruly Third appeared much impressed. The little
girls in the front row were staring round-eyed and open-mouthed with
admiration. Gipsy rose slowly, took one long, comprehensive glance over
her audience, then in her clear, high-pitched tones began her crusade:

"Girls! I'm afraid most of you will think it's rather cheeky of me to
have taken the matter up when I've only been ten days or so at
Briarcroft, and I'd like at the very start to apologize for what really
must look to you like a piece of cocksure presumption. I think you'll
all allow, though, that it's a pretty true saying that 'outsiders see
most of the game'. I've been examining your institutions pretty
carefully since I came, and it seems to me the game's all in the hands
of the Sixth. There are five separate Guilds in this school--the
Needlework, the Photographic, the Dramatic, the Musical, and the
Athletic. I made enquiries about all of them, and I find that though the
Juniors contribute the bulk of the subscriptions, they haven't the least
voice in the arrangements. Now, in the countries I've lived in, such a
state of affairs would be denounced as tyranny pure and simple. I reckon
a school ought to be a democracy, and every member who joins a society
and pays a subscription has a right to have some say at least in the way
the subscriptions are to be spent. If they don't, it's 'taxation without
representation', a bad old mediaeval custom that it's taken some
countries a revolution to get rid of. I put it to the meeting--Are you
willing to sit down and be tyrannized over by the Sixth? Do you mean to
go on paying your shillings, and never getting the least advantage or
satisfaction out of any of the Guilds?"

An indignant roar of "No, no!" came from the audience. Gipsy had stated
the case very clearly. It was what the Juniors had all felt, but had
never fairly voiced before. They wanted to hear more.

"Go on! Go on!" they cried eagerly.

"There are at present ninety-three girls in this school," continued
Gipsy. "Twenty-two are in the Fifth and Sixth, and seventy-one in the
lower Forms. Just compare those figures! Twenty-two Seniors and
seventy-one Juniors! Why, our majority is simply overwhelming. Now, for
an example let us take the Dramatic Guild. At a shilling a year a head,
the subscriptions of the Upper School amount to L1, 2_s._, and those of
the Lower School to L3, 11_s._ I asked how last year's funds were spent,
and found the whole went in hiring Pompadour wigs and other things that
were worn by the Sixth. Only three Juniors took part in the
performances, and they were actually obliged to provide their own
costumes, because there was no money left to buy materials. Now, I ask
you, is such a state of affairs to be tolerated any longer?"

"No!" shrieked a chorus of voices.

"The Dramatic Guild is no exception. All the other societies are equally
bad. The funds ought to be applied to the general good; and if they're
only spent on a few, I call it misappropriation of a trust. In America
and in the Colonies our watchword was always 'Liberty'; and we took care
that all got their rights. Are you Briarcroft girls going to let this
injustice go on, or will you all join together and make a stand for fair
practices? In the name of Liberty, I ask you!"

As Gipsy warmed to her subject her brown eyes flashed and sparkled, and
the whole of her dark face seemed afire with enthusiasm. She looked a
convincing little figure as she stood there, urging the rights of her
schoolfellows, and hardly a girl in the room but was carried away by
her arguments. Instinctively the Juniors felt they had found a leader.

[Illustration: THE LOWER SCHOOL FIND A LEADER]

"I put it to the meeting. Are you ready to combine and stand together?
Those who are in favour, kindly hold up their hands."

Such a clamour arose from the play-room that the noise drifted upstairs
to the ears of the Seniors, who sat all unconscious of the rebellion
that was being preached below. With memories of Wat Tyler, Hampden,
Oliver Cromwell, the Seven Bishops, and other famous champions of the
commonweal fresh in their minds from their history books, the girls were
ready to take any measures suggested to them. There was scarcely a
dissenting voice. Enthusiasm fires enthusiasm. Gipsy's speech seemed an
inspiration, and everybody was agog with interest.

"She's right!"

"We've been kept down too long!"

"I always said it was monstrously unfair!"

"The Seniors will have to give way!"

"We'll get our rights now!"

"I wonder nobody thought of it before!"

The talk burst out on all sides, for every one was eager to have her own
say, and discuss the matter with her neighbour. Even the First Form
children had followed the arguments, and were as keen as anybody. Gipsy
calmly counted the upraised hands, then rang a bell for silence.

"I may take it, then, that the motion is carried by the general consent
of the meeting," she continued. "We're agreed that some stand ought to
be made against the aggressions of the Seniors. Now, the next
question to be considered is what we mean to do, and how we're going to
do it. It seems to me that we ought to have something very definite to
work upon. What I propose is that a picked few of us go as delegates to
the Sixth, and ask for something that has always been refused before.
If, as I expect, they say 'No', then we shall have a just ground of
complaint, and we'll use it as a text at the Annual Meeting to demand a
new arrangement of the Guilds. Four of us ought to make up the
deputation. I'm willing to go for one, and I think I can promise for
Hetty Hancock and Lennie Chapman. Who'll volunteer to be the fourth?"

There was a moment's silence. It was all very well to shout rebellion in
chorus, but the old tradition of awe for the Sixth still oppressed the
Juniors, when it came to the point of openly bearding the lions in
question.

"I will!" said a voice from the back row.

It was Meg Gordon, a member of the Upper Fourth, a rather nice-looking
girl of about Gipsy's own age. Meg had listened with closest attention
and wholehearted agreement, and was prepared to embrace the cause with
the zeal she considered it deserved. If called upon to do so, she would
have been ready even to face Miss Poppleton herself.

"Good!" replied Gipsy. "Then we'll make up a test case. If it's refused,
then we draw up a statement of our grievances, and what we want
reformed, and present it at the General Meeting. If that's also
refused--" (Gipsy paused a moment to let her words take due effect)
"then we show our teeth!"

"What's our programme then?" shouted one of the Lower Fourth.

"I'll tell you. If the Seniors have shown themselves unworthy of our
confidence, they don't deserve our support in any respect. Instead of
voting to elect them as officers, we'll withdraw our subscriptions, and
found a separate system of Guilds for the Lower School alone."

The boldness of Gipsy's suggestion almost took away the breath of her
hearers. To break loose from the hard regime of the Seniors and form a
system of self-governing societies among the Juniors had never occurred
to anybody at Briarcroft before. The idea was splendid in its magnitude.

"It seems to me we've got the game into our own hands if we like,"
continued the speaker. "Nobody can force us to subscribe to societies of
which we don't approve. We'll insist on a referendum of the whole
school, and see how the result turns out. Are you all ready to combine
on this point? Those in favour, please say 'Aye'."

"Aye! Aye! Aye!" arose from all sides.

"Well spoken!"

"Hurrah for the Junior School!"

"Three cheers for Gipsy Latimer!" shouted Hetty Hancock, jumping up
agitatedly from her chair, and nearly falling over the edge of the
platform in the heat of her enthusiasm.

"Hear, Hear!"

"Hip, hip, hip, hooray!"

The excitement was intense. Gipsy's oratory had been quite spontaneous
and unaffected, and like most genuine things it carried conviction to
its hearers. In the midst of a babel of voices the big bell rang for
afternoon school. The girls fled to their various classrooms, discussing
the matter on their way upstairs.

"It's the best idea I've ever heard!" declared Meg Gordon. "Gipsy
Latimer's a trump! I'll support her in anything she proposes."

"I wonder we never thought of such a thing before," said Cassie Bertram.

"Yes, to think of our having stood the Sixth for years, and never making
a move!"

"I think it ought to have come from some of us, though," objected Maude
Helm. "Gipsy's quite a new girl, and it's rather cheek of her to try and
foist her American notions upon us, as if we didn't know anything."

"Oh, you shut up! Why didn't you suggest it yourself?"

"I'm rather of Maude's opinion," said Alice O'Connor. "I agree with the
thing in principle, but I don't like it coming from a new girl."

"New girls oughtn't to run the whole show," added Gladys Merriman.

"Oh, you three! You'd find fault with an angel! For goodness' sake don't
get up these petty little jealousies, and spoil the whole affair. What
does it matter if Gipsy's new? Everybody has to be new some time. She's
shown she's capable of a great deal more than most of us are."

"And she knows it too, doesn't she just?" sneered Maude. "The way she
stood on that platform and talked!"

"It's sheer nastiness on your part, Maude Helm, to try and belittle her!
You won't get much glory for yourself by sticking pins in other people;
and I can tell you, if you're going to set up in opposition to Gipsy,
you've no chance. I'll undertake there's hardly a girl in the Lower
School now who won't side with Gipsy Latimer!"




CHAPTER V

A Pitched Battle


GIPSY ran upstairs to the classroom with a feeling of intense
satisfaction. So far all had gone well. She had succeeded in arousing a
spirit of righteous wrath and resistance throughout the Lower School,
and a desire to combine for the general welfare. There was a certain
exhilaration in the discovery that she was thus able to sway the minds
of her companions. She had been popular in other schools, but she had
never had a chance such as this. To do Gipsy justice, however, she
thought far more of the cause she had taken up than of her own
popularity. "Fairness" was her watchword, and wherever her lot had been
cast she would have come forward as the champion of any whom she
considered unfairly treated. A girl of decided ability, her knockabout
life had in many ways made her old beyond her years, and she had that
capacity for organization and power of making others work with her that
belong to the born leader. Having constituted herself practically head
of the movement, she assumed the further conduct of affairs, and at four
o'clock held a small committee meeting with Hetty Hancock, Lennie
Chapman, and Meg Gordon, her three self-elected coadjutors. As the
result of their consultations they presented themselves next day in the
Sixth Form classroom, at the identical moment when Miss Giles had just
retired, and the members of the Sixth were still engaged in putting away
their books.

"Hello, you kids! What are you doing here?" exclaimed Doreen Tristram.
"Just you quit, and be quick about it, too!"

"Kids, indeed!" retorted Hetty Hancock. "Not much kids about us, I
should think. We're all turned fourteen."

"Are you really? What a magnificent age! I'm glad you've enlightened me,
for I should certainly have classed you among the babes!" returned
Doreen sarcastically.

"Define a kid!" drawled Esther Hughes, putting on her pince-nez to
regard the intruders.

"Everybody knows a kid means a First or Second Form-er, sometimes a
Third, but never, never a Fourth Form girl!" burst out Lennie Chapman
indignantly. "Why, I'm taller than you!"

The Seniors giggled.

"Merely a difference of opinion, my child," said Ada Dawkins. "Now,
according to our standard, every member of the Lower School is a kid,
even if she were six feet in height! Our superiority lies in brains, not
inches! All Juniors are kids, you are a Junior, therefore you must be a
kid. _Quod est demonstrandum!_"

"And kids aren't allowed to poke their impertinent young noses into our
Form room," said Doreen Tristram. "I told you before to quit!"

"Do you want to be turned out by brute force?" added Gertrude Harding.
"It would be an undignified exit, I'm afraid."

Despite the threat, none of the four delegates budged an inch.

"You say what we're here for," whispered Meg, nudging Gipsy.

Thus urged, Gipsy opened her campaign:

"We're all four members of the Photographic Guild, and we've come to ask
for the developing machine. Some of us in the Fourth want to use it."

"In-deed! I dare say you do!"

"Don't you wish you may get it, that's all!"

"Cheek!"

"Look here--clear out of our classroom!"

"Not until I've asked a few questions," returned Gipsy firmly. "Is the
developing machine the property of the Photographic Guild?"

"I suppose it is," grudgingly admitted Ada Dawkins.

"Then why aren't all members allowed to use it?"

"Because we're not going to have it spoilt by kids' meddlesome fingers.
That's the reason, and a very good one too!"

"The Juniors pay their subscriptions as well as the Seniors, so they've
a right to everything that's the common property of the Guild,"
persisted Gipsy.

"No, they haven't!" snapped Helen Roper, the head girl. "Nobody but
members of the Committee has a right to anything. If you think we're
going to let you Juniors come interfering, you're just mistaken, and the
sooner you undeceive yourselves the better."

"We only want our rights."

"Rights? You've got no rights! It's privilege enough for you to be
allowed to belong to the Guild at all."

"A great privilege to pay our shillings!"

"You're allowed to vote, you know," put in Lena Morris, who possibly had
heard a hint of what was brewing in the Lower School. "You can elect any
of us as officers that you like, for any of the Guilds."

"And much good that is, when you all play into one another's hands!"
burst out Gipsy. "Who gets the best parts in the Dramatic and the
Musical, I should like to know? Who votes the prizes in the Sports?"

Helen Roper turned rather red. The difference in the qualities of the
prizes offered to Seniors and Juniors in the last athletic contest had
been so marked as to call forth comment from the mistresses.

"That's nothing to do with it," she faltered rather lamely. "If you
Juniors have any complaints to make, you must make them at the Annual
Meeting."

"We're going to," said Hetty Hancock grimly.

"Then in the meantime keep to your own quarters, and don't intrude
yourselves where you've no business," commanded Doreen Tristram angrily.
"Do you intend to take yourselves off peaceably, or must we eject you?"

"Thank you, we'll go now. We've found out all we want to know, and it
hardly reflects to your credit."

So saying, Gipsy and her confederates stalked away with what dignity
they could muster.

Once outside the door they tore along the passage and downstairs to the
Junior dressing-room, where, collecting all available members of the
Lower School, they promptly held an informal indignation meeting.

"Only what everyone expected!" said Dilys Fenton.

"Trust the Sixth not to give in a single inch!"

"They've been asked heaps of times before."

"Then it adds another nail to their coffin," declared Gipsy. "We've
tried them fairly, and they've refused to act fairly. We'll give them
one more chance at the meeting to-morrow, and if they won't accept our
terms--then we'll break loose and be off on our own. Are you all agreed
to that?"

"Rather! We'll stand no nonsense this time."

"Kids, indeed! We'll show them what kids can do."

"They'll get on pretty badly without the kids."

"We'll soon let them find that out!"

If the Seniors had received any warning of what was in the wind, they
did not take the matter seriously. From time immemorial the Juniors had
always complained, and no notice had ever been taken of their
complaints. As Juniors themselves the Sixth had grumbled at former head
girls and monitresses, but now that they had reached the elect position
of the top Form, they had reversed their old opinions. It had always
been the tradition of Briarcroft that all authority should be vested in
the Seniors, and they saw no reason why it should be changed. A mere
outburst of temper on the part of a few Juniors was nothing: it had
happened before, and would no doubt happen again; it was as much the
province of Juniors to grumble as of Seniors to rule. But they
reckoned without Gipsy. That any girl of her age should be capable of
welding the shifting dissatisfaction of the Lower School into one solid
mass of opposition had never occurred to them. So far no Junior had
exercised any particular influence over her fellows; it had been each
for herself, even in clamouring appeals for privileges, and the upper
girls looked down on the "kids" as a noisy, selfish, troublesome crew,
to be kept well under, and not worthy of very much consideration.

The Annual Meeting of the Guilds was to take place on Friday, 15
October, at three o'clock, in the lecture hall. It was held every year
on the Friday nearest to the middle of October, and by old-established
custom the last hour of the afternoon was allowed to be devoted to it.
The mistresses were never present, and the girls, under the
superintendence of the monitresses, were permitted to make any
arrangements they thought fit, so long as they did not interfere with
the ordinary school rules. Though the meetings had begun in good faith,
as representative assemblies for all alike, they had degenerated into a
merely formal statement of accounts by the Committee, which the general
rank and file were expected to pass without comment, and an election of
officers chosen almost entirely from the monitresses. There were
favourites, of course, among the candidates, but their number was so
limited that they did not even take the trouble to canvass for votes,
each one feeling nearly sure of being elected to fill one, if not more,
of the numerous posts in the many Guilds. The Fifth, having secured
certain privileges denied to Juniors, were content if a few of their
number were chosen to supply minor vacancies, and rarely interfered with
the main direction of affairs.

On the Friday afternoon, therefore, the Upper School strolled carelessly
into the lecture hall, and took their seats with the air of having a
perfunctory business to perform which they would be glad to get over.
The Juniors, on the other hand, were in a ferment of excitement: their
opportunity had arrived, and they intended to make the most of it; even
the youngsters of the First Form were grim in their determination to
resist. The proceedings began in the ordinary time-honoured fashion.
Helen Roper read a report for the previous year, and a statement of
accounts. The latter, having been audited by Miss Poppleton and found
correct, was passed without demur, and the head girl then went on to
announce the list of candidates for the various offices. She rattled off
the whole in a rather supercilious, casual manner, and she finished with
the usual formula: "If any member of the Society has an objection to
raise or a suggestion to make, kindly put it before the meeting now,
that it may be discussed before the voting begins."

She paused for a moment with a bored air, expecting to hear the old
grievances, and to squash them in the old summary fashion. The thing, to
her, was a mere farce, to be gone through as speedily as possible. The
eyes of all the Juniors were turned upon Gipsy, and Gipsy stood up.

"In the name of the whole of the Lower School I have an objection to
raise and a suggestion to make," she began, in her clear, high-pitched
voice. "We Juniors consider that we are unfairly treated in many ways in
the Guilds, and we demand that a certain number of us should be eligible
to serve on the Committee, to look after the rights of our own Forms."

Helen Roper stared at Gipsy as if she could hardly believe the evidence
of her own ears, and the Seniors gasped with astonishment. The impudence
of the proposal seemed to them beyond all bounds.

"I'm afraid it's not exactly the province of Juniors to sit on the
Committee," returned Helen, with a sarcastic smile. "You can hardly
expect us to comply with that demand."

"Cheek!"

"Sit upon her!"

"We can't allow this kind of thing!" murmured the indignant Seniors.

"A Guild is supposed to be formed for the common benefit of all
concerned," continued Gipsy. "And I contend that every member who pays a
subscription has a right to fair representation."

"Hear, hear!" shouted the Juniors.

"Well, you are represented. You can vote for any candidate you like,"
snapped Helen.

"But it is not fair representation when the candidates are obliged to be
chosen from the ranks of the opposite camp. We want candidates of our
own, to look after Lower School interests."

"We'll have them too!" squeaked a shrill voice from the ranks of the
Third Form.

"You're not going to get it all your own way!" yelled another.

"We're tired of tyranny."

"Order! Order!" commanded Helen; then, turning to her fellow
monitresses, she held a brief whispered consultation.

"Stop it at once!" "Put it down firmly!" "Don't stand any nonsense from
them!" "Show them who are their betters," was the hasty advice given,
and she turned again to the excited Juniors.

"What you ask is impossible," she said imperiously. "The Guilds have
gone on very well in the past, and they'll go on very well in the
future. We promise that the interests of the Juniors shall be looked
after, but the general management must remain as before. You can sit
down, Gipsy Latimer."

But Gipsy did not sit down.

"I've made a fair request, and you've refused it," she continued calmly.
"All that remains for me to do now is to appeal to the whole school. We
Juniors have held a meeting amongst ourselves, and have decided that, if
we're denied our just rights, we'll withdraw our subscriptions and found
Guilds of our own. Am I voicing the public opinion?"

"Yes, yes!" roared the Juniors.

"Put it to the vote!"

"Have it in black and white!"

"We'll settle it to-day!"

Gipsy's ultimatum was so utterly unexpected that the Seniors looked at
one another as if an earthquake had occurred. They had imagined it was
all "bluff" on the part of the younger girls, and that they were quite
incapable of enforcing their demands. This sudden mutiny was a crisis
such as had never risen before.

"Hadn't we better yield a point, and let them have one or two candidates
of their own?" suggested Lena Morris hastily.

"Certainly not! It would be the greatest mistake to give way. Leave me
to deal with them," said Helen, and turning on the Juniors with flashing
eyes, she poured forth her scorn.

"Guilds of your own, indeed! Nice Guilds they'd be! Why, the meetings
would be bear gardens. What do you know about how to conduct a Society?
When I was a Junior I trusted to the wisdom of the Seniors, instead of
listening to every newcomer who talked frothy nonsense. I tell you, it
is the monitresses who are your best friends, and who can decide what's
good for you. Are you going to change the whole of our Briarcroft
organizations at the bidding of a girl who has only been in the school
ten days?"

The latter part of Helen's argument appealed to a few who were jealous
of Gipsy's influence, but the greater number broke out in indignant
protest.

"Friends indeed!"

"Pretty friends!"

"Tyrants, more likely!"

"We'll see about bear gardens!"

"We won't be sat upon by a clique!"

These and other remarks were shouted in reply. Some of the excited girls
scrambled up and stood on their seats; each began to talk to her
neighbour, and the noise swelled till it grew into a general roar of: "A
referendum! Give us a referendum!"

Helen rang the bell for silence, and, when some sort of order was
restored, once more faced the turbulent Juniors.

"Do I clearly understand what it is you want to put to the vote?" she
asked, frowning.

"Yes! Yes! Tell her again, Gipsy!"

"I may be a new girl," said Gipsy, "but the others have chosen me to
speak for them, so I'm their lawful delegate. What we want to vote about
is a question of separation. Are we Juniors to keep on in the old
Guilds, or start Guilds of our own?"

"It will have to be a referendum of both Seniors and Juniors," replied
Helen sharply.

"That's only fair. This is a public Annual Meeting, and we want to do
everything in order."

Helen conferred again with her own Form. By all rules of general
meetings, it was impossible to refuse a referendum if called for. They
were obliged, therefore, to submit with the best grace they could, and
to deal out the voting papers.

"Those in favour of union with the present Guilds kindly put a nought,
and those in favour of separation a cross," commanded Helen. "Any paper
with anything more on it will be disqualified. Girls! I make a last
appeal to you to remember our old traditions, and to resist these
innovations. Be loyal to your monitresses!"

"Old traditions are sometimes bad traditions," exclaimed Hetty Hancock,
metaphorically flinging back the gauntlet. "We're ready to obey our
monitresses on questions of school rules, but we're not Saxon serfs.
Fair play is a jewel! We Juniors haven't had it yet, and we mean to get
it. Girls! Be loyal to the Lower School!"

The Juniors snatched their voting papers with hot eagerness, and for a
moment or two there was a silence in the room, while the necessary
noughts or crosses were being registered. The Seniors were feeling
decidedly blue, but for appearances' sake they kept up a show of
confidence.

"I think one of us is entitled to help to check the counting," said
Hetty, as the papers were collected and handed to the monitresses.

"Oh, certainly! Please come and satisfy yourselves," returned Helen
bitterly.

So the votes were counted by Lena Morris and Ada Dawkins on behalf of
the Seniors, and by Hetty and Gipsy on behalf of the Juniors. The latter
had not doubted the result, but to the Upper School the figures were
startling:

          Separation                65
          Union                     28
                                   ___
          Majority for Separation   37

Only six of the younger girls, therefore, had voted for the old regime,
and the victory of the Lower School was complete. A mad scene of
triumph ensued. The Juniors clapped and cheered, and waved their
handkerchiefs in the exuberance of their enthusiasm; and as the
discomfited Seniors beat a hasty retreat, the meeting broke up amid the
roar of exultant hurrahs, and an impromptu chorus started by Gipsy and
taken up by a dozen jubilant voices:

          "Rule, Britannia! Britannia rules the waves!
           Juniors never, never, never, will be slaves!"




CHAPTER VI

American Fudge


THE events narrated in the last chapter had made an epoch in Briarcroft
history. Henceforward the Lower School meant to manage its own affairs,
and it set to work at once to settle things upon a firm basis. Needless
to say, Gipsy was the heroine of the hour. Except for a half-dozen who
envied her popularity, the girls recognized that the revolution was
entirely owed to her suggestion, and they were ready to acknowledge her
as their leader. She took her honours modestly. Having accomplished what
she had aimed at, she was quite ready to retire from the position of
dictator until some other good cause needed a champion. After several
meetings and much discussion, the Juniors decided that instead of
founding a number of separate societies for photography, athletics,
acting, &c., they would institute one united Guild, which should include
all the various forms of school activity, to be covered by one
subscription, payable each term.

"It will be far better than dividing things up," said Hetty Hancock,
"because sometimes we want to spend more on one thing than on another,
and it's awkward to have to vote the funds of the Photographic Society
over to the Dramatic, or vice versa. I think we should manage all right
this way. We must elect a Committee, of course, and officers. For
President, I beg to nominate Gipsy Latimer. She deserves it."

"Yes! Gipsy! Gipsy!" agreed the girls.

But Gipsy shook her head, and like Oliver Cromwell waved away the
tempting offer of a crown.

"No," she said firmly; "I've only been a fortnight in the school, and I
don't feel up to the post. Better choose someone as President who
understands Briarcroft ways better than I do. I suggest Dilys Fenton.
She's the oldest girl in the Upper Fourth, and from what I hear she's
been here one of the longest. I'll serve on the Committee, if you like,
and be of any use I can, but you want an old-established Briarcroft-ite
as President. I don't know any of your arrangements yet about cricket or
tennis, and I should always be making mistakes."

The wisdom of Gipsy's remarks appealed to the girls. It was certainly
more suitable to choose as President somebody who understood the school
ways. They appreciated the motive of her refusal, however; and her
generosity in thus standing aside made her, if anything, more popular
than before. They insisted upon electing her to the post of Secretary.

"You can keep the accounts, and read aloud the minutes of the meetings,
and all those sorts of business things better than anybody," declared
Hetty.

"If I don't happen to forget which country I'm in, and add things up as
cents and dollars, instead of pence and shillings!" laughed Gipsy.

"We'll soon pull you up if you do, never fear!"

Now that her crusade was successfully accomplished, Gipsy settled down
to enjoy life at Briarcroft as well as the limited circumstances
permitted. She had already made several warm friends among both the
boarders and the day girls. Meg Gordon in particular was inclined to
accord her that species of hero worship often indulged in by
schoolgirls. She brought offerings of late roses or autumn violets from
home, and followed her idol about the school like a love-sick swain. She
would sit gazing at Gipsy during classes in deepest admiration, and was
ready to accept her every idea as gospel. Meg was rather a curious,
abrupt girl in many ways, and though she had been a year at Briarcroft,
had hitherto kept very much to herself. Her sudden and violent devotion
to the newcomer caused no little amusement in the Form. She was promptly
nicknamed "Gipsy's disciple", and subjected to a certain amount of
teasing on the score of her attachment.

"You agree with every single thing Gipsy says," laughed Norah Bell. "I
believe if she declared the trees were pink and the houses green, you'd
uphold her!"

"Do you wear her portrait over your heart?" enquired Daisy Scatcherd
facetiously.

"It was a very bad snapshot you got of her," remarked Ethel Newton.

"It certainly didn't do her justice," returned Meg, taking the matter
quite seriously. "I'm going to have a new camera for my birthday, then
I'll try again. But no snapshot could make Gipsy look as sweet as she
really does."

"Not to your love-lorn eyes!" giggled the girls.

"Meg's a perfect joke at present," said Ethel Newton to Daisy Scatcherd.
"She copies Gipsy slavishly, even to doing her hair the same, and those
two big bows of ribbon don't suit her in the least, however nice they
look on Gipsy."

"And yet she's rather like Gipsy, just like enough to be a kind of pale
copy--an understudy, in fact."

"You've hit it! Understudy's the very word. She's absolutely forming
herself on Gipsy."

Curiously enough, Meg Gordon really bore rather a marked physical
resemblance to the object of her worship. She was slim, and dark, and
about the same height, and though she lacked Gipsy's vivacity of
expression, a stranger might quite possibly have mistaken the one girl
for the other. It was perhaps just as well that Gipsy had one such
devoted ally, for there were a few malcontents in the Form who were not
at all ready to accept her with enthusiasm. Maude Helm had taken a
dislike to her from the first, and had allowed her prejudice not only to
blind her to Gipsy's good points, but to cause her to try to influence
others in her disfavour. It is rarely that anybody succeeds in doing a
public service without making any enemies, and Gipsy was no exception to
the rule. According to Maude's code, she had violated every tradition of
school etiquette by pushing herself, a newcomer, into a position of
prominence; and that she had conferred a real benefit upon the Lower
School by her championship went for nothing.

"It's sickening, the way everybody truckles to her," declared Maude to a
few of her particular chums. "I vote we stick out, at any rate, and
don't let her have everything her own way. We don't want the school
Americanized to suit her fancy."

"No; Miss Yankee will have to find out we're not all ready to lick her
boots!" grumbled Alice O'Connor.

"Glad she wasn't chosen President of the Guild, at any rate," remarked
Gladys Merriman. "If she puts up for anything else I shall oppose her.
There are other people in this Form quite as capable of taking the lead
as she is, if they only got the chance."

"Yourself not excepted, I suppose!" snapped Mary Parsons, who happened
to overhear. "You forget Gipsy refused the Presidency voluntarily."

"Clever enough to see it would pay her best!" sneered Gladys. "She
evidently knows how to get round the Form."

"Gladys! How mean you are! Well, you can't do Gipsy much harm by your
nastiness, that's one comfort."

"It only makes me like her all the more," broke out Joyce Adamson, who
had strolled up to take Mary's arm.

"All the same," said Mary to Joyce, as they walked away, "I believe
those three would do Gipsy a bad turn if they got the chance."

"But could they?"

"Easy enough. Gipsy's anything but a favourite with the monitresses
after this Guild business, and they'd be only too delighted to drop on
her if they found a reasonable excuse."

"So they would, and Gipsy's hardly what you call a bread-and-butter
Miss!"

"I should rather think not! She's ready for any amount of fun. She's
bound to come into collision with Helen Roper sooner or later. I shall
give her a hint that she'd better look out."

Gipsy was getting along famously in the Upper Fourth. Though some of the
work was rather different from what she had been accustomed to in her
former schools, she was a bright girl, and managed to fill up her
deficiencies with tolerable ease. In one or two subjects she was
actually ahead of her Form, and in all practical matters she had a mine
of past experience to draw upon. She approved of her Form mistress, Miss
White, adored the Swedish drill mistress, tolerated the German
governess, and detested the French master. For Miss Edith she was
disposed to reserve a very warm place in her heart, but she frankly
disliked Miss Poppleton.

"There are headmistresses and headmistresses," she said. "Of course one
expects them to stand on a pillar above the common herd, but some of
them condescend to peep down below. Now Poppie doesn't. I'd as soon
think of going to the man in the moon, and telling him I felt homesick
or headachy or worried about anything, as I should to her. Much she'd
care! She'd tell me not to report myself till I was sent for! Now at
Dorcas City Miss Judkins was just a dear! We all went and told her our
woes, and she comforted us up like a mother. We might go errands, too,
if we asked leave first, and we made Fudge on the play-room stove about
three times a week."

"You're always talking about Fudge!" giggled the boarders in whom these
confidences were reposed.

"So'd you be if you'd once tasted it, I guess. It was real mean of
Poppie not to let me buy that pan. We used to have good times candy
making when I was out West," said Gipsy, relapsing into Americanisms at
the remembrance of past delights in the States.

"Wish you could make some here, Yankee Doodle! I haven't had even a
chocolate drop for three days," declared Lennie Chapman.

"Poppie never said I mightn't borrow a pan," returned Gipsy
reflectively. "It would be a pity for you not to see Fudge made. I call
it neglect of your education. I believe it's my solemn duty to try and
teach you," and her eyes twinkled.

"A duty's a duty," urged Lennie with a disinterested air.

"It's a cruel rule that we may only buy sweets once a week," remarked
Dilys Fenton.

"More honoured in the breach than in the observance," added Hetty
Hancock.

"I'm not going to break any rules," said Gipsy. "There's no law against
borrowing, at least none that I've heard of. It's a good motto to do
what you want until you're told not to. Ta ta! I'm off on a foraging
expedition. Expect me back when you see me. I'm going to put my powers
of persuasion to the test."

"You mad thing! Don't get into too big a scrape; Poppie can make herself
nasty!" called Hetty.

"Don't worry yourself! I'll keep carefully out of Poppie's clutches,"
returned Gipsy, as she banged the door of the Juniors' sitting-room.

"She'll get into a row with Poppie yet, though," said Dilys; "she's far
too free and easy for this school. Did you see how Poppie glared at her
this morning in maths.?"

"Yes, but Gipsy didn't mind. She takes Poppie very lightly."

"She'll go too far some day," returned Dilys.

How Gipsy managed to wheedle the cook nobody ever discovered, but she
returned in a short time triumphantly carrying a tray.

"Got all I wanted!" she announced. "A pan, and milk, and sugar, and even
a bottle of vanilla. Can't you clear a place on the table? The thing's
heavy."

A number of willing hands swept away books, needlework, and other
impedimenta. It was evening recreation hour, so nearly all the Junior
boarders were collected in the room. They viewed the interesting
preparations with pleased anticipation.

"There!" said Gipsy, putting her burden down with a slam. "I reckon if
any of you care to learn how to make American Fudge, now's your chance!
Positively the last opportunity! By the by, 'reckon' is one of the words
Poppie said I'd got to avoid, but it slipped out. I'll be more careful
next time."

"Does Poppie know you've got these things?" squeaked Aggie Jones, a
ten-year-old from the First Form.

"She's a trump if she let you!" echoed Pamela Harvey, of the Lower
Second.

"You kids mind your own business!" said Hetty Hancock hastily.

"Poppie never said I mightn't have them, which amounts to the same
thing," replied Gipsy calmly. "She hasn't given me a list of school
rules, so I can't break them till I know what they are, can I? There's a
law in most countries that a dog's allowed a first bite free. Well, this
is going to be my first bite. Do you want to join this cookery
demonstration, or not?"

"Rather!" said Lennie Chapman, "if you'll take the responsibility."

"And let us taste some of it afterwards!" added Daisy Scatcherd.

"I'd never be so mean as to eat it all myself. I'll share it round
evenly to the last crumb. Now, if you want to help, you may measure out
three cupfuls of sugar, and three-quarters of a cupful of milk. Now this
tablespoonful of butter. Yes, that's all, thanks. Somebody pull that
fender away, please; I want to get to the fire."

Stolen waters are sweet, and schoolgirl nature is the same the whole
world over. The Junior boarders all had more than a suspicion that
Gipsy's cookery was unauthorized, but who could resist the attractions
of toffee making?

"I hope it's a sort that goes cold quickly, and won't take till next
morning to harden," said Dilys Fenton. "Last 5th of November I think we
didn't boil ours quite long enough, and we really couldn't wait, so we
ate it soft."

"You boil this till it threads from the spoon, and then you beat it with
a fork till it creams," murmured Gipsy, with her head over the pan.

"Let me stir!" begged Pamela Harvey.

"You mustn't stir it. That's the secret of good Fudge-making, not to
stir at all while it's boiling. It makes it coarse-grained if you do."

"Won't it burn, though?"

"It doesn't out in U.S.A. But then we make it on stoves, you see. I
can't guarantee it on an open fire. By good rights it ought to have
pieces of hickory nut in it, but it won't taste bad without."

"I'd call that fire fierce for ordinary toffee," commented Lennie
Chapman.

"I'm sure I smell something," sniffed Dilys Fenton.

"Oh, it's burning!"

"Gipsy! Stir it!"

"It's boiling over!"

"Take it off, quick!"

Half a dozen eager hands snatched at the pan, but it was too late; the
sugary compound rose like a volcano and overflowed into the fire. A wail
of lament came from the disappointed girls.

"I knew it would!" protested Lennie.

"Oh, it's made an awful smell! Open the window, somebody!" shrieked
Gipsy. "If we don't mind, Poppie'll nose it out, and come poking up.
Oh! Good gracious!"

Gipsy might well exclaim, for there, just behind them, stood Miss
Poppleton herself. She had been walking along the passage, and attracted
by the smell of burning, she had opened the door quietly to ascertain
the cause. There was a moment of awful silence. Eleven sinners felt
themselves most horribly caught.

"Who brought these things here?" demanded Miss Poppleton, eyeing the
tray and its paraphernalia.

"I did. I got them from the kitchen," answered Gipsy. "We always made
Fudge in the schoolroom in Dorcas City," she added, with a spice of
defiance in her voice.

"You won't here!" returned Miss Poppleton grimly. "Take those things
back to the kitchen at once. You will stay in from hockey to-morrow, and
learn a page of French poetry. Each of you others" (glaring at the
crestfallen circle) "will copy fifty lines of _Paradise Lost_, and bring
them to me before Thursday. If you can't be trusted, I shall have to
send one of the Seniors to sit with you in the evenings."

With this awful threat she departed, having first seen the exit of Gipsy
with the tray.

"I knew Gipsy was bound to get into a scrape sooner or later," groaned
Dilys.

"And we're in too, worse luck!" wailed Daisy Scatcherd. "Fifty lines is
no joke!"

"It's ironical of her to choose _Paradise Lost_ when the Fudge had just
boiled over!" said Hetty. "She doesn't like Gipsy, it's easy enough to
see that."

"Here's Gipsy back. Well, my child, what do you think of your 'first
bite', as you call it? Poppie didn't see your privileges! You'll have
the pleasure of learning a whole page of French poetry to improve your
mind, instead of playing hockey to-morrow!"

"I don't care!" said Gipsy, with an obstinate set to her mouth. "She may
give me anything she likes, to learn. When folks are nice to me, I'll
keep any number of rules; but when they begin to bully me, I just feel
inclined to go and do something outrageous. I'm afraid there's not much
love lost between Poppie and me."




CHAPTER VII

Gipsy takes her Fling


WHEN the novelty of her introduction to Briarcroft had somewhat faded,
and the excitement of the Lower School mutiny had subsided, Gipsy began
to find the life more than a trifle dull. She had an adventurous
temperament, and her roving life had given her a taste for constant
change and variety, so the prim regime of the English boarding school
seemed to her monotonous in the extreme. She chafed against the
confinement and the regularity of the well-ordered arrangements.

"I feel as if I were shut up in a box!" she declared. "How can you all
go on every day so contentedly with this 'prunes and prism' business?
When I was at school up-country in Australia the mistress used to notice
when we got restless, and take us for a day's camp into the bush. The
day girls would bring horses for us boarders to use (everybody rides out
there), and off we'd go, each with our picnic basket on our saddle, and
have the very jolliest good time you could imagine. It worked off our
spirits, and we'd come back to lessons as fresh as daisies and as meek
as lambs."

"You get hockey here," objected Dilys, who generally stood up for
Briarcroft institutions.

"Not enough of it," sighed Gipsy. "I like hockey, but it's nothing to a
day's riding."

"Did your headmistress ride too?" enquired Lennie.

"Rather! Miss Yorke was Colonial born, and could have sat a kangaroo, I
should think! She was a different article from Poppie, I assure you."

"Can't imagine Poppie controlling a fiery steed," giggled the girls.

"I should like to see you on horseback, Gipsy," said Hetty.

"I'd be only too glad to accommodate you, my dear, if you'd provide the
gee-gee. I can tell you I'm just yearning for a canter."

"Nothing but a clothes horse here," remarked Dilys facetiously.

"Or the colt in the meadow beyond the hockey field," said Lennie.

"The colt! Of course I'd forgotten the colt!" exclaimed Gipsy
rapturously.

"You'd never sit that wild thing! You'd have to ride him bareback. Even
your wonderful cleverness can't do everything, I suppose!" said Gladys
sarcastically.

"I can ride bareback," returned Gipsy. "It's nearly as easy as with a
saddle."

"I'd like to see you catch him first."

"That's perfectly possible--he wears a halter. Do you dare me to do it?
How many chocolates will you give me if I do?"

"A dozen, and a whole boxful if you ride him round the field."

"Then I'll show you a little prairie practice this afternoon. I haven't
lived in the Colonies for nothing!"

"Don't, Gipsy, don't! It's too dangerous!" besought Hetty and Lennie.

"She won't really--it's all brag!" sneered Gladys.

"Is it indeed, Miss Gladys Merriman? Just wait till this afternoon, and
I'll undeceive you."

"I'll wait to buy the box of chocolates, though," sniggered Gladys.

None of the girls really believed that Gipsy was in earnest, yet they
sallied forth to the hockey field that afternoon with a certain amused
anticipation. The news had been spread abroad in the Lower School, so
the Juniors had assembled ten minutes in advance of their ordinary time
on the chance of witnessing what Hetty called "the circus-riding". The
hockey ground was divided from the meadow by a strong wooden paling, on
the farther side of which the colt, a shaggy, ungroomed, raw-boned
specimen of horse-flesh, was feeding.

"It is as frisky as--well, as a colt!" said Mary Parsons. "You'd better
not try to catch that creature, Gipsy."

"It'll pretty soon kick her off if she does!" said Alice O'Connor.
"Well, Gipsy? Going to turn tail at the last minute? You'd best give
in!"

"Rather not!" returned Gipsy. "When I'm dared to do a thing, I do it--or
have a good try, at any rate. If I'm not galloping round the field in
ten minutes, you may count me done. Hetty, you keep time!" And without
stopping to listen to any more remonstrances, she climbed over the
palings.

She had brought some bread with her, and she walked very gently towards
the colt, holding out her bait, and making a series of chirruping sounds
calculated to win its confidence. The rough little creature paused in
its task of tearing the grass, and eyed her doubtfully. It had been
petted, however, by the boys at the farm to which it belonged (a fact of
which Gipsy was well aware when she accepted Gladys's challenge), and
had a marked partiality for such dainties as bread, sugar, and carrots.
Though Gipsy was a stranger, it evidently considered she was familiar
with horse language, and encouraged by her chirrups it advanced
cautiously, rolling its eyes a little, and sniffing suspiciously. Gipsy
stood still, and without moving a muscle let it come quite near and
inspect her. She held the bread on the palm of her left hand; her right
hand was ready for action when necessary.

The row of girls leaning over the palings watched in dead silence.
Summoning up its courage, the colt stretched out its nose to take the
tempting bread. Gipsy let it get the coveted morsel well within its
lips, then seized the halter with her left hand and the long chestnut
mane with her right, and with a sudden agile bound and scramble flung
herself across its back. It was so quickly and neatly done that the
bystanders held their breath with admiration. Gipsy's horsemanship was
evidently no idle boast, if she could perform so difficult a feat of
gymnastics with such comparative ease. Meantime the colt, astonished and
enraged at finding a burden on its back, was trying buck-jumping, and
Gipsy had to cling to mane and halter to keep her seat. At this critical
moment the Seniors and the mistresses arrived on the scene. Miss
Poppleton's amazement and horror at finding one of her pupils mounted on
the back of an unbroken colt were almost too great for words.

"Stop her! Stop her!" she gasped wildly. "Oh, for pity's sake, somebody
stop her!"

But as it was certainly in nobody's power to stop her, Gipsy had to take
the consequences of her own foolhardy act. The colt, after an amount of
kicking and plunging, stood for an instant stockstill, then, rolling its
eyes, set off at a furious gallop round the meadow. That Gipsy managed
to stick on to its back even she herself afterwards confessed was almost
a miracle, but she kept her seat somehow. Up and down the field fled her
steed in furious career, till, tired of galloping, it changed its
tactics and stood still and kicked, when Gipsy seized the opportunity of
sliding to the ground. She just escaped its hoofs as, relieved of her
weight, it scampered off to the farthest limit of the boundary fence.
Very dishevelled and rather bruised and shaky, she picked herself up
from the muddy spot where she had fallen, and limped back to the
palings. The girls cheered. They couldn't help themselves, even though
Miss Poppleton was present.

"She's as good as a cowboy!" exclaimed Lennie.

"Or a circus rider!" added Hetty proudly.

"Well done, Gipsy!"

"Bravo!"

Miss Poppleton, however, did not share the popular enthusiasm, and
received her adventurous pupil with a scolding instead of
congratulations.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Gipsy Latimer," she said sternly.
"It's a mercy you were not killed. Understand once for all that I forbid
such mad proceedings. If you have hurt your leg you had better go
indoors. The sooner you learn that these are not Briarcroft ways, the
better. This is a school for young ladies, not young hoydens!"

Slightly abashed, Gipsy beat a retreat to the house, where Miss Edith,
who had been an agitated spectator from the linen-room window, bathed
the wounded leg, put arnica on the bruises, and comforted the sufferer,
while she proffered good advice.

"It was very naughty of you, you know, Gipsy dear!" she said in her
kind-hearted, deprecating manner. "I don't know anything about riding,
but it looked most dangerous, and of course, if Miss Poppleton said it
was wrong, it was wrong. My sister is always right. Please remember
that. Why, child, you're all trembling! I'll make you a cup of Bovril,
and you must lie down on your bed for an hour. And promise me faithfully
you'll never do such a foolish, silly, mad thing again! We want to hand
you over to your father in good health when he comes to fetch you, and
he'd blame us if you were hurt."

"He knows me only too well," twinkled Gipsy. "But there--I'll promise
anything you like, dear Miss Edith! Yes, the bruises feel better now,
and the Bovril would be delicious. And you're a darling! Let me give you
one hug, and I'll lie down like a monument of patience, though I don't
feel the least scrap ill."

While the Seniors, with whom Gipsy was out of favour, viewed her
escapade with lofty contempt as a madcap proceeding, the Juniors
regarded her as an even greater heroine than before. Gladys Merriman
redeemed her promise, and brought the box of chocolates she had offered,
and Gipsy with strictest impartiality handed them round the Form till
they were finished.

Gipsy had certainly established her record for horse-breaking, and
though, according to Miss Poppleton, it was scarcely a lady-like
accomplishment, there was hardly anyone in the Lower School who did not
admire her prowess.

"You're like the girl in the cinematograph who tracks the villain to his
mountain retreat, or finds the hero, bound with cords, lying in the
brushwood, and then rides off post-haste to inform the sheriff. She
always catches a wild-looking horse, and gallops full speed!" laughed
Dilys.

"I wish we'd a cinema camera!" sighed Hetty. "We might have taken some
gorgeous records this afternoon for the Photographic Society. No one
even got a snapshot."

"Your own faults, not mine! You should have brought your cameras!"
returned Gipsy.

"We never thought you'd really do it."

"Is that so? Well, when I allow to do any special thing, I guess I
admire to see it through!"

"Oh, you Yankee!" roared the others.

Though the girls laughed at her Americanisms and Colonial ways, and
often teased her about them, Gipsy continued as great a favourite as
ever, she took all the banter so good-temperedly, and returned it so
smartly. There was always a delightful uncertainty also as to what she
would do next, and the prospect of an exciting interlude by "Yankee
Doodle", as she was nicknamed, was felt decidedly to relieve the
monotony of the ordinary Briarcroft atmosphere. Not that Gipsy really
ever meant to behave badly; but, accustomed as she was to the
free-and-easy conduct of her up-country Colonial schools, she found it
almost impossible to realize that what would have been tolerated there
with a smile was in her new surroundings counted a heinous crime. The
silence rules and the orderly march in step from classroom to lecture
hall filled her with dismay. She appeared to expect to be allowed to
tear about the passages, talking at top speed, even in school hours, and
many were the admonitions she incurred from indignant monitresses.

"A fine model you are for the Lower School!" said Doreen Tristram
sarcastically one day. "Can't even walk decently in line, and prance
about for all the world like a monkey tied to a barrel piano!"

Doreen had taken the defection of the Juniors much to heart, and could
not forgive the leader of the opposition.

"Thanks! I wasn't aware my movements were so original!" retorted Gipsy.
"There's method in my madness this time, though. I was trying to dodge
Miss White, and dash upstairs to get my _Hamlet_. I've forgotten the
wretched thing, and if I go to class without a book, Poppie--h'm! I mean
Miss Poppleton" (as Doreen's eyebrows went up)--"will want to know the
reason why."

"I expect she will," returned Doreen dryly. "And serve you right too,
for forgetting! No, I shall not allow you to go and fetch it. I'm here
to keep order, not to help you out of scrapes."

The Upper Fourth, under Doreen's superintendence, had just filed from
its own classroom to attend a Shakespeare lecture by the Principal. The
girls were a few minutes early, and in consequence were drawn up like a
small regiment in the corridor to wait until a previous class was over
and they could enter the lecture hall. Waiting is often dull work, and
Gipsy had considered herself a public benefactor in seeking to enliven
the tedium of her form mates. Doreen's notions on the subject of
discipline did not appeal to her.

"But I can't go to the Shakespeare lesson without my _Hamlet_," she
remonstrated. "Suppose I'm asked to read?"

"You should have thought of that before!" snapped Doreen. "Be quiet,
Gipsy Latimer; if you speak another word I shall report you!"

Gipsy refrained from further unavailing speech, but her active brain was
by no means silenced. I do not think anybody but herself would have
dreamed of doing what followed. The outer door of the corridor was
standing open, and when the monitress's back was for the moment turned,
Gipsy slipped out into the playground. On the opposite side of the
quadrangle stood the open window of her classroom, ten feet or so above
the ground. The wall of that part of the house was thickly covered with
ivy, and in less time than it takes to tell it she was scrambling up
with as much agility as the monkey to which Doreen had unfeelingly
compared her. A few girls who happened to be standing near the door and
witnessed her achievement gasped audibly, but I verily believe Gipsy
would have been back before she was missed, had not Maude Helm
officiously chirped out:

"Oh, I say! Look at Yankee Doodle!"

Naturally the monitress did look, and fled into the courtyard in pursuit
of the runaway. Her outraged face, upturned from below, greeted Gipsy as
that irrepressible damsel reappeared at the window waving her _Hamlet_
in triumph.

"Gipsy Latimer, go back down the stairs!" commanded Doreen.

"No, thanks! It's shorter this way, and saves time," returned Gipsy,
dropping her book first, then swinging herself out of the window. She
came down the ivy quite easily, picked up her _Hamlet_, smoothed its
cover, which had suffered in the fall, and flitted back to her place in
the corridor, just as the lecture room door opened to let out the Third
Form and admit the Upper Fourth. Doreen followed grimly.

"You needn't think you're going to play these tricks with impunity," she
said. "You'll report yourself to-morrow at the monitresses' meeting at
four o'clock. We'll see what the head of the school has to say to you!"

"Delighted, I'm sure! I've got my _Hamlet_, anyhow," chuckled naughty
Gipsy, as she disappeared into the lecture hall.

On this occasion I am afraid she was not altogether innocent of cause of
offence, and had taken a distinct pleasure in defying Doreen. Perhaps
she thought, on maturer consideration, that she had gone a trifle too
far, for she turned up at the monitresses' meeting with a countenance
sobered down to the requirements of so solemn a convocation.

"Gipsy Latimer, you are here to report yourself for insubordination,"
began Helen Roper with dignity. "Do you realize that monitresses are
officers in this school, and that their authority is only second to that
of the mistresses?"

Gipsy took a clean handkerchief from her pocket, and, unfolding it
ostentatiously, blinked hard.

"I realize it now," she answered, with a something in her voice that
might have been either laughter or tears; "I'm afraid I was very
ignorant before."

Helen glared at her suspiciously. Was that a twinkle in the dark eyes?
But no; Gipsy was looking grave in the extreme.

"The monitresses must be obeyed," continued the head of the school.
"Every girl at Briarcroft knows that, and anyone who deliberately
disobeys incurs the penalty of being reported to Miss Poppleton."

The corners of Gipsy's mouth were drooping; her face had assumed an
expression of abject penitence.

"Please don't do that to me!" she pleaded humbly. "Remember how badly
I've been brought up! If I'd been at Briarcroft all the time, instead of
other schools, and had had the advantage of the monitresses, I might
have been different."

"I expect you would," said Helen freezingly. "And you'll please to
remember that now you're here, you'll have to conform to our standards."

"I know I'm a heathen. I'll be only too grateful to be taught better,"
murmured the subdued voice that was so strangely unlike Gipsy's usual
sprightly tones.

Lena Morris turned away to hide a smile. She was possessed of a strong
sense of humour, and moreover had a sneaking liking for Gipsy.

"Mind you do as you're told next time, then," commanded Helen. "I'll
excuse you this once, but if it happens again, I warn you that I shall
send you straight to Miss Poppleton. You may think yourself very lucky
to be let off so easily. You can go now."

Gipsy's big brown eyes looked like two wells absolutely overflowing with
gratitude and humility.

"Thanks so very immensely much! It's far more than I deserve!" she
sighed, and, flaunting the clean handkerchief, beat a hasty retreat.

The monitresses would have been edified if they could have seen the war
dance she executed in the passage as soon as the door was shut.

"Couldn't have kept my face a moment longer!" she choked to one or two
friends who were waiting for her. "Oh, you should have seen me as the
penitent! I think I did the thing rather neatly."

"You mad hatter! I wonder Helen didn't see you were shamming," said
Hetty.

"No, no! She's been improving my mind and showing me the path I ought to
walk in. How would you like me if I turned out a first-class prig?"

"It couldn't be done. Come along, you wild gipsy thing! Do you want the
monitresses to come out and catch you? You'll get into a really big
scrape some day if you're not careful."

"Some people are born wise and proper, and some are born otherwise. I'm
one of the otherwise! It's my misfortune, not my fault," laughed Gipsy,
as Lennie and Hetty dragged her forcibly away.

Gipsy's wild spirits were undoubtedly liable to lead her beyond the
bounds of propriety, and both mistresses and monitresses were inclined,
justly or unjustly, to suspect that she was at the bottom of any
mischief that cropped up in the school. One incident, though shrouded in
mystery, was generally laid by Miss Poppleton as a sin to her charge. In
the upper corridor, not very far from Gipsy's dormitory, hung a long
chain which sounded a fire bell. The boarders at Briarcroft were
instructed in fire drill, though a night summons was generally only
given in summertime, as Miss Poppleton was afraid of the girls catching
cold. Gipsy had read the printed card of "Directions in case of Fire",
and had examined the chute with intense interest.

"I'd just love to go sliding down it out of our bedroom window," she
exclaimed. "It would be almost as much fun as toboganning."

"Rather freezing work on these sharp nights. There was ice on the
puddles this morning," said Dilys. "No fire-drill practice for me, thank
you! I prefer to stop snug in bed."

"You've no spirit of adventure in you," returned Gipsy.

"I've got sound common sense instead, and that's what you don't possess,
Yankee Doodle!"

"All the same, that summons is going to come off, by hook or by crook!"
said Gipsy to herself. "It would be a kindness to the school to give it
a chance to see whether it's prepared for emergencies. Gipsy Latimer, I
guess you'll have to be the philanthropist! But you've no need to flaunt
your noble deed. 'Do good by stealth, and blush to find it fame', in
fact."

If Gipsy, before she went to bed that night, contrived to tie a long
piece of string to the bell chain in the passage, and to secure the
other end to her bedpost, she did not blazon the fact abroad, and the
string was so neatly laid against the edges of skirting board and under
mats that nobody happened to notice it. At 3 a.m., when the whole of
Briarcroft was wrapped in deepest slumbers, there suddenly came the
great _clang-clang_ of the fire bell, resounding and echoing through the
quiet house. Everybody woke in a hurry, and the head of each dormitory
at once switched on the electric light and assumed command. The
well-trained girls dipped their towels in water and put them over their
mouths, threw the red blankets from their beds round their shoulders,
and lined up along the corridor. Miss Lindsay was already there, and
gave the command to march, and away trooped the boarders downstairs and
out of the front door on to the lawn, where they ranged themselves to be
counted. The light streaming through the front door revealed a strange
sight--all the girls in night gear, with their scarlet blankets trailing
on the ground. The juveniles were clasping dolls and other treasures,
and some of the others had caught up big sponges in their confusion. The
whole exit had only taken about a hundred seconds from the sounding of
the bell, and if Gipsy was last, and clutched a roll of string in her
hand, nobody remarked the circumstance.

There followed a hurried enquiry among the mistresses as to the
whereabouts of the fire, and the discovery that no fire existed. Miss
Poppleton hastily gave the order to return, and the boarders trooped
back shivering to the dormitories, not a little disconcerted to have
been disturbed for nothing on a chilly night in November. The Principal
made every enquiry next day as to the source of the alarm, but she could
discover nothing. Dilys Fenton was able to assure her that when she had
switched on the light in No. 3 Dormitory Gipsy Latimer had been asleep,
and she had been obliged to shake her violently to awaken her, so it was
quite impossible that Gipsy could be responsible for the practical joke.
The occurrence made a great excitement among the boarders. For days
they talked of scarcely anything else.

"It was over too soon, and they didn't use the chute after all," said
Gipsy disconsolately.

"Gipsy! you never--you couldn't-- Oh, surely----!"

But Gipsy's brown eyes looked such absolute mirrors of innocence that
even Hetty's suspicions were laid to rest.




CHAPTER VIII

Daisy Forgets


THOUGH Gipsy was accustomed to try to enjoy herself in any place where
circumstances chanced to fling her, and though she had contrived to
settle down fairly happily at Briarcroft, she nevertheless thought often
of her father, far away on the opposite side of the Equator. He must
long ago have arrived at the Cape, and it was high time that she
received news from him, telling her of his whereabouts. Every morning
she looked out anxiously for the post, but day after day brought the
same disappointment. She was the only boarder who had no letters, and
she often felt her isolated position keenly when she saw her schoolmates
tearing open their welcome budgets. It would be nice, she thought, to
have a mother and brothers and sisters to write to her, and a home to go
to in the holidays. In her roving life she could not remember a real
home; a log hut for a few weeks in a mining camp had been the nearest
approach to it.

"But I've Dad, and he's better than a whole family; and it's fun to go
about the world with him, though I do live mostly at hotels when I'm not
at school," she said to herself. "I'm not going to worry my head. Dad
will send me a letter as soon as he possibly can, I know. He's not in
the least likely to forget me."

So she tried to comfort herself, but every day she looked out wistfully
for the postman--how wistfully nobody but Miss Edith ever noticed. It
was growing towards the end of November, and already the boarders were
beginning to talk of the holidays. The evening recreation time was
devoted to the making of Christmas presents; even the little girls were
busy embroidering traycloths and constructing pincushions. Gipsy began
to work a pair of slippers for her father, a rather lengthy proceeding,
for she was not clever at needlecraft, and was apt to pull her wool too
tightly, having to unpick her stitches in consequence. There was no
particular hurry in her case, though, for it was impossible for her to
dispatch the parcel in time for Christmas when she did not know where to
address it. If there was a forlorn look in the brown eyes sometimes when
others talked about home, they twinkled again so readily that her
schoolmates never realized she could feel lonely, and a stranger in a
strange land. To them she appeared the very epitome of fun and
happy-go-lucky carelessness, and they would have been surprised indeed
if they had known what a very sore heart she carried occasionally under
her outward assumption of jollity.

Daisy Scatcherd's birthday fell on the last day of November. Daisy,
though she merited her nickname of "Scatterbrains", was rather a
favourite among the boarders, so she came off very well indeed in the
matter of presents. Her home people had also remembered her, and many
interesting parcels arrived for her during the course of the morning.
Between four and half-past, in the afternoon, she was taking a run round
the garden in company with a few friends, when she spied the postman
walking briskly up the drive.

"I expect he's got something more for me," she exclaimed, and dived
under the laurels to take a short cut to the drive and intercept him.

"Give me the letters, please! It's my birthday!" she said breathlessly.

"Only three this afternoon, missy! Don't know whether any of 'em's for
you or not," said the man, laughing.

"Let me see! Yes! yes! I'll take them, please. It's all right."

Not sorry to save the extra walk to the house, the postman departed. He
was late, and had a long round before he could return home. Daisy was
looking eagerly at the letters. One, a thin foreign envelope, was
addressed to Miss Gipsy Latimer, and that she thrust hastily into her
coat pocket; the other two were for herself. They both contained postal
orders, which elevated her to such heights of satisfaction that she
never gave a thought to the letter she had stuffed in her pocket:
indeed, in her excitement she had put it away so automatically that the
incident faded from her memory almost as soon as it happened. She rushed
into the house in a state of great exultation, to ask Miss Edith to
take charge of her orders, and put them away safely.

"A whole pound! Isn't it lovely? I shall buy a new camera, or perhaps a
bookcase like Hetty Hancock's; or I want a bracelet watch most fearfully
badly, and I expect I'll get some more money at Christmas that I could
put to it. What would you advise, Miss Edith?" she chattered.

"Wait till you go home and consult your mother," said Miss Edith. "What
a cold you've got, child! You oughtn't to have been running about the
garden. And this coat is much too thin. You must wear your thick one
now. Put this away in your wardrobe, to take home at Christmas."

"Mother said I needn't take my autumn clothes back with me," objected
Daisy. "It only crams up my boxes. She said they might as well be left
here."

"Very well. I'll put it away in my big cupboard until the spring. Here
are some cough lozenges, and I shall rub your chest to-night with
camphorated oil. Go and sit by the fire, and mind you don't get into
draughts."

"I've got all my birthday letters to answer," replied Daisy, as she
tripped gaily away. "I don't particularly want to go out again."

Miss Edith folded the coat neatly, placed a packet of camphor balls with
it to keep away moths, and laid it with a pile of similar garments
inside a large cupboard in the linen room. It never struck her to look
in the pockets, so the letter so longed for and expected lay upstairs
in the dark, and Gipsy waited and hoped, and hoped and waited, all in
vain.

To forget her troubles she threw herself with enthusiasm into the
working of the Dramatic Section of the Lower School Guild. The Juniors
intended to act _The Sleeping Beauty_, and she had been chosen as the
wicked fairy, a part which she rehearsed with much spirit. She was
unwearied in her efforts at arranging costumes, constructing scenery,
and coaching her fellow performers in their speeches. She soon had the
whole play by heart, and could act prompter without the help of the
book--a decided convenience to those whose memories were liable to fail
them at critical moments.

Though the Guild comprised a number of separate societies, it lacked one
feature which Gipsy considered it certainly ought to possess. Briarcroft
had no school magazine, and not even among the Seniors had one ever been
suggested.

"Yet it's really a most necessary thing," urged Gipsy. "How else can one
give notice of coming events, and reports of what has taken place? It's
such fun, too! Why shouldn't we steal a march on the Upper School and
start one of our own?"

"There's the expense, my child, for one thing," replied Mary Parsons,
who was treasurer of the United Guild. "The subscriptions don't go very
far when we want to buy so many things with them. I'm sure they wouldn't
run to printing."

"I never intended having it printed. I know that would be beyond us."

"Perhaps we could have it typed," suggested Fiona Campbell, whose father
was a journalist. "Dad always sends his articles to a typing office, and
it looks just as good as printing when it's done."

"I don't think the Guild could afford even that," said Mary. "The
costumes for the play will about clear out the funds for this term, and
next term, you know, we voted to buy a developing machine."

"It was mean of the Seniors to stick to all the properties of the other
Guilds! They might have given us something," put in Norah Bell.

"Trust them! They wouldn't part with so much as a twopenny music sheet!"
said Gipsy. "But about the Magazine; it needn't cost us anything. My
idea was to ask Miss White to lend us the duplicator, and we'd make a
copy for each Form. They could be lent round and round. If we liked we
might put in a few illustrations. You're good at drawing, Fiona."

"That certainly sounds more simple," said Dilys. "And the Mag. would be
ripping fun. We'd have articles and poetry and stories and reviews and
all sorts of things."

"Would it be a monthly?" enquired Hetty.

"I should say about twice a term would be enough," said Gipsy. "It would
be difficult to get contributions if you had it too often."

"We couldn't duplicate the illustrations," objected Fiona, whose mind
was already turned to things artistic.

"No; each Form would have to provide its own pictures for its own copy.
That would make it all the more interesting. There'd be no two quite
alike."

"And we could even have advertisements, and a kind of Exchange and
Mart!" exclaimed Dilys, who was immensely taken with the idea. "It would
just suit the First and Second; they're always trading white mice or
silkworms with one another."

"We'll add a Beauty Bureau, with hints about the complexion, if you
like," suggested Gipsy demurely.

The others laughed, for Dilys was rather vain of her appearance, and
kept many bottles of toilet requisites upon her portion of the
dressing-table.

"Best call a general meeting of the Guild; then we can propose the
thing, and have it carried through in proper order," said Hetty. "I
believe it will catch on. Gipsy, you write out some notices and pin them
up in the classrooms."

                      "A GENERAL MEETING

                            of the

                         UNITED GUILD

          Will be held on THURSDAY at 4 p.m. in the
                         Dressing-Room.

          Business:--To discuss the proposal of starting
                     a Lower School Magazine.

          All members are particularly requested to attend."

So ran the Secretary's notice, and the girls who read it were only too
eager to respond to the invitation. They felt that Gipsy stirred things
up at Briarcroft, and were ready to listen to anything fresh she might
have to suggest. As Hetty had expected, the idea was received with
enthusiasm, and when Gipsy propounded her scheme in detail, everybody
cordially agreed, and the motion was carried unanimously.

"There's one principal matter to be settled," said Dilys, who, as
President, occupied the post of chairman. "We've got to choose an
editor."

"Then I beg to propose Gipsy Latimer," said Meg Gordon, rising hastily.

"And I beg to second the proposal," said Hetty Hancock.

"Gipsy! Yes, Gipsy!" exclaimed the girls, and a forest of hands went up.

"You'll have to take it, Gipsy," urged Hetty. "You're the most suitable
of anybody. It's a new thing in the school, so it's best managed by a
new girl. We should none of us understand how to do it. Besides, you
suggested it. The whole plan of it is yours."

"Right-o, if you think I'm 'the man for the job'," agreed Gipsy.

Though she had not canvassed for the post, Gipsy was delighted to get
the editorship. Running a magazine was work that exactly suited her. She
was sure she could make it a success, and she looked forward with
immense satisfaction to issuing her first number. A name had yet to be
chosen, and after much debate it was decided to call the new venture the
_Briarcroft Juniors' Journal_.

"That'll quite cut the Seniors out of it," said Meg Gordon. "We don't
want them to get any of the credit."

"And 'Juniors' Journal' has a nice juicy kind of sound," said Daisy
Scatcherd.

"A juicy journal would be a new departure--it suggests oily words and
honeyed speeches!" laughed Hetty.

By general vote, the first number was to be issued a week before the end
of the term, so Gipsy had to set to work in earnest in her capacity of
editress, inviting contributions from likely members, and settling the
various departments of her magazine. She intended to conduct it on the
lines of a real publication, and to keep separate pages for Sports and
Pastimes, Reviews of Books, Nature Notes, How to Make Things, Handy
Recipes, Puzzles, Competitions, and Letters from Correspondents, as well
as matter of a more original literary character. It was rather a big
order, but Gipsy's ambitions soared high; she felt it was a chance for
the Lower School to shine, and she spared no trouble to make her scheme
a success.

There was very little time for all this, but she worked systematically,
apportioning the departments among different girls, and making them
promise to write certain things. Joyce Adamson, who was "great" on
hockey, was told off for "Sports and Pastimes"; Ethel Newton, a day
girl, who lived a few miles away quite in the heart of the country,
undertook the "Nature Notes"; Meg Gordon's fertile brain could be
trusted to invent puzzles and competitions; neat-fingered Norah Bell
contributed an article on "How to make Paper Boxes"; and Gipsy herself
undertook the "Library Shelf" and "Answers to Correspondents". Fiona
Campbell provided some dainty illustrations, and her example was
emulated by members of other Forms, who were also invited to submit
articles, stories, nature notes, and puzzles. Gipsy, with the oligarchy
of the Seniors fresh in her memory as a warning, did not wish the Upper
Fourth to monopolize the Magazine by any means, and the younger girls
were strongly urged to try their 'prentice hands at the art of
composition. She herself was busy with the opening chapter of a serial,
in which she intended to set forth all her adventures in the Colonies,
embroidered by the aid of her imagination. Fortunately Miss White was
kind, and, sympathizing with the idea of a magazine, allowed the
duplicator to be used in its production, so that Gipsy was able to
strike off six copies, for the First, Second, Lower Third, Upper Third,
Lower Fourth, and Upper Fourth respectively. Each Form undertook to
produce its own cover, the younger children being helped by the drawing
mistress, who was much interested, and allowed a special afternoon to be
devoted to the purpose. The designs were painted on brown paper, and
varied from sprays of flowers to conventional patterns, according to the
taste of the Form, though each bore in large letters the same
inscription: _Briarcroft Juniors' Journal_.

It was a proud day for Gipsy when she completed her arrangements, and
all the six copies were ready in their artistic covers. The contributors
had really done their best in the brief time at their disposal. There
were two or three short stories, an article on pet dogs, some recipes
for sweets and toffee, including Gipsy's favourite American Fudge, and
quite a long page of nature notes, the latter being contributed mostly
by the day girls. Gipsy had not had time to write any book reviews, but
she had enjoyed herself over the answers to correspondents. She had
posted up a notice inviting letters when first the scheme for the
Magazine was accepted, and quite a budget had been delivered at the
"editorial office"--otherwise her school desk. Some were couched in
rather a facetious vein, but she answered them as if they were intended
to be serious, sometimes with a comic result. A correspondent who signed
herself "Honeysuckle" had enquired: "Can you tell me how to stop my feet
from growing any bigger? I take fives in shoes and I am only eleven." To
which Gipsy replied: "You are evidently eating too much, Honeysuckle!
Limit your diet to water and crusts, and abstain from sweets, cakes, and
toffee in any form. You will then probably stop growing at all in any
direction, either up or down."

Gertie Butler, of the Lower Third, had blossomed into poetry, and had
composed an "Ode to the Magazine", the opening lines of which ran:

          "Hail, literary gem of Briarcroft Hall!
           Thou com'st to be a blessing to us all".

The exchange column was voted "ripping", and resulted in the transfer of
several families of white mice, some foreign stamps, a variety of
picture post-cards, and other treasures. The first instalment of Gipsy's
serial, "The Girl Pioneer of Wild Cat Creek", was so thrillingly
exciting that its readers could hardly wait for the second chapter, and
pressed the authoress for details of "what was coming next"; but as
Gipsy had not made up any more, they were obliged to curb their
impatience. Altogether the Magazine was a brilliant success; and if it
lacked anything in composition and grammar, it made that up in other
ways. Miss Poppleton, who examined a copy, expressed her entire
approval, and the teachers greatly encouraged the girls to persevere and
continue this new branch of the Guild. The Seniors affected to ignore
the whole affair.

"But that's just put on," said Hetty Hancock. "They know all about it. I
saw Helen Roper and Doreen Tristram sneak into our classroom yesterday
when no one was there, at dinner-time. The Mag. was lying on Miss
White's desk, and they took it up and began to read it. They simply
shrieked with laughing."

"What cheek! Let them write one of their own then!" exclaimed the
indignant editress. "I'll undertake to say it wouldn't be half as
interesting as ours!"

"Not one ten-millionth part as nice. Ours is just too scrumptiously
ripping!" agreed Hetty.




CHAPTER IX

Gipsy grows Anxious


GIPSY spent the Christmas holidays at Briarcroft. Miss Poppleton went
away to Switzerland, to refresh her tired mind with the winter sports;
but Miss Edith stayed behind, to count linen, and superintend workmen
who were making some alterations in the bathrooms. She and Gipsy managed
to enjoy themselves in a quiet manner, but the latter hailed the return
of her schoolfellows with considerable relief. The house seemed so big
and silent and lonely without its usual lively crew of boarders, and the
dormitory with its empty beds oppressed her. Miss Poppleton came back
more brisk and bustling than ever, and was at once immersed in the
business of interviewing parents and rearranging school affairs, and in
the thousand and one cares that always occupied her at the beginning of
term.

When about ten days had gone by, and Briarcroft had settled down into
its ordinary routine, she sent a message to Gipsy to report herself in
the study. Gipsy obeyed with a feeling of considerable apprehension.
Miss Poppleton's manner towards her, never very gracious, had been
markedly cold since the Christmas holidays. For some reason she was
evidently much out of favour. She tapped more deferentially at the study
door, and entered less confidently than she had done on the morning
after her arrival. A term at Briarcroft had taught her many lessons. The
Principal was seated at her desk, studying an account book, and to judge
from the jerking movements of her mouth, she was in a state of mind
quite the reverse of amiable.

"Gipsy Latimer," she began uncompromisingly, "I've sent for you to
enquire if you've heard anything at all from your father?"

Gipsy shook her head silently. It was such a sore subject that she could
hardly bear to speak about it.

"It's a most extraordinary thing!" commented Miss Poppleton. "Since the
day he left you here, he has never written a line either to me or to
you. I don't like the look of it at all. Did he tell you where he was
going?"

"Back to Cape Town," replied Gipsy briefly.

"Did he leave you any address?"

"No; he said he would be going up-country into a very wild place, but he
would write when he got to the Cape."

"Has he any friends at Cape Town who would know of his whereabouts?"

"Not that I know of."

The barometer of Miss Poppleton's face seemed to fall still lower.

"This won't do at all!" she said, frowning. "When your father brought
you, he paid for you up to Christmas, but no more. Now, the rule of
this school is that fees must be paid in advance at the beginning of
each term. I don't make an exception for anybody. Where are your fees
for this term, I should like to know?--to say nothing of the holidays
you spent here!"

It was such an utterly unanswerable question that Gipsy did not attempt
a reply.

"I had a girl left on my hands like this once before," continued Miss
Poppleton, "and I said then it should never happen again. Have you any
relations in England?"

"Not one!"

"Or friends who could take charge of you?"

"I know absolutely nobody in England."

"Who are your relations, then? Surely you must have some in some portion
of the globe?"

"Not any near ones. We have some cousins in New Zealand, at a farm right
up in the bush."

"Where did your father come from? Hadn't your mother any relations?"

"Father was born in New Zealand, but his grandfather came out from
England. Mother was an American, from Texas, I believe. Her mother was
Spanish. I never heard about her relations. She died when I was a baby,
and we've always been travelling about ever since I can remember."

"Humph! That doesn't look well. Had your father no permanent address,
then, where letters would always be forwarded to him?"

"I never heard him say so."

Gipsy stood with her little brown hands pressed hard together, and her
mouth set tightly while she answered this unwelcome catechism. Miss
Poppleton might have pitied the sad look in the dark eyes, but she went
on bluntly:

"I'm afraid it's only too evident he wants to get rid of the burden of
your education. We've got to trace him somehow. It's all very fine for
him to leave you here and desert you!"

Gipsy's face turned crimson, and the big sob that had been gathering in
her throat nearly choked her for a moment.

"Father would never desert me!" she gasped at last. "He promised
faithfully he'd come back and fetch me. Oh! you don't know Dad, to say
that. I'm afraid something's happened to him--out there!"

She did not tell Miss Poppleton how she had hoped against hope, and lain
awake at night wondering, and searching her mind for any possible
solution of his silence, but she looked such a forlorn little figure
that in spite of herself the Principal slightly relented.

"Well, Gipsy," she said more kindly, "I'm afraid it looks a bad
business. I'm sure you understand that it would be impossible for me to
keep on my school if pupils did not pay their fees. I can't afford to be
kept waiting. In your case, however, we'll let matters stand for awhile,
and see if we hear from your father. In the meantime I might write to
your cousins in New Zealand. It will take three months, though, before I
can get a letter back."

"More," sighed Gipsy. "They only go down to the town once a month for
letters, and not then if the river's in flood. They live in such a wild
place--right up in the bush."

"At any rate they're your relations, and ought to be responsible for
you," snapped Miss Poppleton. "If the worst comes to the worst, I could
send you out to them through the Emigration Society. It's a very awkward
position to be placed in--very awkward indeed. You're absolutely sure
you know of nobody, either in England or at the Cape, who could give
information about your father?"

"No one at all. I didn't know anything about Dad's business. I was at
school, and he used just to come and fetch me for the holidays,"
confessed Gipsy sadly.

Miss Poppleton shut her account book with an annoyed slam.

"Well, there's no further help for it at present. We must see what turns
up. Of course, I can't pretend to keep you here indefinitely. Give me
the address of your cousins in New Zealand, and I will write to them
to-day. That seems the best we can do. The whole thing is most
unfortunate."

Gipsy dictated the address as steadily as she could, then taking
advantage of Miss Poppleton's brief "That will do; you may go now!" she
fled to the most remote corner of her dormitory and sobbed her heart
out. There she was found later on by Miss Edith, who came to put away
clean clothes. Poor Miss Edith was generally torn in two between strict
loyalty to her sister and the promptings of her own kind heart. She knew
the cause of Gipsy's trouble well enough. She sat down beside the
forlorn child, and comforted her as best she could.

"I wish Dad would write! Oh, he can't have forgotten me! I wish I'd
anybody to go to; I haven't a soul nearer than New Zealand!" wailed
Gipsy.

"You mustn't make yourself so miserable, Gipsy dear!" said Miss Edith
nervously. "I'm sure Miss Poppleton will keep you here for a while, and
perhaps your father will write after all. My sister will do everything
that's right--she always does. Oh, don't sob so, child! She'll see that
you're taken care of. Do try to cheer up, that's a dear! You must trust
Miss Poppleton, Gipsy. There, there! You'll feel better now you've had a
good cry. Wash your face in cold water, and take a run round the garden.
It's a good thing it's Saturday!"

Gipsy didn't feel equally confident of Miss Poppleton's benevolence, but
she gave Miss Edith a hug, and took her advice. She had not lost faith
in her father, only his silence made her fear for his welfare. She was
aware of the many dangers of life in the rough mining camps where his
work lay, and shuddered as she remembered his tales of attacks by
desperadoes, skirmishes with natives, or perils of wild beasts. Almost
directly, however, her naturally cheerful and hopeful disposition
reasserted itself. She knew letters sometimes miscarried or were lost,
or perhaps her father might have been ill and unable to write.

"He'll let me hear about him somehow," she said to herself. "I must just
try and be very patient. Dad desert me! Why, the idea's ridiculous. And
I've a feeling I'd know if he was dead. No! He's alive somewhere and
thinking of me, and it will all come right in the end. His very last
words were: 'I'll soon be back to fetch you!' I mustn't let folks at the
school think I don't believe in Dad. That would never do! I'll show them
how I can trust him!"

True to her intention of vindicating her faith in her father, Gipsy,
after the first outburst of tears, took a pride in concealing her
feelings, and preserving at least an outward appearance of calm
confidence. It certainly needed all her courage to face the situation,
for there were several circumstances which rendered it peculiarly
trying. Miss Poppleton, with whom she had never been a favourite,
snapped at her more frequently than before, and was harder to please as
regarded both lessons and conduct. Gipsy often felt she was treated
unfairly, and received more than her due share of blame for any little
occurrence that cropped up.

A great many small things contributed to make her feel her position. Her
morning glass of milk, which all the boarders and some of the day girls
took in the pantry at eleven o'clock, was knocked off, as were all
concerts and lectures where there was a charge for admission. It was not
pleasant, when the other boarders were taken into Greyfield, to have to
stay behind for the sake of the price of a ticket and a tram fare. She
had long ago spent all her pocket-money, and there was no more
forthcoming. Not only was she denied such luxuries as chocolates, but
she was not even able to pay her subscription to the Guild, which, by
the new arrangement, was due at the beginning of each term. The
Committee, who knew the reason and sympathized with her, ignored the
matter; but poor Gipsy, as Secretary, felt her deficiency very keenly
when she made up the accounts. She was a proud, sensitive girl, and the
knowledge that she alone, of the whole Guild, had not rendered her dues
to the Treasurer was a bitter humiliation.

It was not in regard to the Guild alone that she was hampered by lack of
money. During the spring term the girls at Briarcroft were accustomed to
get up a small bazaar in aid of a home for waifs and strays. They were
already beginning to work for it, and Gipsy, who would gladly have
helped, made the unpleasant discovery that it is impossible to make
bricks without straw, or in other words that she had no materials. Each
Form generally took a stall, so one afternoon there was a little
informal meeting of the Upper Fourth, to discuss what contributions
could be relied upon.

"I vote that each girl undertakes to make a certain number of articles;
that would be far the easiest, and then we should know how we stand,"
suggested Alice O'Connor. "We'll draw up a list, and write it down."

"Need we do it quite that way?" said Hetty Hancock. "Wouldn't it be
enough if each promises to do what she can?"

"Why? It's much better to nail people."

"Well, you see, it mightn't suit everybody. There's one girl I know who
perhaps really couldn't undertake to make several things. We don't want
her to feel uncomfortable."

Gipsy was not in the room at that moment, so Hetty was free to give her
hint.

"If you mean Gipsy Latimer, I don't see why we should spoil the bazaar
to spare her feelings!" returned Alice bluntly.

"I don't want to spoil the bazaar. I only thought we might do it some
other way that wouldn't hurt her pride."

"What nonsense! People oughtn't to have such ridiculous pride!"
expostulated Gladys Merriman. "I think Alice's idea is a good one. I'll
vote for it if she proposes it properly."

"But surely you wouldn't like it yourself--" began Hetty.

"Hush! Here's Gipsy!" said Dilys hastily.

Neither Alice nor Gladys bore any special love for Gipsy, and they were
not particularly desirous to spare her the unpleasantness of an open
confession of her inability to make her contribution. Perhaps it was
with a spice of malice that Alice rose immediately and offered her
suggestion.

"Each girl could surely undertake at least three articles--that ought to
be the minimum--and as many more as she's capable of doing," she said in
conclusion.

There was a moment's pause in the room. On the face of it, Alice's
proposal was excellent. Everybody felt it ought to be carried out, but
many shared Hetty's motive in objecting to it. It was Lennie Chapman who
saved the situation.

"I beg to propose an amendment," she put in quickly, "that, instead of
each girl promising things separately, we may be allowed to form
ourselves into working trios. Three of us could promise a dozen articles
between us, to be made just as we like, all stitching at the same piece
of embroidery if the fancy took us--just joint work, in fact. We'd spur
each other on in that way, and get far more finished than if we did it
singly."

"Excellent!" commented Dilys. "Who votes for the amendment?"

It was carried by half the Form, much to Lennie's relief. She and Hetty
promptly proposed to form a trio with Gipsy, and were thus able to
rescue her from rather a difficult position.

"But I haven't even a skein of embroidery silk!" sighed Gipsy afterwards
to them in private.

"Never mind! Hetty and I can get the silks, and you shall do some extra
work to make it square. We shall be exactly quits in that way. You can
do all the painting part, too, on those blotters; you paint far better
than either of us. My flowers are always scrawny, and yours are lovely.
There's an enormous advantage in working threesomes!"

"Yes, for me!" said Gipsy gratefully.

There are some unworthy natures who cannot resist the temptation of
kicking anyone who is down. It was very quickly realized at Briarcroft
that Gipsy was in ill favour at headquarters; and though most of the
girls were sorry for her, with a certain number her changed fortunes
undoubtedly lessened her popularity. Maude Helm never lost an
opportunity of a sneer or a slight, and could sometimes raise a laugh
at Gipsy's expense among the more thoughtless section of the Form. Gipsy
generally responded with spirit, but the gibes hurt all the same.

[Illustration: "GIPSY GENERALLY RESPONDED WITH SPIRIT"]

"When are you going to get some new hair ribbons, Yankee Doodle?" asked
Gladys Merriman one day. "Those red flags of yours are looking rather
dejected."

"The American turkey's losing its top-knot," sniggered Maude tauntingly.
"It doesn't soar up aloft like it used to do! Been a little tamed by the
British lion!"

"If you imagine a turkey to be the crest of the United States, you're a
trifle out," said Gipsy scornfully.

"I'd take to a pigtail if I were you," tittered Maude. "It only needs
one ribbon!"

"If you were me, then I suppose I'd be you--and, yes, it might be
necessary to change my style of hair-dressing," retorted Gipsy, with a
glance at Maude's not too plentiful locks.

Some of the girls giggled, and Cassie Bertram murmured: "Rats' tails,
not pigtails! Or even mouse tails!"

Maude scowled. She had not intended the laugh to be turned against
herself.

"I wouldn't wear limp, faded red bows at any price," she commented,
banging her desk to close the conversation, and stalking from the room.

"That Gipsy Latimer's too conceited altogether! I should like to take
her down a peg," she confided to Gladys, as the pair walked arm-in-arm
round the playground.

"Well, so you do, continually!" said Gladys.

"That's only by the way. She deserves something more for her American
cheek. I'm going to play a trick on her, Gladys. It'll be ever such fun!
Listen!"

The two girls put their heads together, and laughed as Maude whispered
her plan; then they both scuttled up to the empty classroom, and
abstracting Gipsy's atlas from her desk, carried it downstairs to the
lost-property cupboard, and hid it carefully under a pile of books.

"She won't find that in a hurry!" chuckled Maude.

"There'll be a fine to-do when she misses it," said Gladys.

"People who suffer from 'swelled head' just deserve a little wholesome
medicine, to cure them of thinking too much of themselves. Now she's
editor of the Magazine, Yankee Doodle's unbearable, to my mind. There
are others in the Form who can write stories as well as herself."

"Yours about the brigands was lovely!" gushed Gladys obediently.

"Well, I don't boast, but I flatter myself it wasn't the worst in the
Mag. I don't call it fair that everything should be in the hands of one
girl, and she a foreigner, as one might say! I'll talk to you again
about this, Gladys, for I've got an idea I mean to exploit later on.
Come along now, there's the bell!"

That afternoon the Upper Fourth had a lesson with Miss Poppleton on "The
Work of our Great Explorers". The class was held in the lecture hall,
and each girl was required to bring with her an atlas, a blank book for
drawing charts, a notebook, a pencil, and indiarubber. Gipsy's desk was
not always a miracle of neatness, but she understood its apparent
confusion, and could generally lay her hand in a moment upon anything
she wanted. This afternoon, however, she rummaged for her atlas in vain.
She turned books and papers over and over in her futile search, till the
desk was in a chaotic muddle.

"Where's my atlas? Who's had my atlas? It was here yesterday!" she asked
agitatedly.

"Really, Gipsy Latimer, I don't wonder you can't find your things in
such an untidy desk!" remarked Miss White. "You must stay after four
o'clock and put your books in order. Be quick, girls! Ada is waiting.
Are you ready? Then take your places and march!"

Miss White hurried off to give a botany demonstration to the Lower
Fourth, and the Upper Fourth filed downstairs to the lecture hall under
the superintendence of Ada Dawkins, monitress for the time in place of
Doreen Tristram, who was absent with influenza.

As the Form stood waiting for a moment or two in the corridor before
entering the lecture hall, Maude Helm began ostentatiously to count her
belongings.

"Pencil--indiarubber--map book--notebook--and atlas. I've not forgotten
anything!" she said in a particularly audible whisper.

Ada Dawkins heard, and it reminded her of her duties. She was anxious to
show herself a zealous monitress.

"Have you all brought your things?" she enquired authoritatively. "Face
about into line, and hold them out so that I can see."

The single file of girls wheeled round into a row, each exhibiting what
she carried. Ada passed along like a commanding officer inspecting a
regiment, and immediately pounced upon Gipsy.

"Where's your atlas, Gipsy Latimer? How is it you're the only one to
forget? Been taken from your desk? What nonsense! Things don't lose
themselves. If you were tidy, you'd be able to find your books. No, I'm
not going to accept any excuses. You all know what you want for the
lesson, and it's your own fault if you come without it. Lose two order
marks for leaving your atlas behind, and a third for arguing! Will you
never learn that the monitresses have some authority here?"

Very much snubbed, poor Gipsy went into the lecture hall, to be further
rebuked by Miss Poppleton later on for the lack of her atlas. It was
only after a long hunt that she discovered her missing book in the
lost-property cupboard.

"I've a very shrewd guess who put it there, too!" she remarked to Hetty
Hancock. "Maude and Gladys were giggling something to Alice O'Connor,
and they all looked at me and simply screamed."

"You don't mean to say they've played a low, stingy trick like that upon
you?"

"I'm almost sure."

"Then they're mean sneaks! If ever I catch them at such a thing again,
I'll spiflicate them!"




CHAPTER X

The Millionairess


"HEARD the news?" enquired Barbara Kendrick one afternoon towards the
end of February, lounging into the Juniors' recreation room with a
would-be casual air, and whistling a jaunty tune which she fondly hoped
was expressive of superior indifference to news of any kind. Two girls
sitting reading by the fire closed their books, and three at the table,
who were in the agonies of three separate games of patience, temporarily
laid aside their cards.

"No; what's up? Anything decent?" asked Norah Bell.

Barbara strolled leisurely to the fireplace, and spread her hands to the
blaze. Being a member of the Third, and having a most interesting piece
of information to communicate, she did not intend to make it too cheap,
and wished to excite the curiosity of the Fourth Form girls before she
vouchsafed to enlighten them.

"Oh! something I heard just now downstairs. I was passing the Seniors'
door, and Allie Spencer came out and told me."

"Well?"

"She said it concerned your Form."

"Why us particularly?"

"What's going to happen?"

"Is it anything worth knowing, or not?"

"Really, that depends how you take it," said Barbara, enjoying herself.

"Look here, kiddie, you get on and tell us!"

"Gee up, stupid!"

Barbara paused, prolonging for one more blissful moment the joy of
tantalizing her audience; but in that moment her chance was lost, for
the door opened suddenly, and in burst Hetty Hancock, like a tempestuous
north wind, proclaiming without either hesitation or reserve the
important tidings.

"I say, isn't it a joke? There's actually a new boarder coming
to-morrow."

"New girls seem to choose odd times to come nowadays," said Lennie. "Why
didn't she wait till the half term--it's only about two weeks off?"

"Perhaps she's been shipwrecked, like I was," suggested Gipsy.

"Not a bit of it! She doesn't come from far. Her home's only about ten
miles off, I believe. Her name's Leonora Parker."

"Parker! Parker! Surely not the Parkers of Ribblestone Abbey?" commented
Norah Bell.

"I really don't know."

"But I know!" put in Barbara Kendrick, delighted to score at last by her
superior information. "They are the Parkers of Ribblestone Abbey."

"Then they're most enormously rich people."

"Yes, millionaires! And Leonora's the only child."

"So she's an heiress!"

"Rather--an heiress of millions."

"You might call her a millionairess, in fact," chuckled Gipsy.

"Good for you, Yankee Doodle!"

"I say, it's rather a joke her coming here, isn't it?" said Norah Bell.
"A millionaire's daughter! I wonder what she'll be like?"

"Sure to have the best of everything," said Daisy Scatcherd; "the
loveliest dresses and the most expensive hats."

"She won't be able to wear anything but her school 'sailor' here!"
commented Dilys. "You needn't imagine she'll come decked out with
diamonds, Daisy."

"She'll have absolutely unlimited pocket-money."

"And be able to buy chocolates and walnut creams by the pound!" added
Barbara enviously.

"Wonder what Form and what dormitory she'll be in?"

"Well, at any rate I shan't be the last new girl," said Gipsy. "I'm glad
to retire from the position."

"Yes, Yankee Doodle. Your little nose will be quite put out of joint."

"A millionairess at Briarcroft! Doesn't it sound magnificent?"

"What a set of sillies you all are!" said Dilys. "I'm not going to make
any fuss over Leonora, even if she can buy chocolates by the pound. I'll
wait and see how I like her before I give my opinion. She mayn't be nice
at all."

In spite of Dilys's attitude of aloofness the others could not help
anticipating with the keenest eagerness the advent of a fresh fellow
boarder. The personality of the "millionairess", as they nicknamed her,
was a subject of much speculation, and a whole row of noses was
flattened against the panes of the Juniors' sitting-room window to
witness her arrival. The glimpse the girls got of her was distinctly
disappointing. She wore a tweed coat and skirt, and the orthodox
Briarcroft "sailor", with its narrow band and badge.

"I thought she'd have come in a velvet coat and a big picture hat full
of feathers!" said Barbara, with rueful surprise in her tone.

"I never dreamt she'd drive up in only a station cab!" said Norah Bell.
"Why didn't she arrive in her own motor?"

When Leonora was introduced by Miss Poppleton to her schoolfellows at
tea-time, she certainly did not answer the expectations which had been
formed of her. She was short and rather squat, with heavy features and
nondescript eyes and hair.

"A most stodgy-looking girl," whispered Hetty. "I don't take to her at
all. She's not one half as nice as Gipsy. By the by, where is Gipsy? I
haven't seen her since four o'clock."

Gipsy came in just then, and took her seat at the table, looking cold
and rather dejected.

"Where've you been?" whispered Hetty.

"Arranging my new room. Didn't you know? I've been moved out of our
dormitory to make way for Leonora. Miss Edith carried all my things
upstairs this morning."

"How sickening! Is that girl to have your bed?"

"Of course."

"And where are you put?"

"In that little box-room on the top floor. The boxes are all piled at
one end, to make room for a camp bed."

"You don't mean it? Well, I didn't think Poppie was capable of such a
horrid piece of nastiness."

"There's no other place for me at present. I may be extremely grateful
to have that attic, so I'm informed. You forget I'm a charity girl!"
said Gipsy bitterly.

Poor Gipsy was smarting sorely from a brief conversation she had had
with Miss Poppleton. The Principal had reminded her in very plain terms
of her dependent position, and had questioned and cross-questioned her
as to whether she could remember any possible clue by which her father's
whereabouts might be traced. Gipsy had already told all she knew, so the
fresh catechism only seemed to her like the probing of an old wound. She
felt so utterly helpless, so unable to offer any suggestions, or any way
out of the difficulty. But she stuck tenaciously to her faith in her
father.

"Dad promised to come back for me, and he will!" she said, with a gleam
in her dark eyes.

"I'm afraid I know more of the world than you do, Gipsy, and it looks
bad--very bad indeed!" replied Miss Poppleton, with a dismal shake of
her head. "Some men are only too anxious to cast off their
responsibilities."

Even Miss Edith, kind as ever though she was, seemed to take a gloomy
view of the case.

"I'm sorry, dear--very sorry!" she said, as she introduced Gipsy to her
attic bedroom. "I don't like to have to turn you out of your
dormitory--and I'm sure Miss Poppleton doesn't either! But, you see,
we're obliged to put Leonora there--and there's no other place but this.
If your father hadn't behaved so queerly, of course it would have been
different. I'm very sorry, Gipsy--it's hard on a girl to be left like
this. I wonder he could have the heart to do it. And it's hard on my
sister too. She has to think of ways and means. Dear, dear! what an
amount of trouble there is in the world! And you're young to have to
begin to feel it. There! I've made you as comfortable as I can here,
child. After all, you'll be downstairs most of your time."

When Miss Edith had gone away, Gipsy sat down on the one chair in her
room, with a blank, wretched feeling that was beyond the relief of
tears. It was not that she minded a camp bed in the least, and she had
often slept in far rougher places than her new attic; but the change
seemed the outward and visible sign of her forlorn circumstances. Both
Miss Poppleton's uncompromising remarks and Miss Edith's well-meant
sympathy hurt her equally, for both expressed the same doubt of her
father's honour. Not until that afternoon had Gipsy thoroughly realized
how utterly alone she was in the world. Every other girl in the school
had home and parents and relations, while she had nobody at all except a
father who had--no, not forgotten her! that she would never allow; but
for some strange, mysterious reason had been kept from communicating
with her.

Gipsy had too generous a nature to bear Leonora any grudge for having
taken her place in the dormitory. She even volunteered to give some
valuable hints to the newcomer, knowing by experience the thorns that
were likely to beset her path. Leonora, however, did not seem at all
afflicted by many things which would have been most trying to Gipsy. She
went her own way stolidly, without reference to her schoolfellows'
comments, good or bad. This attitude did not satisfy Briarcroft
standards, and by the time she had been there a week she had been
weighed in the balance of public opinion and found decidedly wanting.
She was the exact opposite of what the boarders had expected. Far from
being liberally disposed, and inclined to spend her superabundant
pocket-money for the good of her companions, she appeared anxious to
take advantage on the other side. She readily accepted all the
chocolates and caramels that were offered her, but made no return; and
if she bought any sweets she ate them herself in privacy. She
appropriated other girls' hockey sticks, books, or fountain pens
unblushingly, but had always an excuse if anyone wished to sample her
possessions.

"She's the meanest thing I ever met in my life," said Lennie Chapman
indignantly one day. "She borrowed my penknife three times this morning,
and when I asked her what had become of her own, she said it was such a
nice one, it seemed a pity to use it."

"She spoilt my stylo. yesterday," complained Norah Bell, "and she never
even offered to buy me another."

"She's greedy, too," said Daisy Scatcherd, swelling the list of
Leonora's crimes. "When I handed her my box of candied fruits, she
picked out the very biggest!"

"How piggie!"

"And yet she's plenty of pocket-money."

"Oh, yes, heaps, as much as she likes to ask for."

"I don't see what's the use of being a millionairess if you're a miser
at the same time!" remarked Dilys scornfully.

A girl who receives everything and dispenses nothing is never popular
among her companions, so it was scarcely surprising that Leonora won no
favour. A few mercenary spirits, encouraged by the reputation of her
millions, made tentative advances of friendship, but rapidly withdrew
them on the discovery that it was likely to prove a one-sided bargain.

"I wouldn't be friends with her if she owned the Bank of England!"
declared Lennie. "I think she's too contemptible for words."

"By the by, girls," said Dilys, "it's Miss Edith's birthday on the 1st
of March. Aren't we Junior boarders going to get up anything in the way
of a present? I know the Seniors are giving her one."

"Rather!" said Fiona Campbell. "I'd stretch a point for Miss Edie if I
was on the verge of bankruptcy. I vote we open a subscription list. I'm
good for half a crown."

"I expect most of us are," replied Lennie, taking paper and pencil to
write down names. "Except Leonora Parker!" she added with a laugh.

"Don't you think she'll give?"

"Not generously."

"Oh, she'll have to!"

"I declare, we'll make her for once!" said Dilys indignantly. "She
shan't sneak out of everything."

"I don't see how you're going to make her."

"The millionairess won't fork out unless she feels inclined, I can tell
you that, my child."

"Just you leave it to me. I'll manage it by fair means or foul."

"Won't a subscription list make it rather awkward for Gipsy? You know
she can't give anything," whispered Hetty Hancock to Dilys.

"Not at all, the way I'm going to do it. I'll take care of Gipsy, you'll
see--make it easy for her, but nick in Leonora for more than she
bargains."

"You're cleverer than I thought you were."

"Ah, you haven't plumbed the depths of my genius yet, my good child. Now
when Leonora----"

"Hush! Here she comes."

The millionairess walked to the fireplace, and stood leaning over the
high fender, sharpening a cherished stump of lead pencil.

"We're getting up a subscription," began Dilys, opening the attack
without further delay. "It's to buy a present for Miss Edith's birthday.
You'd like us to put your name down, wouldn't you?"

"Well, I'm not sure," replied Leonora cautiously. "What are most of you
giving?"

"Half a crown," replied a chorus of voices.

"I've been at Briarcroft such a short time," demurred Leonora. "Perhaps
it would really be better if the present came from you, who are all old
pupils."

"There's something in that," said Dilys. "Both you and Gipsy Latimer
have only been here a little while, so it would be more appropriate,
after all, to leave you both out of it, and let it be an old girls'
gift. Lennie, do you hear? You're not to put down either Gipsy or
Leonora, however much they beg and pray."

"Right-oh!" said Lennie rather sulkily. She thought that Dilys, in her
delicacy for Gipsy, was sparing Leonora too much. But Dilys gave her a
withering look, which so plainly implied: "Trust me to mind my own
business" that she began hastily to hum a tune.

"Perhaps you'd like to give Miss Edith something on your own account,"
suggested Dilys craftily to the millionairess.

"Exactly. It would be far better than my joining with the rest of you,"
agreed Leonora, jumping at such an easy way out.

"Tell me what it's to be, then, and we'll ask Miss Lindsay to order it."

"Oh! I can get it myself, thanks."

"We're not allowed. All shopping has to be done through Miss Lindsay. I
should suggest a book."

"I dare say that would do. There was one of yours that Miss Edith was
looking at yesterday."

"Do you mean my small 'Christina Rossetti'? All right. Lennie, put down
that Leonora Parker wants to order a copy of Christina Rossetti's
poems."

Thus cornered, Leonora was obliged to consent. Dilys's little book was a
shilling edition--not ruinous, certainly, to the purse strings; so
comparing that with a subscription of half a crown she considered she
had escaped cheaply.

"You've let her off too easily," grumbled Lennie afterwards, as she
added up her list. "It's a shame the richest girl in the class should
give the least."

"I haven't finished with her yet, my friend--I've only begun!" chuckled
Dilys. "Let me go to Miss Lindsay."

Dilys had a deep-laid scheme, which she considered too good to be
divulged at present, but which she hoped would be the undoing of
Leonora. She went to the mistresses' room with the subscription list,
and handed the collection of half-crowns to Miss Lindsay.

"Would you please order a Russia leather blotter for Miss Edith?" she
said. "We've decided on that, unless you know of anything she'd like
better. Leonora Parker would like to give her a separate present, quite
on her own account."

"Indeed?" said Miss Lindsay, who had not yet grasped the new pupil's
economical tendencies. "Then I suppose she wishes it to be something
handsome?"

"She mentioned a copy of Christina Rossetti's poems, but she said
nothing about the price," returned Dilys stolidly.

"Christina Rossetti's poems? Then she must surely mean that beautiful
illustrated edition that we were talking about at tea-time yesterday. I
remember Miss Edith said how immensely she would like to see it. No
doubt Leonora made a mental note of it. It was a kind thought of hers,
which Miss Edith will appreciate, I am sure."

"Is the edition expensive?" enquired Dilys casually.

"Fifteen shillings net, but of course to Leonora that is a mere
nothing--no more than sixpence to most girls. Still, perhaps I'd better
send for her and ask her."

"She's having her music lesson," put in Dilys quickly.

"The order ought to go off at once, if we are to have the presents in
time for the 1st of March," said Miss Lindsay, glancing at the clock. "I
must write now to catch the post. I think I may venture to send
Leonora's commission without consulting her. She must certainly mean the
illustrated edition, and in her case we really need not trouble to
consider the question of the price."

Dilys went away, rubbing her hands with satisfaction.

"Serves you right, Leonora Parker!" she chuckled to herself. "Your
little effort at economy is going to cost you rather more than you
bargained for. Miss Lindsay's an absolute trump. I hate mean people who
hoard up their money and keep it all for themselves."

She confided her success to the others, but exacted a promise of strict
secrecy.

"We'll simply say Miss Lindsay has sent for the book," she advised. "I
believe Leonora would be capable of countermanding the order if she knew
the amount of the bill. It will be a surprise for her later on."

"And a ripping joke for us!"

"It's Miss Lindsay's fault, though. She named the edition."

"Oh, yes, of course! We understand that, my dear girl!"

The presents arrived by return of post, just in time for Miss Edith's
birthday--a splendid blotter of delicious-smelling leather, and the
edition of Christina Rossetti's poems, a large and handsome volume full
of beautiful illustrations. Miss Lindsay brought them into the Juniors'
sitting-room, and showed them to the delighted girls.

"It was so nice of you, Leonora dear, to think of giving such a lovely
gift to Miss Edith all on your own account," she remarked; "so
thoughtful to have fixed upon the very thing she wanted. You meant this
edition, of course? I knew I could hardly be mistaken. Miss Edith will
be particularly pleased that a new girl should show such appreciation.
The pictures are perfect gems. We'll wrap the book up again in its
various papers, and you must hide it carefully away until to-morrow.
Would you like to give me the fifteen shillings now, or will Miss
Poppleton stop it out of your allowance?"

Leonora's face was a study. Blank amazement struggled with disgust, and
for a moment she seemed almost tempted to deny all responsibility for
having given the order. Pride, however, at the sight of the sneer at
the corners of Dilys Fenton's mouth, came to her rescue. She knew the
girls had tricked her, and she was determined not to afford them the
satisfaction of an open triumph.

"Thank you very much, Miss Lindsay, for getting the book," she replied
calmly. "I'll give you the money now, please. I'm glad it's the edition
Miss Edith wants," and taking her parcel, she sailed from the room,
without deigning to glance at the others.

"Done her this time!" chuckled Dilys. "It'll do her good to shell out
for once."

"She took it awfully well, though! Perhaps on the whole she wasn't
altogether sorry. Miss Edie's such a dear, anyone would want to give her
nice things who'd got the money," sighed Gipsy, whose own offering was
limited to a little pen-and-ink drawing of the house.

"She's not so bad on the whole, though she isn't liberal in the way of
sweets," remarked Daisy Scatcherd.

"You greedy pig!" said Dilys. "We don't want her to keep us provided
with chocolates. As long as she's fair, that's all I care about. I think
it's sickening to try and truckle to her because she's so rich. If you
wanted to get anything out of her, I'm glad you were disappointed. 'Give
and take' and 'Share and share alike' are the best mottoes for school."

"Thanks for the sermon!" said Daisy sarcastically.

"I don't care if you do call it preaching!" retorted Dilys. "When first
Leonora came, some of you made such a ridiculous fuss over her, I was
quite disgusted. A girl ought to be judged on her own merits, not by
what her father's got. If she shows herself ready to take a fair part in
everything, and be of some service to the school, then I'll approve of
her, and not till then."

"Hear, hear!" cried Hetty Hancock.




CHAPTER XI

Gipsy turns Champion


EACH Form at Briarcroft had its own teacher, but in addition there were
a certain number of visiting masters and mistresses who came out from
Greyfield to give lessons at the school. A few were popular, some were
tolerated, and one or two were cordially disliked. Among those who had
the ill fortune to encounter strong opposition was Fraeulein Hochmeyer,
the singing mistress. She was a most conscientious teacher and a clever
musician, but so intensely German in both accent and methods that she
offended the British susceptibilities of her pupils, and inspired more
ridicule than respect. Poor Fraeulein meant so well, it was really very
hard that her efforts did not meet with better results. She treated her
classes exactly as she would have dealt with similar ones in Germany;
but what might have pleased apple-cheeked, pig-tailed Gretchens did not
at all suit the taste of the Briarcroft-ites, particularly the members
of the Lower School. They refused even to smile at her heavy Teutonic
jokes, mocked her accent, rebelled at the numerous German songs they
were expected to learn, whispered, giggled, and talked during the
lesson, and generally made it extremely difficult for her to keep
order. In vain she alternately pleaded, conciliated, flustered, fumed,
and even threatened. The girls would not behave seriously, and though
they did not deign to laugh at her attempts at humour, they treated her
as a joke. As she was decidedly stout and rosy they nicknamed her
"German Sausage", and made fun of her almost to her face.

A part of Fraeulein Hochmeyer's system of voice production which her
pupils much detested was learning the proper position of the mouth. It
was of course a most important and necessary part of the lesson, but
owing to the way it was enforced the silly girls turned it all into
ridicule. Fraeulein would stand upon the platform giving a practical
demonstration to show how the lips must be well drawn back, revealing
the teeth parted about the third of an inch, so as to offer no
obstruction to the free passage of the voice; and she would require her
pupils to stand at attention with their mouths thus fixed before
beginning the preliminary exercises.

"We look like a set of grinning imbeciles!" complained Lennie Chapman,
"with Sausage for the arch-lunatic of us all. I wish to goodness we had
a decent English teacher! I don't like these foreign ways."

"You'd like it still less if you were turned into a pattern pupil like
me!" grumbled Gipsy. "I hate making an exhibition of myself."

Gipsy, being an apt copyist, was able to set her mouth at exactly the
right angle, and in consequence her approving teacher would frequently
beckon her on to the platform with the invitation:

"Dear friendt, com here and show ze ozers how you do open ze mouz."

The letters "th" were an impossibility to Fraeulein's German tongue, and
the girls giggled continually at the "z's" that replaced them. Gipsy was
not at all proud of being forced to set an example to the class, and
would ascend the platform with an ill grace, and look the reverse of
flattered at the encouraging pats that were bestowed upon her shoulders.
Really Fraeulein had the kindest heart in the world, and tried, in her
heavy fashion, to be on excellent terms with her pupils, but she did not
in the least comprehend the mind of the British schoolgirl.

"She treats us exactly as if we were kindergarten babies!" sneered Hetty
Hancock. "I don't know how German girls of our age would enjoy her silly
jokes, but I think she's a rotter!"

"And she's so sentimental!" hinnied Daisy Scatcherd. "I nearly had a fit
when she began to troll out that love song, with her hand laid
touchingly on her heart."

"That sort of rubbish may go down in the Fatherland, but it doesn't
here."

The girls had waxed restive at many of the _Lieder_ which they were
obliged to learn, but when Fraeulein turned up one morning with a volume
of songs of her own composition, their discontent verged towards mutiny.

"Ze original vords are, of course, in German," explained Fraeulein, "but
I have had a translation made for you by a friendt of mine, and it is
sehr gut. Ze first it is a cradle song. Now, I ask has any girl in ze
class got at home a leetle, leetle brozer or sister?"

"I have," volunteered Mary Parsons bluntly. "A brother."

"And how old?"

"Six months."

"Ach! Zat is beautiful! You shall sing zis song to ze leetle baby in ze
cradle, vile you rock him gently, gently, till he sleep!" and Fraeulein
gazed ecstatically at Mary, as if calling up a mental picture of her
sisterly attention.

"He'd soon squall if I did!" grunted Mary to her neighbour, who exploded
audibly.

"You, who are not so all-fortunate as to have a baby in ze home, must
sing it to ze child of a neighbour," went on Fraeulein, evidently
determined that the value of the lullaby should receive a practical
trial.

"And what are we boarders to do?" enquired Lennie Chapman ironically.

"Sing it to the cat!" whispered Hetty, whereat the bystanders tittered.

"You've stumped her there!" murmured Fiona.

Fraeulein certainly for a moment looked a little at a loss, but she soon
recovered her presence of mind.

"Vait till ze holidays, zen you sall see!" she returned with an engaging
smile. "I shall now sing von or two of ze lieder to you, to show you vat
zey are like."

The music of the songs was beautiful, that was allowed by even the most
unappreciative of the girls. There was a joyous lilt and a true melody
about them that put them high in the rank of composition, and the
accompaniments played with Fraeulein's delicate touch were harmonious and
suitable. The words, unfortunately, were childish in the extreme, and
more fit for youngsters of five than girls of eleven to fourteen. Even
the members of the Lower Third turned up supercilious noses. They were
further marred by Fraeulein's accent, and when she unctuously rendered

          "Hush, my baby, sweetest, best,
           Little mousie's gone to rest",

as

          "Hosh, my baby, sveetest, best,
           Leetle moozie's gone to rest",

a ripple of mirth passed round the class.

Having gone through one or two as specimens, Fraeulein selected the
lullaby and set the girls to work at it. I am afraid that, instead of
doing their best, they only sang in mockery. Fiona Campbell made a
pretence cradle of her arm, and rocked it for Mary Parsons' benefit; and
Gipsy put an amount of sham sentiment into her execution calculated to
convulse the others. At the end of the lesson the class trooped away in
a state of frank rebellion.

"Really, this is too much!" protested Dilys Fenton. "We can't be
expected to sing her silly songs."

"It's just baby nonsense!" exclaimed Norah Bell.

"The music's pretty," said Joyce Adamson.

"Oh, yes, the music--but look at the words!" scoffed Gipsy, turning over
the pages of the new copies. "Did you ever see anything so absolutely
idiotic in all your life as this?

          "'Old hare's little son
           Is up to good fun,
           And skipping and prancing
           He's bent upon dancing.
           Just see how he spins
           On his dear little pins!'"

"It's an affront to ask us to learn such rubbish!" declared the outraged
girls. "We shall really have to speak to Poppie about it."

"Yes, a good idea! Let's complain to Poppie."

"If she'll listen."

"She's not generally so ready to hear our grievances."

"Well, something will have to be done, for we can't go on week after
week with this baby stuff. It's like turning back to one's ABC. I
declare we'd more sensible songs when I was in the Kindergarten."

"I'll take my book home, and perhaps I can get my mother to write a
letter to Poppie about it," suggested Mary Parsons.

"You! Why, you're the one who's to sit serenading over your infant
brother's cradle!"

"Perhaps Sausage will bring a doll to school next week and make us
practise with it in turns! She'd be quite capable of it," sniggered
Maude Helm.

Nobody plucked up sufficient courage to interview Miss Poppleton on the
subject. It is one thing for schoolgirls to growl, and quite another to
venture to remonstrate with the Principal about the lessons. Miss
Poppleton was not an approachable person, and except in extreme cases
her pupils did not venture to get up deputations. Gipsy voiced the
opinions of the class, however, in airing their grievances to Miss
Edith, and gave her an animated account of their special bug-bear, the
new song book.

"Oh, dear me, Gipsy! I'm very sorry!" said Miss Edith, puckering up her
forehead anxiously. "I'm afraid you girls behave very badly in the
singing class. You ought to have more respect for Fraeulein Hochmeyer. I
hope Mary Parsons' mother won't write about it. It puts Miss Poppleton
in a most awkward position when parents make complaints. We don't want
to change our singing mistress, Fraeulein's system of voice production is
so very good. She was a pupil of Randegger, I believe. There's no other
first-class teacher in Greyfield either except Mr. Johnson, and he
doesn't take half the trouble with his pupils that Fraeulein does. I wish
you girls would try to appreciate her more."

Gipsy screwed up her mouth and looked humorous in reply.

"But she's a beautiful character, if you only knew!" urged Miss Edith.
"She's so simple and kind-hearted; and she works so hard! She has an
invalid father to keep. He's quite dependent on her, I believe. They
live in lodgings in Greyfield. I'm sure I'm often sorry for her, going
about to her pupils in all weathers. It's too bad of you girls to make
such fun of her! She's a stranger in a strange land, poor thing, with no
friends here, and her living to make. Girls are a thoughtless set, as
I've found out long ago. You might try to have a little more
consideration for her, Gipsy. Just imagine yourself in her place, and
fancy you were teaching a class of German girls! Yes, as I said before,
I'm sorry for Fraeulein Hochmeyer. She has a hard time of it."

Gipsy said nothing, but she retired with ample food for thought. It had
never struck her before to take the view of Fraeulein that Miss Edith had
just presented. The little foreign peculiarities and eccentricities had
excited her mirth, but she had quite missed the sterling good qualities
that lay underneath them. "'A stranger in a strange land, with no
friends here'--I know what that means!" muttered Gipsy to herself. "It's
brave of her to work to keep her father! Don't I just wish I--" but here
she sighed, for the unuttered wish seemed so entirely hopeless and
futile.

After revolving the matter carefully, Gipsy made up her mind that
Fraeulein Hochmeyer deserved to be helped instead of hindered.

"Though how I'm to do it when she insists on forcing those absurd baby
songs upon us, I can't tell. Stop! I've an idea. Oh, I don't know
whether I can, but I mean to have a jolly good try! No time like the
present. I've half an hour before tea." And furnishing herself with
pencil and paper, she ran up to her attic, and was soon puckering her
brows in the agonies of composition. As the result of that and several
other half-hours of work, she covered two pages of foolscap; then,
seeking out Miss Edith, she unfolded her scheme and begged for help.

"I'm afraid you'll think it fearful cheek of me," she began, "but you
see the trouble at present in the singing class is that we all abominate
those silly little songs. They really sound foolish for girls of our
age. Of course Fraeulein's composed them herself, and the tunes are very
nice. Do you think she'd mind changing the words? It wouldn't matter to
her what we were singing so long as the music was the same, would it?
But it would make all the difference to us. I made up a few verses that
go with the tunes just as well. They're here, if you don't mind looking
at them," and Gipsy modestly unfolded her manuscript. "This one's
instead of

          "'Old hare's little son
           Is up to good fun.'

I've called it 'The End of the Term'

          "'Now classes are done
           And vacation's begun,
           Of fun and of leisure
           We'll have our full measure.
           For it's hip, hip, hooray
           For a long holiday!

          "'So to lessons goodbye,
           While to pleasure we fly.
           No rules now need bind us,
           All care's cast behind us.
           For it's hip, hip, hooray
           For a long holiday!'"

Then there's one instead of that dreadful

          "'Little Freddie had run to his nurse,
           Because his poor headache was worse,'"

continued Gipsy. "I've called it 'Briarcroft'.

          "'There's a school near the edge of the fell,
           That all of us girls know full well,
           For at Briarcroft Hall
           There's a place for us all,
           And the tale of its fame we would tell.

_Chorus_

          "'So hurrah! for the dear old School!
           We'll make it a general rule
           That we Briarcroft-ites
           Shall stand up for its rights,
           And be true to the dear old School!

          "'There are teachers we love and revere,
           And customs and ways we hold dear.
           Give a clap for each one,
           And a cheer when you've done,
           For all who have worked with us here.

_Chorus_

          "'So hurrah! for the dear old School!
           We'll make it a general rule
           That we Briarcroft-ites
           Shall stand up for its rights,
           And be true to the dear old School!'"

"Very creditable, Gipsy. Really not at all bad," commented Miss Edith.

"I know they're not up to much," said Gipsy apologetically, "but oh!
Miss Edith, I believe the girls would much rather sing them than the
other words. They're about the school, you see. I daren't ask Fraeulein
myself; do you think you could?" and Gipsy turned quite red at the
boldness of her own suggestion.

"It might be a good idea. Give me the paper, and I'll see what I can
do."

"Oh, thanks so much! I hope Fraeulein won't be offended."

Miss Edith's gentle tact could often accomplish things where other
measures might have failed. Nobody ever heard how she explained the
situation and persuaded Fraeulein Hochmeyer to adopt the alterations, but
before the next singing lesson all the obnoxious song books were
collected and Gipsy's versions, neatly printed by hand on slips of
paper, were pasted over the old words of the two songs in question.

"I hear you not like to sing about hares and babies?" commented
Fraeulein. "So! It must be all about school? Yes. You have among you von
who can write in verse" (nodding cheerily to the abashed Gipsy). "My
friendt, you shall make for us some more verses to suit ze ozer songs!"

Having determined to act as Fraeulein's champion, Gipsy tried her utmost
to sway popular opinion in favour of the luckless singing mistress. It
was a far harder task, though, than she had anticipated, and put her
powers of leadership to a severe test. It had been easy enough to induce
the Juniors to stand up for their own rights, but it was considerably
more difficult to make them realize anybody else's claims to
consideration.

"Do let's be nice to her!" pleaded Gipsy. "She's really a very decent
sort on the whole. She can't help being a foreigner and talking with a
queer accent."

"Why, you were the first to make fun of her last week," objected some of
the girls.

"I know, but it was rather horrid. Her story's quite romantic, don't you
think?"

"Can't see much romance about our homely German Sausage!" giggled Daisy
Scatcherd.

"Put a bunch of forget-me-nots in her hair, and she'll look a heroine!"
tittered Norah Bell.

"Yankee Doodle, when you ride a hobby you ride it to death! What's
induced you to take such a sudden and violent affection for the
Sausage?"

"You'll be standing perennially on the platform now, holding your teeth
like a dentist's advertisement, to show us how to 'open ze mouz'!"

"I wish you'd revise the schoolbooks and cut out the difficult parts!"

"Go on! Rag me as much as you like. I don't care!" retorted Gipsy
sturdily.

"I've brought this picture of a sausage," piped one of the smaller
girls. "I'm going to pin it on to the piano. She knows we call her
'Sausage'! She'll be in such a rage!"

"You little horror!" said Gipsy, seizing the picture and tearing it into
shreds before the eyes of its enraged owner.

On the whole, though her championship was treated as a joke, Gipsy's
influence had a beneficial effect, and the general behaviour in the
singing class began steadily to improve. Her Briarcroft songs were
appreciated, and the girls sang them lustily and trolled out the chorus
with vigour. The tunes were very catchy and bright, and everybody seemed
constantly to be humming them, in season or out of season.

"Your 'Hurrah! for the dear old School!' has got in my brain, Yankee
Doodle," said Mary Parsons. "It haunts me all day long, and I can't get
rid of it."

"We'll sing it in the lecture hall on the last day of the term. Poppie'd
be quite flattered," said Hetty Hancock.

"With a special cheer for Fraeulein Hochmeyer, then!" added Gipsy.




CHAPTER XII

A Spartan Maiden


THE Spring Term was passing rapidly, and Gipsy had now been nearly six
months at Briarcroft. It felt a very, very long time to her since the
first evening when she had introduced herself in so sprightly a fashion
to her fellow boarders, and had given them a graphic account of the
shipwreck. The old Gipsy of last October and the new Gipsy of the
present March seemed like two different people, with a whole world of
experience to divide them. The well-conducted regime of Briarcroft had
had its due effect, and had considerably toned down her unconventional
Colonial ways; while the trouble through which she was passing, like all
seasons of adversity, had made her older and more thoughtful than
before. There was still no news of any kind from her father, and no
answer had yet been received from the cousins in New Zealand. Miss
Poppleton's manner towards Gipsy hardened a little more each week that
mail day arrived and brought no solution of the problem where her school
fees were to come from. At present her attitude was that of grim
acceptance of a most unwelcome burden. She was not actively unkind, and
no doubt thought she was behaving very generously in keeping Gipsy at
Briarcroft at all, but in a variety of small ways she made the girl feel
the humiliation of her position.

To poor Gipsy the difficulties appeared to accumulate more and more. The
clothes which her father had bought for her in Liverpool were fast
wearing out, and there seemed not the slightest prospect of renewing any
of them. In a school where the girls were always well, if simply
dressed, it was not pleasant to be the only one in worn skirts,
washed-out blouses, patched boots, mended gloves, and faded hair
ribbons. Gipsy had never before been stinted in either clothing or
pocket-money, and it hurt her pride sorely. But in spite of her shabby
attire she looked a distinguished little figure, with her straight,
upright habit of carriage, and quick alertness of manner. The sadness in
her dark eyes gave her a new dignity, and though a few girls might pass
ill-natured remarks about her clothes, her general prestige in the
school remained the same. There was an individuality about Gipsy which
marked her out, and raised her above the ordinary level. She was full of
original ideas, and had a persuasive way of stating her views that
invariably won her a following. The girls were becoming accustomed to
consult her on any important topic, and tacitly if not openly regarded
her as the Captain of the Lower School. With some the fact that she was
"down on her luck" invested her with a flavour of romance, more
especially as she was very reserved on the subject.

"I never dare ask Gipsy a word about her father," said Hetty Hancock.
"She shuts up like an oyster if one throws out the faintest hint."

"Do you think she still believes in him?" queried Mary Parsons.

"Rather! And I admire her for it. She's shown splendid spirit all this
time, and never once given in. She's a real Spartan."

"Yes, Gipsy's as game as can be," commented Dilys. "She never looks
beaten, however hard Poppie snubs her, and Poppie's just abominable
sometimes."

"I'm often dying to help Gipsy," said Hetty. "But one can't help her.
She'd be desperately offended if one offered to lend her pocket-money,
or anything."

"You'd better not try! No, I believe Gipsy's pride wouldn't let her
borrow so much as a yard of hair ribbon, however badly she needed it."

"Rather different from Leonora, who borrows everything she can persuade
people to lend her."

"Don't speak to me of Leonora! I rue the day she came into our
dormitory. She snores at night till I have to get up and shake her. We
call her 'Snorer' now, instead of 'Leonora'. I wish Poppie'd put her in
the attic, instead of Gipsy."

"Trust Poppie not to banish the millionairess! She's ever so proud of
having her at the school."

"H'm! Her company's a doubtful privilege, in my opinion."

"Yet Poppie had the cheek to suggest that we ought to make her a Guild
officer."

"No! Did she?" exclaimed the girls. "It's not Poppie's business to
interfere in our affairs. We'll manage them for ourselves, thank you!
We've got rid of the Seniors, and we're not going to let her dictate
what we must do."

Under Gipsy's fostering care the various branches of the United Guild
had prospered exceedingly. She was a most zealous and enterprising
secretary, sparing no trouble to make things a success, and capable of
organizing all kinds of new departures. She had got up a photographic
exhibition, and collected quite a nice little show of snapshots, neatly
mounted on brown paper, and pinned round the play-room. She persuaded
Miss White to allow the Form to start a museum in an empty desk that
stood in a corner, and spurred on the day girls to bring specimens for
it of birds' eggs, stones, pressed flowers, and any curiosities with
which they would consent to part. She made a neat catalogue of the
exhibits, with the names of the donors, and then broached a scheme for a
series of museum lectures; but at that even her stanchest adherents
turned tail.

"Got too many irons in the fire already to find time to write learned
papers on Natural History, Yankee Doodle," objected Lennie. "One would
have to cram it all up out of the encyclopaedia, and that's too hard work
for this child!"

"Wait till we have a museum anniversary, then we'll appoint you curator,
and you shall spout for the occasion," suggested Hetty.

A sketching club among the artistically disposed members of the Lower
School met with some response, especially as it developed into a
monthly competition. Gipsy boldly begged some attractive prints from
the drawing mistress to serve as prizes, and, having chosen a subject to
be illustrated, pinned up the various attempts, signed with pseudonyms,
and took the voting of the whole of the Juniors to decide the awards--an
exciting occasion which everybody considered worthy of repetition.
Gipsy's restless, energetic temperament was her salvation at this
particular crisis of her career. If she had allowed herself to brood
over her troubles, she would have been wretched indeed; but by throwing
herself heartily into schemes for the general good of the community she
succeeded in being, if not exactly happy, at any rate a useful and
cheerful addition to the school.

The Sale of Work took place in March, and though she had not a single
penny to spend on it, she contributed excellent service in other ways.
She was indefatigable in assisting to arrange stalls, write programmes,
or do any of the necessary drudgery that a bazaar always entails. Even
the Seniors acknowledged her helpfulness, and Helen Roper admitted that
"if one wanted a thing done quickly, Gipsy Latimer was worth a dozen of
those other kids". In the matter of the Sale of Work the hatchet had
been buried between the Upper and the Lower Schools, and both
co-operated to make the affair a success. Now that the rights of the
Juniors were fully established, and their claims to consideration
recognized, Gipsy was only too pleased to help the older girls, and ran
about holding step-ladders, handing tacks, fetching articles wanted, and
generally doing odd jobs. Encouraged by the conciliatory attitude of
the Seniors, she ventured to propose a scheme suggested by her foreign
experience.

"Why shouldn't we turn the tea-room into a cafe chantant?" she said. "We
should get far more money in that way than if people only went in for
refreshments. Charge them an admission, and then tea extra. They'll stay
far longer, and take more things, if music and singing are going on all
the time. It's really better than a separate concert, too, because you
can't always get people to go to the concerts, but hardly anyone can
resist tea at four o'clock."

After talking it over, the Seniors were graciously pleased to adopt
Gipsy's idea, and began to draw up a programme for the cafe chantant.
Their struggle of the past had taught them a lesson in fair play, and
they therefore proposed to admit a certain number of Juniors as
performers, instead of, as formerly, keeping the whole thing in their
own hands.

"I've put you down for two solos, Gipsy Latimer," said Helen Roper
magnanimously. "What would you like to sing?"

Gipsy thought for a moment before she replied:

"I wonder if it would be possible to borrow a banjo? I used to play one
out in America, and I know some very pretty Creole songs, and one or two
Spanish ones."

"My brother has a banjo that he'd lend, I'm sure," said Lena Morris.

"Good! We'll rig you out as a Spanish gipsy," agreed Helen. "There are
lots of things in our dramatic property box that would come in. You'd
look the part no end!"

"I'll send the banjo this evening, so that you can practise it,"
volunteered Lena.

Naturally the afternoon of the bazaar was a great event at Briarcroft.
Stalls had been put up in the lecture hall, and were prettily draped
with muslin, while the walls of the room were decorated with flags,
festoons of laurel leaves, and Chinese lanterns hung from wires
stretched across the platform. The flower stall was a particular
success, with its great bunches of daffodils, narcissus, violets, and
other spring blossoms, and pots of tulips, lily of the valley, and
hyacinths. Leonora had for once risen to the occasion. She had written
home to her mother for contributions, and Mrs. Parker had responded
generously, sending a quantity of beautiful flowers and pot plants to be
sold, and lending some of the finest palms in her conservatory to help
to deck the room.

By three o'clock everything was in order for patrons, and really the
arrangements reflected great credit upon the Committee. All the stalls
were well laden with articles. Some of the Seniors had been busy making
beautiful things. Doreen Tristram, who was taking lessons in china
painting, brought some charming little teacups and saucers, painted with
sprays of flowers. Helen Roper sent some excellent woodcarving, and
there was every description of needlecraft--traycloths in fine drawn
threadwork, doilys, cushions, tea cosies, nightdress cases, table
centres, and other dainty bits of embroidery. By the appointed hour,
groups of parents and friends began to arrive, and the hall was soon
full. The Lady Mayoress of Greyfield had consented to open the sale, and
made an excellent speech, explaining the object for which the money was
being raised, and urging the claims of the home for waifs and strays.
She herself set a good example by purchasing a number of articles at
various stalls, and the visitors followed suit liberally.

The girls hovered about, picking and choosing what they should buy,
according to the state of their purses or their individual tastes. A
novel feature, much patronized by the Juniors, was a Surprise Packet
table. All kinds of tempting little articles were wrapped up in gay
tissue paper, and purchased somewhat on the system of "buying a pig in a
poke", an arrangement that at any rate afforded great amusement when the
parcels were untied. The stalls soon began to exhibit a welcome
bareness, and the stall-holders felt the fullness of their bags with
satisfaction. Towards four o'clock everybody showed a tendency to
migrate in the direction of the cafe chantant. This had been arranged in
the largest of the classrooms. Tea was served at small tables while a
concert proceeded, the guests being expected to retire after about ten
minutes, so as to make room for others.

Helen Roper had got together quite a good programme. Irma Dalton, a
Second Form day girl, a dainty, fairy-like child, gave a graceful
performance of step dancing, Doreen Tristram played the violin, and
there were piano solos and songs from other members. Everyone
acknowledged, however, that Gipsy was the star of the occasion. She was
dressed specially for her part in a kind of half-Spanish costume, with a
red skirt, a black velvet bodice over white sleeves, and a muslin fichu
trimmed with lace. Her rich dark hair was allowed to hang loose, and a
gold-embroidered gauze scarf was twisted lightly round the top of her
head, the long ends falling below her waist. She wore sequin ornaments
and a quantity of Oriental bangles, which enhanced the fantastic effect,
and gave her the appearance of a true Romany. She was not at all
afflicted with shyness, and performed her share of the entertainment
with a zest that charmed her audience. Her southern songs, with their
crooning refrains, seemed to bring visions of moonlit lagoons and the
luscious scent of tropical flowers. She accompanied herself quite
prettily on the banjo, and had a stock of encores ready to meet the
demands for a further exhibition of her skill. She was such a success
that her fame spread over the bazaar. People came into the cafe chantant
specially to hear her, and everyone was asking who that bonny,
gipsy-looking girl was that sang the charming Creole melodies.

"We've taken exactly three times the money by the refreshment room that
we did last year," said Helen Roper, counting up the gains afterwards.

"It was a ripping idea of Gipsy's to add the music!" said Hetty Hancock,
always anxious to put in a good word for her friend.

"Yes, I'll give Gipsy the credit that's due to her," allowed Helen.
"She's worked hard over this affair, and behaved more decently than I
expected. I think she's improved. She's not nearly so perky and cheeky
as when she first came. She may turn out quite a nice girl yet."

"Wonders will never cease! Praise for Gipsy from Helen Roper!" gasped
Hetty to Lennie Chapman.

Gipsy, in her editorial capacity, wrote a most vivid report of the
bazaar for the _Juniors' Journal_, putting in a variety of grand words
and flowery turns of speech calculated to impress her readers. She had
taken special pains with this number of the Magazine. The chapter of her
serial story was longer and more exciting than ever; under the heading
of "Our Library Shelf" she had reviewed several books; she had written a
leading article on the tennis and cricket prospects for the forthcoming
season; and by ceaseless urging had kept her contributors, who were apt
to slack off, up to the mark in respect of literary matter. Fiona
Campbell had been persuaded to illustrate Norah Bell's storyette;
Blanche Russell had sent an account of a winter holiday ski-ing in
Norway; the Exchange and Mart had been fuller than ever of offers of
silkworms, garden plants, and miscellaneous possessions; and Gipsy had
appended a catalogue of the Museum, with an appeal for more donations of
specimens.

"Our journal now seems a going concern, and a well-established feature
of the Lower School; it is earnestly to be hoped that everyone will make
a supreme effort to ensure its success, and that more members will take
their share in swelling its pages. Criticisms and suggestions are freely
invited, and will be discussed at the General Meeting to be held next
Friday, 21 March, at 4 p.m., in the dressing-room."

So wrote Gipsy, and thought no more about the matter. This portion of
her editorial address, however, was seized upon by several of the girls,
and led to results which she had certainly not expected.

"Wants criticisms, does she?" said Maude Helm. "Well, I'll guarantee
she'll get them for once."

"And suggestions too!" giggled Gladys Merriman. "She's had it her own
way too long. The fuss people made about her at the bazaar was absurd."

"You weren't even asked to sing at the cafe chantant, Gladys!" commented
Alice O'Connor.

"There's been far too much of this favouritism lately. It's time
somebody took the thing up, and others had their fair turn. I was
speaking to Leonora about it, and she quite agreed with me."

"Yes; Poppie gave a strong hint she'd like Leonora pushed to the front
rather than Gipsy."

"Poppie barely tolerates Gipsy."

"I agree with you there. She'd rejoice to see her shelved."

"Well, look here, we've no time to stand gossiping. If anything's to be
done, we'd best go and canvass among the kids."

It was exactly at this crisis that Meg Gordon returned to school. She
had been absent since the week before Christmas, when her brother had
developed measles. She herself had caught the infection, and one after
another various brothers and sisters had sickened with it, so that for
about three months the whole family had been in quarantine. In her case
the old adage "absence makes the heart grow fonder" was undoubtedly
true. She came back more devoted to Gipsy than ever, ready to hang upon
her words, and yield her somewhat the same fealty as a squire of the
Middle Ages rendered to the knight to whom, by the laws of chivalry, he
was bound. It was well for Gipsy to have so firm an adherent, for her
present position in the school caused her to be greatly in need of
stanch friends.




CHAPTER XIII

A Leader of the Opposition


GIPSY had called the General Meeting of the Magazine department of the
Guild because she honestly wished her journal to be a representative
organ for the whole of the Lower School. A member of each Form was on
the Committee, but she thought suggestions would probably be offered by
others, and could then be discussed and settled by popular vote. At four
o'clock on the Friday afternoon all the Juniors flocked to the
dressing-room, for there was a whisper abroad that changes were in the
wind, and that it behoved everybody who had an interest in the subject
to be present and take sides. Dilys Fenton, as President of the Guild,
opened the proceedings with a few introductory remarks; then Gipsy, as
editress, read her report on the Magazine.

"Members are invited to suggest any fresh features that they consider
would be advantageous for the forthcoming summer term, and to offer any
criticisms on the past number." So she concluded.

"I think we may all declare ourselves perfectly satisfied with this
report," commented Dilys. "Our editress has worked hard, and the
_Journal_ is a unique success, which speaks for itself. Personally I
can suggest no improvements, but members are of course invited to give
their opinions."

There was a moment's pause, then Maude Helm stood up.

"Our lady chairman and fellow members!" she began airily, "I am glad to
have this opportunity of raising a protest against an abuse which I
consider is beginning to creep into our Guild, and which, unchecked, may
be liable to lead to very serious results. You will remember that this
Guild was founded in consequence of the very unjust and unfair treatment
of the Lower School by the Seniors. This tyrannical attitude of the
monitresses had been long resented by the Juniors, and though one new
girl happened to seize upon the matter and voice the discontent, it was
felt in many quarters that her action had been given undue prominence,
and that the real credit belonged to those who had slowly and surely
influenced the general opinion. These members, though they stood aside
and waived their claims to gratitude, anxious only for the welfare of
the Lower School, feel strongly that the whole conduct of the Magazine
should be now revised and placed upon a more representative basis. I am
not wishful to disparage the work of one who has no doubt done her best
for the _Journal_, but I should like to suggest that there are others
among us equally capable of undertaking office, and, if they had the
chance, of running the affair with possibly even greater success. It
seems to me undesirable for one person to take everything upon her
shoulders, and as a question of fair play I beg to propose that the
editorship should be changed for each issue of the Magazine, with a
standing provision that nobody be elected more than once in twelve
months."

If a bombshell had suddenly exploded, some of the girls could not have
been more surprised. Dilys Fenton stared at Maude as if marvelling at
her amazing impudence, Hetty Hancock flushed pink with annoyance, and
Meg Gordon's eyes sought the face of her idol. A few of Maude's
following clapped vigorously, notably Leonora, and there was an echo of
support among some of the younger ones. Gipsy, though she had been quite
unprepared for such a mutiny in camp, bore the attack with admirable
coolness and self-possession.

"I may perhaps be allowed to state," she remarked calmly, "that any
office which I hold at present was not self-sought, but was given me as
the result of the general vote. To the members themselves, therefore, I
appeal, if they consider they've anything against me."

"Maude's perfectly right!" interposed Gladys Merriman, rising hastily.
"This Magazine business has been a 'one man show' all along. Nobody else
has had even a look-in. It's been 'Gipsy Latimer' from beginning to
end."

"Oh! Oh! Who's had a story in every number?" cried a voice from the
back.

"The editress oughtn't to be allowed to monopolize the chief parts!"
called out Alice O'Connor.

"She didn't!"

"How can you say so!"

"Go it, Alice! Pitch it strong! I'm with you!"

"Order! Order!" commanded Dilys. "This question must be discussed from
both sides. We'll take one at a time, please."

"Maude! Let Maude speak, then!" shouted a band of sympathizers from the
opposition.

Maude, who had waxed warm, was only too ready to speak, and seized upon
the opportunity.

"I want to know," she demanded aggressively, "why one girl expects to
take the top seat in this school, and dictate what's to be done all
round? Newcomers used to be kept in the background, but it seems all
that's changed now. However, if new girls are the fashion, Leonora
Parker's newer still, and why shouldn't she be editress?"

"Because she couldn't!" piped somebody.

"Who's that says she couldn't?" shouted Gladys.

"Give her a chance to try!" called out Alice O'Connor.

"Likely!"

"You want to try yourself, I suppose!"

"Look here, we don't want everything turned topsy-turvy to suit a few
like you."

"Order! Order!" cried Dilys again--a very necessary command, for the
members were growing excited, and instead of stating their proposals in
the orthodox, conventional language which they prided themselves upon
always using at meetings, were descending to personalities.

"Oh, do let me speak! I'll give it them hot!" begged Hetty. But Meg
Gordon had already caught the President's eye, and began:

"If this is to be a representative meeting, it's time some reply was
made to Maude Helm's insinuations. The main object of Maude's remarks
seems to be to cast a slur upon Gipsy Latimer, and to imply that she's
taken an unfair advantage in coming to the fore. Every girl in this room
knows that Gipsy Latimer refused the Presidency of the Guild, and only
accepted the editorship because it was forced upon her. Did any one of
those who are so ready to run the Magazine now it's started think of
originating it? Of course they didn't! It was Gipsy, and Gipsy alone,
who suggested the idea, drew up the plan, asked for contributions, and
made the thing the success it is. There isn't another girl at Briarcroft
who could have done it, or if there is, why didn't she? Where's your
gratitude? Gipsy got us our own Guild, and the _Journal's_ the organ of
the Guild. She's the only one who's really qualified to be editress. I
ask you, do you think anyone else could do it equally well? No, you know
very well they couldn't, and wouldn't take the trouble either!"

"Hear, hear!" shouted a number of voices, as Meg stopped from sheer lack
of breath.

"I thought this meeting was to be conducted in strict order!" sneered
Maude. "I made a proposal a while ago, and instead of its being allowed
to be seconded and put to the vote, everybody began to talk separately.
I beg to propose again that the editorship of the Magazine be changed
each time, and nobody be eligible for office again within twelve
months."

"And I beg to second the proposal," cried Gladys.

"Those in favour, kindly signify!" said the President.

"Put it to the ballot!" suggested Alice O'Connor eagerly.

"No, we'll have a show of hands," returned Hetty grimly. "We want to
know which among you are answerable for this business. In all common
sense, how do you suppose a magazine can be run properly with a
different editress each time? But it's evidently a question of Gipsy
Latimer versus Maude Helm as leader of the Lower School. Which will you
choose, girls?"

Several hands that were on the point of going up wavered at that, and
went down again. Maude was not a general favourite, and though she had
contrived to raise a spirit of envy against Gipsy, nobody was anxious to
claim her as a leader.

"I suggested Leonora as editress," corrected Maude, rising angrily.
"Miss Poppleton herself proposed it!"

But at that there was a scornful laugh. Maude had made a fatal mistake.
Miss Poppleton's championship, far from being a recommendation, was
exactly the reverse. The girls resented her interference in their
private concerns, and did not intend to allow her the least voice in
their councils.

"We don't want Poppie's pet, thanks!"

"She's not going to manage our Guild for us!"

"We can make our own choice!"

So few hands went up in favour of Maude's proposal that its rejection
was obvious at once. Meg Gordon started up immediately with a counter
motion.

"I beg to propose that Gipsy Latimer continue to be editress until the
end of the summer term."

"And I beg to second that motion," agreed Lennie Chapman heartily.

This time the hands went up in earnest, and there was no doubt about the
majority.

"Hurrah! Hurrah!" shouted Gipsy's supporters, turning in much triumph
upon the opposition as the meeting broke up. Maude and her friends,
finding the point carried, had no more to say, and were obliged to drop
the subject. Leonora affected a sublime indifference.

"I'm sure I didn't want to be editress. I can't think why they suggested
it," she said, in her stolid, bored fashion.

"To carry favour with Poppie, and spite Gipsy!" declared Lennie Chapman.
"I don't blame you: they made you a cat's-paw, that's all."

"It's a victory for Gipsy, but I'm sorry it's happened at all," fretted
Hetty. "It's annoyed her dreadfully, and I believe she's ready to throw
the whole thing up and resign office."

"That she can't and shan't and mustn't do! We won't allow her!"

The struggle made a great sensation in the Upper Fourth. Some of the
girls openly twitted Maude with her defeat, an unwise and ungenerous
proceeding which bore ill fruit. Maude was not a girl to let bygones be
bygones; she turned sulky, brooded over her grievances, and bore Gipsy
a deeper grudge than ever. She was determined that she would not let the
latter go entirely unscathed, and looked about for some further
opportunity of flinging a dart.

"I'll pay her out somehow--see if I don't!" she grumbled to her chum
Gladys. "Wish I could think of some really good way!"

"I know!" cackled Gladys suddenly. "It's only struck me this second. Oh!
It's an inspiration! No, I daren't tell you here, with all those kids
about eavesdropping. Come outside into the playground, and I'll explain.
Have you any used South African stamps in your collection? Good! Then
it's as simple as ABC."

"What are the Triumvirate up to?" asked Lennie Chapman a few days later.
"I'm absolutely certain they've some mischief brewing."

"Do you mean Maude, Gladys, and Alice? I call them Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram," said Dilys. "They're always hatching plots of some kind. I
suppose they've a fresh grievance against the Guild."

"I believe they'd like to start a rival magazine of their own."

"Let them, then! There's no reason why they shouldn't. We should have a
chance to prove who's the best editress. But I don't believe they'd take
the trouble when it came to the point. They only make a fuss because
they enjoy growling."

"I can stand growls, but Maude's apt to stick in pins as well. I should
like to find out what she's evolving just at present."

Maude kept her secret well, however, and even Lennie's watchful eyes
could discover nothing beyond the ordinary schoolgirl nonsense that
generally went on among the three chums. She decided that she must have
been mistaken after all.

March, with its boisterous winds, was passing fast away, and an early
spring was bringing on green buds, and opening out venturous blossom on
pear and plum trees. It was the first time Gipsy had seen an English
spring, and she enjoyed the experience. The thrushes and blackbirds
which carolled all day in the Briarcroft garden especially appealed to
her.

"They're little plain birds to look at, but they just sing their hearts
out," she said. "I learnt Browning's piece about the thrush when I was
at school in Australia, and I always wanted to hear a real English one.
I don't wonder he was enthusiastic about it."

March had arrived like the traditional lion, but went out like the
orthodox lamb, and the 1st of April was ushered in by most appropriate
showers. The time-honoured festival was kept up in rather a languid
fashion at Briarcroft. The Upper School discountenanced it as childish
and foolish, but a few of the Juniors indulged in jokes at one another's
expense. These were mostly confined to the First and Second Forms, and
the Upper Fourth as a rule scorned them equally with the Seniors.

On this particular morning the girls had just taken their places in
their classroom, and were waiting for Miss White, when Maude handed
Gipsy a letter, with the casual enquiry: "I say, Yankee Doodle, is this
meant for you?" It was a thin foreign envelope, and bore a South
African stamp, and it was addressed to "Miss Latimer, Briarcroft Hall,
Greyfield, England". Gipsy glanced at it at first idly, then seized upon
it as a starving man clutches at food. Her heart was beating and
throbbing wildly, and her shaking, trembling fingers could scarcely tear
it open. Was it at last the news for which she had been yearning,
craving, sickening for so many weary, weary months? It was not her
father's writing, but it might possibly contain tidings of him. She
could scarcely control her violent excitement; her cheeks were white,
her lips were quivering, and she drew her breath with little, short,
painful jerks. In frantic anticipation she dragged the letter from its
envelope, and unfolded it. It was only a single sheet of foreign paper,
and it bore but one sentence:

                      "First of April; nicely sold!"

For a moment Gipsy gazed at the words without really comprehending their
meaning. Then it dawned upon her that she was the victim of a most cruel
hoax. The revulsion of feeling was so great, and the disappointment so
intense, that she gave a little, sharp, bitter cry, and, leaning forward
over her desk, buried her head in her arms, and sobbed audibly.

"What is it, Gipsy? What's the matter?" enquired her neighbours.

"Read it! Oh, how could anybody?" choked Gipsy.

Hetty Hancock seized upon the sheet, which had fallen to the floor, and
after one brief glance at its contents turned upon Maude with blazing
eyes.

"I never thought much of you, Maude Helm, but I didn't believe even you
could have invented such a detestably mean, dastardly trick as this. You
deserve to be boycotted by every decent girl in the school."

"It was only a joke," blustered Maude. "Everyone expects to be taken in
to-day."

"It's a wicked, heartless joke--the cruellest thing you could have
thought of--and you knew it, and did it on purpose!"

"How could you, Maude? It's hateful!" came in a chorus from the other
girls. "We'll tell Miss White!"

"Well, I'm sure it's not so dreadful, and it was Gladys who thought of
it, too!" protested Maude, finding popular opinion against her.

"Don't try and put it off on Gladys, though one of you is as bad as the
other. Girls, I'm not going to speak to Maude Helm or Gladys Merriman
for a week, and I hope nobody else will either!" thundered Hetty.

Lennie Chapman and Meg Gordon were trying to comfort Gipsy, and make her
take heart of grace again, but she had suffered a severe shock, and
controlled herself with difficulty. She sat up, however, as Miss White
came into the room.

"Don't tell her!" she whispered huskily. "What's the use? It would only
make a fuss, and I hate fusses. The thing's over now, and I'd rather try
and forget it. Maude needn't be proud of such a poor joke!"

"What a stoic you are!" returned Meg admiringly.




CHAPTER XIV

Mountaineering


EASTER was drawing very near, and the school was to break up for more
than three weeks. Gipsy, to her intense delight, had been asked to spend
the holidays with the Gordons, and Miss Poppleton had graciously allowed
her to accept the invitation.

"We had meant to ask you for Christmas," said Meg, "and Mother had even
got as far as writing a letter to Poppie; then Billy broke out in spots,
and the doctor said we might all have taken the infection, and we must
stop in quarantine. It was a horrible nuisance. I felt so savage! But we
couldn't invite you to come and share measles! We're all looking forward
most tremendously to your visit. I'm so excited I can hardly wait till
the end of the term!"

After six months spent entirely at Briarcroft, Gipsy felt that the idea
of a change was most welcome and exhilarating. She liked Meg, and wanted
to see her home surroundings. The two younger sisters, Eppie and Molly,
she knew already, as they were in the Lower Third and Second Forms, and
she had always set them down, in school parlance, as "jolly kids". The
rest of the family she hoped would prove equally interesting.

Poor Gipsy heaved many a sigh as she packed her box. Her outfit seemed
such a very shabby one with which to go a-visiting, and she hoped Mrs.
Gordon would not feel ashamed of her guest. At the last moment Miss
Edith, looking rather guilty and self-conscious, popped hastily into the
bedroom and thrust a small parcel into her hand.

"It's a little present, Gipsy dear," she said nervously, "just some new
hair ribbons and a pair of gloves and a tie. You've no need to tell Miss
Poppleton or anybody that I gave them to you. Don't thank me--I'd rather
you didn't! I do hope you'll enjoy yourself, you poor child!"

"Oh, Miss Edie! If a letter should happen to come for me from South
Africa while I'm away, you'd send it on, wouldn't you?" asked Gipsy
wistfully.

"I'd bring it myself, at once," returned Miss Edith, as she scuttled out
of the room in a desperate hurry.

Mrs. Gordon sent a cab to Briarcroft on breaking-up day, and when
Gipsy's box had been placed on the top, Meg, Eppie, and Molly bore away
their guest with great rejoicing. The Gordons lived at an old-fashioned
house about a mile from the school. It seemed quite in the country, with
fields all round, and had an orchard and large garden, a pond, an
asphalted tennis court for wet weather, as well as a grass one, and a
croquet lawn.

Mrs. Gordon welcomed Gipsy most kindly, and at once made her feel at
home, and the remainder of the family were introduced by degrees. Mr.
Gordon, a jovial, genial man, greeted her with a humorous twinkle in
his eye.

"So this is Meg's idol! Glad to see you, my dear!" he remarked. "If you
can cure Meg of standing on one leg and puckering up her mouth when she
talks, I'll be grateful. She seems disposed to listen to you in
preference to anyone here, so please act mentor."

"Oh, Dad! Don't be naughty!" shrieked Meg. "What will Gipsy think of
you?"

"A favourable opinion, I trust," laughed Mr. Gordon, as he vanished into
his own particular sanctum.

Donald, Meg's elder brother, seemed disposed to be friendly; but Billy,
the twelve-year-old offender who had started the family with measles,
was afflicted with shyness, and preferred to inspect the visitor from
afar until he grew accustomed to her presence. Rob, the youngest, a
roguish laddie of six, fell openly in love with Gipsy at first sight,
and prepared to monopolize her company to an extent that Meg would by no
means allow.

"She's my friend, and hasn't come here to play with little boys. Run
away to the nursery, and leave us alone!" she commanded, enforcing her
words by a process of summary ejection, regardless of all wails.

Gipsy had further to form an acquaintance with two dogs, three cats, a
dormouse, and a tame starling, before she was considered intimate with
the whole household, but after that she felt thoroughly at home.

The Gordons were a particularly jolly, merry, happy-go-lucky set of
young people, and they made their guest so entirely welcome that at the
end of a few days she might have known them all for years. Even the
bashful Billy soon ceased turning crimson whenever he spoke to her,
while Eppie and Molly disputed fiercely over the honour of sitting next
to her at tea. It happened to be a fine Easter, so outdoor occupations
were in full swing. Gipsy was an ardent tennis player, and revelled in
golf also. She and Meg and Donald made many cycling excursions, for the
neighbourhood was pretty and the roads were good. With packets of
sandwiches tied to their handlebars they would start off for a whole
day's ride, to explore some ruined abbey or ancient castle, or to get a
picturesque view of the fells. Donald, who was keen on collecting birds'
eggs, would often stop the party, to hunt for nests in the hedges or
banks; while Meg, whose hobby at present was wild flowers, kept a
watchful eye for any fresh specimens that she might find growing by the
roadside.

Mr. Gordon was an enthusiastic member of an Alpine Club, and he would
sometimes take the elder and more reliable members of his family on to
the fells for mountaineering practice. Many of the rocks afforded
excellent training for Switzerland, without involving any special
danger. These climbs were something quite new for Gipsy, and an immense
delight. She was very fearless, and had a steady head, so she proved an
apt pupil. Mr. Gordon would show her exactly how she must place her feet
and hold herself so as to take advantage of the tiniest and narrowest
ledges of rock, and she much enjoyed the excitement of accomplishing,
under his guidance, what would have appeared to her impossible
performances without his skilled advice. Meg and Donald had already
received some training, and when Gipsy was sufficiently advanced to be
able to keep up with them, Mr. Gordon allowed them all three to venture
with him on a more difficult ascent, linked together with one of his
Alpine ropes. Gipsy was proud indeed as she stood at the top of a jagged
crag and waved her hand to Billy, who was taking a snapshot of the party
from below.

Poor Billy was liable to fits of dizziness since his attack of measles,
and was not allowed any real climbing, so he consoled himself by
following the others about with a Brownie camera, and photographing them
in the most dangerous-looking positions that he could catch.

"Billy must do some extra prints, and you could put them in the
Magazine," suggested Meg to Gipsy. "You could write an article on
'Mountaineering in Cumberland'. It would be grand, and would make Maude
Helm gnash her teeth with envy."

"Perhaps she's been doing something even more exciting to astonish us
with," laughed Gipsy. "I wish we could have climbed a real mountain,
like Skiddaw."

"Yes, there'd be some credit in that," commented Donald thoughtfully. He
said no more at the moment, but a few days afterwards, when the three
young people had set out on another cycling expedition, he had an
enterprising plan to unfold.

"I vote we ride as far as Ribblethwaite, leave our machines there, and
then climb Hawes Fell," he announced. "We've started so early we'd have
heaps and loads of time. It would be a thing worth doing! I didn't
broach the idea at home because I knew the Mater'd be in such a state of
mind, and think we were going to break our necks. It will be time enough
to tell about it when we come back. Are you two game to go?"

"Rather!" exclaimed both the girls rapturously.

Gipsy, with her Colonial bringing up and independent American ideas, did
not realize any necessity to ask permission for such an expedition. She
had been in far wilder places, and considered the Cumberland fells
civilized ground compared with portions of the Rockies and certain
mountainous tracts of New Zealand with which she was familiar.

If Meg had any qualms of conscience she contrived to quiet them with the
comforting assurance: "Dad would have taken us if he hadn't been busy at
his office, and we can manage so well ourselves now, we can get on all
right without him."

Ribblethwaite was a pretty little village about six miles away, a
typical north-country hamlet with its stone cottages, with mullioned
windows and flagged stone roofs, its grey turreted church tower, and its
quick-flowing, brawling river. It was well wooded, but it stood high,
and at this early season of the year the trees were still bare, and only
a few green buds showed here and there on the hedges. The gardens were
full of golden daffodils and clumps of opening polyanthus; but
primroses--which had long been in blossom in the sheltered garden at
Briarcroft--were here only venturing into bud. As the inn looked clean
and attractive, the three decided to leave their bicycles there, and to
have a lunch of ham and eggs and coffee before setting out on their
climb.

"Then we can take our sandwiches with us. We're sure to want them up
there," said Donald.

"Yes; best to fortify ourselves thoroughly before we start," agreed Meg.

"Billy'll be fearfully sick when he hears where we've been," said Gipsy.

"Poor old Billy-ho! Yes, he'd have liked to follow us with his camera;
but he's not quite up to tackling Hawes Fell just at present," agreed
Meg.

The inn was a delightfully quaint, old-fashioned, primitive little
place, such as is not often found in these days of modern improvements.
Gipsy, who had had no opportunity before of seeing English country life,
was enchanted with its sanded floor, its oak dresser with rows of
willow-pattern plates, its pewter mugs and dishes, and the great brass
preserving-pan that was set in the ingle-nook. She admired the oak beams
of the ceiling, the rows of plant pots in the long mullioned window, the
settle drawn up by the big fireplace, and the glass cases of stuffed
pike and game birds that adorned the walls.

The lunch was a great success--a smoking dish of fried ham and eggs,
home-made bread and farmhouse butter, thin oatcakes and moorland honey,
and coffee, with thick yellow cream to pour into it.

"Beats school, doesn't it?" said Donald, with a chuckle of enjoyment, as
he helped himself to a third serving of honey. "I say, though, we
shan't have to stop too long feasting here if we mean to get to the top
of Hawes Fell. It's a jolly good step, I can tell you."

"We're ready!" returned Meg smartly. "We were only waiting for you to
finish gormandizing."

"Thanks for the compliment! One doesn't get the chance of heather honey
every day, and I've a remarkably sweet tooth. Anything in the way of jam
or preserves left near me invariably vanishes."

The way up the fell lay first over the old stone bridge that spanned the
river, then across fields, and by a narrow footpath leading up a steep
and thickly-wooded hillside. Though the trees were still in their winter
garb they were none the less lovely for that; the lack of foliage
revealed the delicate tracery of their boughs and the beauty of their
straight stems, which, in one or two terraced glades, were like the
columns and shafts of some great cathedral. The sun shining down the
glen gave a soft purplish tint to the bare twigs, and brought out in
bolder contrast the deep dark green of the innumerable masses of ivy
that had utterly taken possession of and choked some of the trees
supporting them.

"Isn't it glorious? I always say our fells need a great deal of
beating," said Meg, who was an enthusiast over her native county. "I
don't believe there's a wood equal to this anywhere!" and she began to
sing the old north-country ditty:

          "A north-countree maid
           Up to London had strayed,
           Although with her nature it did not agree.
           She wept and she sighed,
           And she bitterly cried:
           'I wish once again in the north I could be!
           Oh! the oak and the ash and the bonny ivy tree,
           They all grow so green in the north countree!'"

"Don't know whether you'll get Gipsy to agree with you; she ought to be
a dab critic of scenery by now," grunted Donald.

"Oh, it's lovely!" said Gipsy, who was enjoying herself immensely. "Of
course it's quite, quite different from America, or Australia, or South
Africa. It's smaller, but it's prettier in its own way. It looks much
more cultivated."

"Ah! wait till you get right out on the moor at the top. You won't
insult that by calling it cultivated."

The woods were soon left behind, and the pathway led ever upwards, first
through a tangle of heather and bilberry and gorse; then, higher still,
over short, fine, slippery tracts of grass. They were reaching the upper
region of the fell, where the hard rock cropped out into great
splintered crags, weathered by countless winter storms, and where no
bushes or softer herbage could face the struggle for existence. So far
the walk had been comparatively easy, but now the footpath had
disappeared, and they were obliged to trust to their knowledge of
mountaineering. The top still towered above them a very long way off,
and they calculated it would need a two hours' climb before they could
reach the particular crag that marked the extreme summit.

Donald assumed the leadership of the party, and, scanning the
mountainside with what he called an Alpine eye, decided which would be
their best course to pursue. There were several steep precipices and
awkward places that must be avoided, for though they were all quite
ready to try their skill at scaling rocks, it seemed no use to waste
unnecessary time over performing difficult feats.

"I expect that last crag will give us enough practice in that," remarked
Donald. "I've brought a rope with me in case we want it--got it wound
round and round my waist under my coat."

"Oh, that explains why you look so stout to-day!" laughed Meg. "I should
think it's pretty uncomfortable."

"Not a bit of it! It keeps me warm. I call it jolly cold up here."

"I believe we've reached the Arctic zone!" agreed Gipsy.

The air had undoubtedly grown colder with every hundred feet of their
ascent. The sunshine had disappeared, grey clouds had gathered, and
feathery flakes of snow began to fall lightly. The grass was soon
covered with a thin white coating which gave a delightfully Alpine
aspect to the scene. The prospect was glorious--the sharp, splintered,
snow-crested crags stood out in bold relief against the neutral-tinted
sky, and the long stretches of moor below them looked soft and blurred
masses of whiteness.

"We can find our way home by our footsteps in the snow!" said Gipsy,
drawing long breaths of the pure, exhilarating air.

"I wonder if we ought to turn back," said Meg, rather doubtfully.

"Turn back!" exclaimed Donald. "You don't mean to say you want to turn
tail now, Meg? Why, we're just getting to the exciting part!"

"I was only thinking of the snow."

"Why, that makes it all the more like Switzerland! You don't suppose Dad
turns back at the snowline when he's doing a climb? We're in luck to
have the chance of a little snow. I wish there'd been a keen frost, and
we could have tried an ice axe somewhere. Pluck up your courage, Meg!
You'll never do the Matterhorn if you shirk Hawes Fell!"

Thus encouraged Meg said no more, though she had her private doubts
about the wisdom of proceeding farther. It is an unpleasant task to be a
drag on other people's amusement, and both Donald and Gipsy were very
keen on making the ascent. So they scrambled onward and upward, slipping
often on the rapidly freezing rocks, helping each other over difficult
places, sighing for nailed boots and alpenstocks, but laughing and
enjoying the fun of the adventure.

To climb to the summit certainly taxed all their strength. The mountain
seemed to heave before them in a succession of huge boulders, and as
each one was scaled another appeared beyond it. At length they reached a
piled confusion of rocks, where a little cairn had been built of small
stones and loose pieces of shale.

"There we are! The very place!" shouted Donald. "I knew we'd find it if
we pegged along. Now, can you girls tackle this last bit? Wouldn't you
like to use the rope?"

The final piece of crag was slippery enough to justify Donald's offer,
and as he seemed particularly anxious not to have brought his rope in
vain, the others consented to give it a trial. With its aid the
difficult bit was accomplished fairly easily, and the three were soon
standing in triumph by the cairn, hurrahing and waving their
handkerchiefs with much excitement.

"I'm going to eat my sandwiches here; I'm fagged out," declared Gipsy,
sitting down on a stone and suddenly realizing that she was tired and
hungry.

The others followed suit, very ready for a rest and a picnic. It was a
long time since their lunch at the inn, and the frosty air had given
them keen appetites. It was too cold to sit still, however, for more
than five or ten minutes; a bitter wind had sprung up, and the snow,
which had only fallen very lightly before, began to come down in thicker
and heavier flakes.

"We'd better be going, or we shan't be able to find our way," worried
Meg anxiously.

"Right-o! only we must each add a stone to the cairn first," replied
Donald. "I've a pencil here, and we'll write our names on them as proof
conclusive that we've been, in case anybody doubts our word afterwards."

So "Gipsy Latimer", "Margaret Gordon", and "Donald Alexander Gordon"
were duly inscribed on smooth pieces of shale and placed as evidence on
the top of the pile, after which ceremony the three began their descent
with something of the feeling of Arctic explorers who had reached the
Pole.

It was indeed high time to return. Clouds were blowing up fast, and with
the thickening snow began rapidly to obscure the view. The trio went
very cautiously, trying to remember various landmarks which they had
noticed on the way up. Gipsy's idea of retracing their footsteps in the
snow soon proved futile, for already all tracks were obliterated. It was
impossible to see far in front of them, and but for the compass that
hung on Donald's watch-chain they would have had no notion of where they
were going.

"We must keep due west, and look out sharp for precipices. Don't let us
get separated on any account. Hadn't we better use the rope again?"

"I don't believe we're anywhere near the way we came up. I don't
recognize these rocks in the least," said Meg.

"Never mind, if we get down somewhere to civilization," returned Gipsy.

"Yes, but we don't want to be five miles away from our bicycles!"

"We're all right!" exclaimed Donald jubilantly. "Here's the piece of
white quartz we were sitting on, I'm sure. Yes!" (grubbing about under
the snow) "I'm right, for here's a scrap of the silver paper from the
chocolate we were eating. Hurrah! I'm going to set up for an Alpine
guide!"

The snow was clearing considerably as they got farther down the
mountainside, and after a while they were able to recognize various
points of the landscape, and realized that Donald's compass and
instinct for locality had led them correctly.

"It was a narrow squeak, though," confessed Meg. "I don't mind telling
you now that I thought we should have to stay up there all night! It's
getting fearfully late--we must sprint back when we reach our machines."

"We'll have some hot tea at the inn first," declared Donald. "You girls
will never sprint six miles without!"

Very tired, but exceedingly proud of themselves, the mountaineers
reached home at half-past eight, to find Mr. and Mrs. Gordon looking out
anxiously for their return.

"You young scamps! I'd no idea you were going climbing on your own!"
said Mr. Gordon. "I'd have forbidden it if I'd known. Hawes Fell is a
nasty little bit at the finish."

"But we did it, Dad!" cried Meg excitedly. "We put our feet on all the
right ledges, just as you taught us. Oh! Don't you think I'm old enough
to go to Switzerland with you next summer, and try some real ice work?
You promised you'd take me when I was fifteen!"




CHAPTER XV

A School Mystery


AFTER the delightful three weeks spent with the Gordons, Gipsy felt that
so pleasant an experience of English home life made it doubly difficult
to return to Briarcroft. No news of her father had arrived during her
absence, and she was received with black looks by Miss Poppleton. She
had begun to dread, with a shrinking, nervous horror, those futile
interviews with the Principal--interviews in which she could only state
again how little she knew, and listen to fresh reproaches. She tried to
brace herself for the ordeal when ordered to the study, but her heart
failed her as she tapped at the door, and she entered with something of
the apprehension of a victim of the Inquisition facing the torture
chamber. She advanced hesitatingly towards the Principal's desk, and
stood without speaking, a forlorn enough little figure to have excited
compassion in the most mercenary heart. Miss Poppleton glanced at her
furtively, and looked away again. She had made up her mind not to allow
herself to be worked upon by her feelings, and meant to speak plainly.

[Illustration: AN INTERVIEW WITH MISS POPPLETON]

"It's no use mincing matters, Gipsy!" she began, blustering a little to
hide her own sense of uneasiness. "Here we are at the beginning of
another term, and things are exactly the same as they were at Christmas.
Not a word from your father, or from your New Zealand relations either.
It's plain enough they mean to abandon you! Now, I want you to
understand that I can't be responsible for you. You must think again.
Are there absolutely no relations or friends to whom you can apply?"

Gipsy sighed as she gave the same old answer. Had she been possessed of
any information, how gladly would she have supplied it!

"I can't keep a school for philanthropy," frowned Miss Poppleton. "I'm
afraid your father is an adventurer pure and simple. He's left you on my
hands, and gone off, who knows where? I'll let you have one more term
here, just on the chance of his turning up; but if we've heard nothing
by the summer holidays, then I shall be obliged to apply to the
Emigration Society, and send you out to New Zealand. Your relatives
there would be forced, at least, to support you, though I suppose I
shall have to write down your fees here as bad debts. In the meantime
you must make yourself as useful as you can, out of school hours. You
might help Miss Edith with the mending, and look after No. 1 dormitory.
I can't afford to keep you here on the same footing as an ordinary
pupil. It's an unpleasant business from beginning to end."

Very unpleasant, thought poor Gipsy, as she availed herself of
permission to go. Her proud spirit could not bear her position of
sufferance in the school, and she would almost have preferred to be
handed over to the Emigration Society, and deported to New Zealand. That
her father should be called an adventurer seemed the cruellest cut of
all. The reason for his long silence she could not fathom, but she was
positive he would never abandon her, and her faith in him did not waver.
Some day, if he were still alive, she knew he would come to claim her;
and in the meantime, though life was dark, for the sake of her own
self-respect she must show a brave front. Gipsy certainly needed all the
courage and fortitude of which she was possessed.

If last term had been hard, the present term was harder still. Miss
Poppleton's hint about making her useful was no idle remark, as she soon
found to her cost. Instead of joining the other girls at tennis and
croquet in her play hours, she was expected to sit in the linen room,
darning stockings and hemming dusters, or mending damaged garments. She
was made into a kind of attendant for the little ones who slept in No. 1
dormitory, and was responsible for brushing their hair, seeing that they
had their baths, putting away their clothes, and keeping their room in
order. It was a recognized thing that she was to be at the beck and call
of all the mistresses, to run errands, take messages, fetch articles
wanted, and do innumerable little "odd jobs" about the house.

She was willing enough thus to help to earn her salt, but the
unfortunate part was that the extra work made serious inroads upon her
time. Her new dormitory duties took a large slice out of each evening,
and no allowances were made in class for the fact that her hours of
preparation were curtailed She resented the injustice of being
reproached for badly learnt lessons, when she had been busy the night
before washing the hair of her little charges, copying some notes for
Miss Lindsay, sorting music, filling inkpots, and stitching fresh braid
on Miss Poppleton's skirt. The mistresses did not really mean to impose
upon Gipsy, but having been told to make the girl of use, it was so easy
to hand over all the tiresome extra things for her to do, and completely
to forget that an accumulation of trifles may make a large sum. It never
struck anybody that Gipsy's legs could grow weary with constantly
running up and down stairs, or that she preferred tennis to darning and
croquet to brushing children's coats; all were supremely busy with their
own concerns; and though Miss Edith sometimes noticed that she looked
tired, loyalty to Miss Poppleton forbade the least interference. So
Gipsy plodded away, with a grim determination to do her best, and not to
give in under any circumstances whatsoever. She was much too proud to
make complaints to her friends, even if they could have helped her, and
met their compassion for her non-appearance at the tennis courts with an
assumption of indifference.

"I can't get at Gipsy nowadays!" said Hetty Hancock to Dilys Fenton.
"She seems quite changed this term, since Poppie's made her into a kind
of pupil teacher. It's as if there were a barrier suddenly set up
between us."

"So there is--a barrier of her own making," sighed Dilys. "I've tried to
get across it myself, and I can't. The fact is, Gipsy's about the
proudest girl in the school, and she's eating her heart out at finding
herself in this queer position. She's neither exactly a pupil, nor a
teacher, nor a monitress, nor anything: indeed, Poppie treats her more
as a servant; sometimes she absolutely wipes her boots on her! Gipsy's
like a princess sold into slavery! She's taking it hardly, but she won't
let it crush her spirit. I think she feels so sore, she can't even bear
our sympathy."

"I wish we could do something," groaned Hetty.

"Nothing would be of any use, unless you could find her father. I'm
afraid, myself, he must be dead."

"She's fighting a battle against fearful odds," said Hetty, shaking her
head. "She's keeping her self-respect when most girls would have given
way utterly. I suppose there's nothing to be done but just look on and
admire her pluck. I should like to speak my mind to Poppie sometimes!"

"You'd do Gipsy no good, I'm afraid."

"I wonder Miss Edith doesn't stand up more for her."

"Miss Edith! She's a jellyfish--a crushed worm--a mere serf and vassal!
She's frightened to death of her sister, in my opinion, and hardly dare
call her soul her own. She'd be nice enough to Gipsy if Poppie'd let
her."

"Look here! I hope Gipsy's going to the Fourth Form picnic next week."

"Gracious! So do I. I hadn't thought of it. She never does go to
anything now that needs paying for. Oh, but she must! We can't have her
left out of it. Let's beard Poppie boldly in her den, offer to pay
Gipsy's share in private, and beg for her to come."

"I'm game if you are, and ready to go halves."

The Upper and Lower Fourth Forms always joined in an excursion, which
was invariably held on the first Saturday in June. They went, under the
care of Miss White, to visit some place of interest in the
neighbourhood, and the journey was made either by train or in hired
wagonettes. Tea was provided at a farmhouse or hotel, and counting the
price of admission to ruins and tips to guides, the little jaunt
generally worked out at about three or four shillings per head. All the
other Forms in the school had similar picnics: the Fifth and Sixth
invariably combined, as did the First and Second; and the Third, which
like the Fourth consisted of Upper and Lower divisions, was large enough
to have its own outing. To miss the annual excursion would be felt by
any girl as a terrible omission, almost as bad as missing the
prize-giving or the Christmas soiree.

Hetty and Dilys hastened therefore to Miss Poppleton's study, to make
quite sure that on such an important occasion Gipsy should not be left
behind. They stated their case with considerable eagerness and
enthusiasm.

"We'd pay all Gipsy's share between us, only, please, we'd rather she
didn't know anything about that part of it," ended Dilys, who did the
most of the talking.

Miss Poppleton received the suggestion with a coldness that was
particularly damping.

"I can't decide anything at present," she said briefly. "I doubt if
Gipsy can be spared. Her new duties keep her occupied in looking after
the little ones, and Saturday is a busy day. No, Dilys, I can't
promise. Gipsy must remember it is impossible for her to have
everything the same as other girls, and she must not expect it."

"Oh, she didn't ask us to ask you! She doesn't know anything about it.
It was our idea entirely," put in Hetty hastily.

"I'm glad to hear it," returned Miss Poppleton dryly, and dismissed the
girls without further ceremony.

"I don't believe she means to let her go," declared Dilys indignantly,
as they walked down the passage. "Poppie's taken an absolute spite
against Gipsy lately. But I'll be even with her! I've got an idea. Let's
make the picnic a Guild affair, and persuade all the Lower School to
join together and do the same excursion on the same day. Then Gipsy'd be
bound to go, to help to look after those kids! Besides, she's the
Secretary."

"Stunning! I believe we shall compass it. Only don't say what's our
object, or Maude Helm or somebody will be putting a spoke in our wheel
perhaps. We'll call a meeting of the Guild and propose it. You bring it
up, and I'll second it."

Dilys's and Hetty's suggestion was very well received by the Guild. The
idea of a big united picnic sounded attractive, so the motion was
carried unanimously. It was of course necessary to refer the matter to
Miss Poppleton and the mistresses, but they were not likely to offer
objections to a scheme favoured by the whole of the Lower School. It
would indeed be easier for the mistresses to co-operate than for each to
take charge of a separate Form. It was decided to ask permission for
the excursion to be regarded as the annual treat of the Guild, and
particularly to request that all officers should be present and wear
their badges.

"Done Poppie for once, I believe!" triumphed Dilys. "She can't have the
cheek to keep our Secretary at home. The Guild would mutiny."

"She's made such a fuss of the Guild, she's bound to allow us some
latitude," agreed Hetty.

"Then on Saturday week Gipsy shall get one treat, if she doesn't get
another all this term."

But before Saturday week something happened.

Among the various rules of Briarcroft, one of the strictest was that
which forbade any boarders to go outside the grounds without first
obtaining special permission from Miss Poppleton. The day girls at the
school wore the regulation sailor hat with a plain band of navy-blue
ribbon, but the boarders, to distinguish them from the others, had a
navy band with a white stripe in it. They were extremely proud of these
stripes, which they regarded as a badge of superiority, similar to the
gold tassels which, many years ago, were worn by the sons of the
nobility on their college caps at Oxford. The hats were of course very
well known in the neighbourhood, and nobody who lived anywhere near the
school could possibly mistake the Briarcroft "sailor".

Now it came to Miss Poppleton's ears, through the medium of one of those
malicious little birds who have a reputation for carrying inconvenient
pieces of information, that on several evenings, just at dusk, a girl
who wore a boarder's hat had been seen to leave the garden and hurry up
the road, returning about five minutes later to dodge with great caution
inside the gate. Such a proceeding was manifestly irregular and highly
improper. Miss Poppleton, at first indignant at the very idea that one
of her pupils could be guilty of so great an indiscretion, nevertheless
felt it her solemn duty to investigate the matter thoroughly, and either
expose the offender or deny the imputation. She was the more
particularly annoyed because the hint came from a quarter which, if not
absolutely hostile, was inclined to regard her establishment as
old-fashioned, and to air the notion that there was room for another
high-class ladies' school in Greyfield. In the face of such reports, the
scandal must be instantly suppressed. She arranged, therefore, that a
careful watch should be kept on the school, and if anyone were seen
going out or returning in a surreptitious and unorthodox fashion, the
occurrence must be immediately reported, so that she could act promptly
and catch the delinquent. She said nothing about the affair to the
girls, as she did not wish to put them on their guard, but Miss Edith
and the mistresses were instructed to use extreme vigilance.

One of the manifold duties that had lately been heaped upon Gipsy's
shoulders was the task of sorting the stockings that came from the wash,
and putting in a pile those that required darning. She had been very
busy one evening with this rather uncongenial occupation, and had barely
finished the necessary counting and arranging, when the bell rang for
preparation. During the last few days Miss Lindsay had insisted upon
Gipsy joining the others and learning her lessons as usual, and had
scolded her if she were absent, even on an errand for another mistress.
It was most unreasonable to reproach her for what was seldom her own
fault; but knowing that Miss Lindsay would expect her to be in her
place, she hastily put the stockings away, and fled to fetch her books.

Preparation was being held in the Juniors' room, and the girls were
sitting on forms round the long table. Gipsy, scuttling in just in time
to avoid the mistress's censure, took a seat between Hetty Hancock and
Lennie Chapman, and, opening her French grammar, began to write an
exercise. All the Junior boarders were at work with the exception of
Dilys Fenton, Leonora Parker, and Barbara Kendrick, who were practising,
for the girls had to take turns to use the pianos, according to a
carefully arranged monthly music list. Gipsy plodded on with her
exercise, and had arrived at sentence No. 9 when suddenly a horrible
thought struck her. It had been rather dark in the linen room, and in
order to examine the stockings better, she had switched on the electric
light. She was almost certain that in her hurry she had forgotten to
turn it off again. Leaving on the electric light unnecessarily was one
of Gipsy's worst crimes, a negligence for which Miss Poppleton had often
rebuked her severely. If the Principal were to walk past the linen room
she would certainly enquire who had been there last, and would
administer a scolding, at the prospect of which Gipsy shivered.

She wondered if she dared ask Miss Lindsay to allow her to go and
ascertain. It was a mild, wet evening, much darker than usual, and the
mistress sat reading close by the window, so as to catch the advantage
of the fading light. Her profile, rather stern in its outline, did not
look particularly encouraging, and Gipsy sighed, knowing that her
request would probably be met by a prompt refusal. What was she to do?
It was a question of braving either Miss Lindsay's or Miss Poppleton's
wrath--perhaps both. 'Twixt two fires she hesitated, then an idea
occurred to her. If she could get out of the room and return to her
place without the governess discovering her absence, all would be well.
Miss Lindsay seemed absorbed in her book, and as long as her pupils kept
quietly at work she took no particular notice of them. As before stated,
she was seated close to the window, while the girls were placed round a
long table, the end of which, nearest to the open door, was unoccupied.
Gipsy hastily scribbled on a scrap of paper: "I'm going to do a
bolt--don't give me away!" and, with her finger on her lips for silence,
showed it to her two neighbours, Lennie and Hetty. Then very quietly and
cautiously she dropped from the form, and began to creep underneath the
table in the direction of the open door. Lennie and Hetty, after a
glance at the paper, comprehended her scheme, and moved nearer together,
lest her absence should be betrayed by a telltale gap. Some of the other
girls of course noticed the occurrence, but, being loyal to Gipsy, they
held their tongues and made no sign. As gently as a mouse she crept
under the whole length of the table, chuckling inwardly at the fun of
the adventure.

I do not believe anyone in the school except Gipsy would have thought
of such a rash and risky experiment; but she had not yet entirely
forgotten her old Colonial habits, and every now and then, despite Miss
Poppleton's discipline, her wild spirits would crop up and assert
themselves in very questionable ways. Miss Lindsay read calmly on, quite
oblivious of the fact that one of her pupils was crawling through the
doorway on all-fours, and that the greater proportion of the rest were
consciously aiding and abetting such a scandalous proceeding. Once she
had gained the passage in safety, Gipsy sprang to her feet and ran with
all speed to the linen room. As she expected, the light was still on, so
she switched it off with supreme satisfaction, congratulating herself
heartily that Miss Poppleton had not been before her. It was only the
work of a minute, and she hoped she could regain her place at the table
in the same way as she had left it, without being missed by Miss
Lindsay. She was hurrying back along the passage when Leonora, coming
from practising, entered from the opposite direction, and without seeing
Gipsy or noticing her frantic signs, went into the Juniors' room and
closed the door behind her.

The Peri shut out of Paradise was as nothing to the disconcerted girl
who stood blankly in the corridor. Poor Gipsy was indeed in a dilemma.
It was utterly impossible to open the door and walk in, but in the
meantime every minute increased the probability of her absence being
detected. There seemed nothing for it but to hang about on the chance
that Dilys or Barbara might also return from practising, and that she
could persuade one of them to leave the door open, so as to give her
the opportunity of entering. But the corridor was not a safe place to
wait in. Mistresses or Seniors might very possibly be passing, and would
ask awkward questions. It seemed more discreet to retire downstairs,
where she might catch Dilys as she came from the library. There was a
large cupboard in the hall where the boarders kept some of their outdoor
clothes, and here Gipsy took refuge, listening to the five difficult
bars of a sonata with which Dilys was wrestling, and wishing her
friend's half-hour at the piano might soon expire. As she stood among
the coats and waterproofs, peeping out through a small chink of the
door, she noticed Miss Poppleton come from the drawing-room, and cross
the hall in the direction of the library. Gipsy was in a panic of
fright. What account should she give of herself if her retreat were to
be discovered? Alarm made her draw her breath sharply, and the action,
combined perhaps with some dust or a slight cold--alack! alack!--brought
on a terrific and utterly uncontrollable fit of sneezing.

"Ha-chaw! Ha-chaw! Ha-chaw!" issued from the cupboard with horrible
distinctness. Miss Poppleton paused for a second, then made an instant
dart, and seized the culprit in the very midst of her fourth convulsive
gasp.

"Oh, indeed! So it's you, Gipsy Latimer, is it?" said the Principal
grimly. "What are you doing here, I should like to know?"

Too much taken aback even to sneeze again, poor Gipsy stood looking the
picture of guilt, without volunteering any explanation of her presence
in the cupboard. She felt that to do so would only involve her in
further difficulties. Miss Poppleton's keen, suspicious eyes seemed to
note every detail of her embarrassment.

"You've been out, Gipsy Latimer; it's easy enough to tell that! So
you're the one who's been seen every evening in Mansfield Road!"

"Out!" gasped Gipsy, galvanized into speech by the utter falsity of the
accusation. "No, indeed! I haven't been out of the house at all."

"It isn't the slightest use denying it," returned Miss Poppleton
harshly. "I might have known it would be you. Besides--" (here she began
to examine the waterproofs and hats that were hanging upon the hooks),
"Oh, you wicked, wicked girl! Here's proof conclusive that you are
telling a deliberate untruth! Why, your 'sailor' and your mackintosh are
quite wet! Look at them, marked with your name, and try to deceive me if
you dare!"

"But, Miss Poppleton, indeed, indeed, you're mistaken!" protested Gipsy
with warmth. "If you want proof, look at my shoes--they're not wet."

"You may think you're very clever, but you're not able to blind me!
Whose galoshes are these, I should like to know, all muddy and covered
with gravel? I suppose you'll pretend your initials are not 'G. L.' Go
along immediately to your bedroom. I intend to sift the matter to the
bottom. So this is how you repay me for my kindness in keeping you
here!"

From Miss Poppleton's point of view the case against poor Gipsy
certainly looked extremely black. Apparently she had been caught in the
very act of returning from some clandestine excursion, and was leaving
her incriminatingly moist garments in the cupboard when she was
surprised.

The more the affair was investigated, the more everything seemed to
indicate her guilt. The girls who had been present with her at
preparation were obliged, much against their will, to confess how she
had left the room without Miss Lindsay's knowledge by crawling under the
table, and what had been merely a piece of mischief assumed a far graver
aspect when coupled with other circumstances. It was really a very
serious fault of which poor Gipsy was accused. She was supposed not only
to have set the school rules deliberately at defiance by taking a
surreptitious walk alone in the evening, but to have shielded herself by
the most brazen falsehoods. Remembering how, when she had first come to
Briarcroft, she had begged to be permitted to go out, had chafed against
the confinement of her life, and had constantly quoted the larger
liberty allowed in American schools, Miss Poppleton could easily believe
that she would be ready to break bounds if she found a suitable
opportunity; and though hitherto Gipsy had been strictly truthful, her
previous reputation for honour could not do away with the circumstantial
evidence of the damp waterproof and galoshes.

The neighbours who had reported noticing one of the Briarcroft boarders
in Mansfield Road on several successive evenings could give no account
of the truant's personal appearance. It had been dusk at the time, and
they had only seen a girl in a sailor hat with a blue-and-white striped
band hurrying rapidly past, as if anxious to escape observation. They
thought she had dark hair, and that she must be about fourteen or
fifteen years of age, but otherwise could not identify her in the least.
The description might or might not fit Gipsy, but Miss Poppleton, misled
by her own prejudice, jumped immediately to the conclusion that she and
no other was the miscreant. If she had been harsh with the girl before,
she was terribly stern with her now. She considered it an act of the
very basest ingratitude and the most double-dyed deceit, and was the
more particularly angry because the episode had brought the school into
discredit. She had always prided herself upon the immaculate behaviour
of her boarders, and it was extremely galling to have such an occurrence
talked about in the neighbourhood. The reputation of Briarcroft,
hitherto above reproach, had sustained a serious blow, from which it
might take some time to recover.

"This is what comes of fostering the children of adventurers!" she said
bitterly. "I feel as if I had warmed a serpent, and it had turned and
stung me for my pains."

"I couldn't have believed it of Gipsy!" sobbed Miss Edith, who, if
anything, was even more concerned than her sister, owing to her
predilection for the offender.

"You were always much too generously disposed towards her," sniffed Miss
Poppleton. "She certainly has not proved worthy of your kindness."

The affair made the most immense sensation in the school. Nothing else
was talked of next morning, and the day girls questioned the boarders
closely upon every detail.

"Isn't it awful?" sighed Lennie Chapman. "And to think that we had to
tell about her!"

"We don't believe she's really done it, though," protested Hetty
Hancock.

"It looks bad, I'm afraid," said Mary Parsons, shaking her head gravely.
"It's so queer!"

"Very queer for a girl who set herself up to teach other people, like
Gipsy," sneered Maude Helm. "What do you think of your precious leader
now?"

"Where is Gipsy?" asked Meg Gordon.

"Locked up in the dressing-room next Poppie's bedroom till she
confesses, and that she declares she won't do, if she stays there till
she dies! We've none of us seen her, of course. We're forbidden to go
anywhere near."

"Oh, poor Gipsy! I'm so sorry for her! Whatever did she go and do it
for?" wailed Daisy Scatcherd.

"You don't for a second suppose Gipsy's guilty?" said Meg Gordon
indignantly. "If you do--well then, you just don't know Gipsy Latimer,
that's all!"




CHAPTER XVI

A Friend in Need


MISS POPPLETON, having, as she deemed, successfully detected Gipsy in
her misdoings, was determined to force her into making a full
confession. The girl's repeated denials she regarded as mere stubborn
effrontery, and after several stormy scenes she had locked her up in the
dressing-room, to try if a spell of solitary confinement would reduce
her to submission. Poor Gipsy, agitated, overstrung, burning with a
sense of fierce anger against the injustice of her summary condemnation,
had faced the Principal almost like an animal at bay, and defying her
utterly, had persisted in sticking without deviation to her own version
of the story.

"You'll gain nothing by this obstinacy!" stormed Miss Poppleton. "I'll
make you see who is in authority here! Do you actually imagine I shall
allow a girl like you to set herself against the head of the school?
Here you stay until you own the truth and beg my pardon."

"Then I'll stop here till I'm grown up, for I've told the truth
already," returned Gipsy desperately.

She had kept up a brave front in opposition to Miss Poppleton's
accusations; but after the key had turned in the lock, and the sound of
footsteps died away down the passage, she sank wearily into a chair, and
burying her hot face in her trembling hands, sobbed her heart out. She
felt so utterly deserted, friendless and alone. There seemed nobody to
whom she might turn for help or counsel, nobody in all the wide, wide
world who belonged to her, and would defend her and take her part.
Everything appeared to have conspired against her, and this final and
most crushing blow was the last straw. Gipsy clenched her fists in an
agony of hopelessness. "Oh, Dad, Dad! why don't you come back?" she
moaned, and the utter futility of the question added to her misery.
Outside the sun was shining and the birds were singing cheerily--they
had their mates and their nests, while she had not even a relation to
claim her. She could hear the voices of the girls as they took their
eleven o'clock recreation; each one had a joyful home to return to, and
parents or friends who would shield and protect her.

"I've never had a home!" choked Gipsy. "Oh! I wonder why some people are
always left out of everything?"

Then she sat up suddenly, for there was the sound of a hesitating
footstep in the passage. The key turned, the door opened gently, and
Miss Edith, very nervous and excited, entered the room.

"Oh, Gipsy!" she began tremulously, "Miss Poppleton doesn't know I'm
here, but I felt I must come. Oh! you poor, naughty, naughty child, why
did you do it? How could you, Gipsy? I'd never have thought it possible.
Oh, do be a good girl and own up! Miss Poppleton will forgive you if
you'll only tell the truth--and you know you ought to! For the sake of
what's right, be brave, and don't go on with this dreadful tissue of
lies--it's too wicked and terrible!"

Miss Edith's eyes were full of tears. She laid her hand tenderly on the
girl's shoulder, and looked at her with a world of reproach in her
twitching face. If Miss Poppleton's scolding had been hard to endure,
Miss Edith's concern was far worse. Gipsy seized the kind hand, and held
it tightly.

"Oh, Miss Edie, I can't bear you to misjudge me!" she exclaimed
bitterly. "Indeed, if you only knew, I am telling the absolute, whole
truth. Have I ever told you an untruth before?"

"No, Gipsy. But this, alas! has been so conclusively proved."

"But has it? It all rests on my wet waterproof and galoshes. I don't
know how they got wet, but I do know that I didn't go out in them, and
if I said I did, why, then I should be really telling a falsehood."

Miss Edith sighed with disappointment, and drew her hand reluctantly
away.

"I thought I might have influenced you, Gipsy," she said, with a little
sad catch in her voice. "I'm not clever like my sister, but you were
always fond of me. I can't put things as she does, but I should have
liked to make you feel that doing right is worth while for the sake of
your own conscience. Oh, you poor misguided child, do think it over, and
make an effort! You'll be glad all your life afterwards if you own your
fault, and start afresh. I can't stay any longer now--and you've no
need to tell Miss Poppleton that I came--but I'll be your friend, Gipsy,
if you'll only confess."

She lingered a moment, half hopefully; then, as Gipsy only shook her
head in reply, she gave up her useless attempt, and went sorrowfully
away. In black despair Gipsy mentally went over the conversation,
wondering how she could have convinced Miss Edith of her innocence. She
could not allow herself to be cajoled by kindness into a confession of
what she had not done, any more than she could permit herself to be
coerced by severity. Miss Edith might use gentle persuasion, and Miss
Poppleton might try to cow her and break her spirit, but neither should
succeed in forcing her to a false admission.

Helen Roper came up at dinner-time with a plate of meat and vegetables
in one hand and a glass of water in the other. She slammed them down
hastily on the table, with a scornful glance at the prisoner.

"That's all you'll get," she remarked brusquely. "Miss Poppleton says
you don't deserve pudding to-day. And quite right, too! Bread and
water'd be enough for you, in my opinion. Why haven't you the pluck to
face things in an honourable way, and say you're sorry for what you've
done? I never much cared for you, but I thought better of you than this.
For the sake of the school, do let's have an end of this wretched
business! 'Noblesse oblige' has been our motto, and I hoped every girl
would have risen to it. Have you no self-respect?"

"Yes--too much to say I've done what I haven't," retorted Gipsy,
glowering her defiance.

Helen shrugged her shoulders.

"Miss Poppleton says you're as obstinate as a mule, and she's about
right!" she remarked tartly, as she banged the door and locked it
noisily behind her. Gipsy was not hungry, so the plentiful supply of
meat and vegetables was quite sufficient for her needs, and the lack of
pudding was no grievance. Helen's severe censure hurt her desperately.
Had the girls all condemned her equally without fair trial, and without
sifting the evidence against her? Did Hetty, and Dilys, and Meg, and
Lennie, her own particular friends, consider her guilty? Had they no
better belief in her honour than that? Had everybody forsaken her? Gipsy
pushed her half-finished plateful aside. She was choking too much with
sobs to swallow another morsel.

"There isn't a single soul here who cares! I shall have to go away and
find Dad!" she exploded in a kind of desperation, standing up and
scrubbing her eyes with her wet pocket-handkerchief.

In the meantime Gipsy's friends had not altogether abandoned her, as she
supposed. They had been on the alert all the morning to discover some
means of communicating with her, though, owing to Miss Poppleton's
vigilance, their efforts had so far met with ill success. Any girl found
loitering in the vicinity of the passage that led to the dressing-room
had been packed off in a most summary fashion, with a warning not to
show herself there again under penalty of an imposition. After dinner,
however, Meg, who had secret plans of her own, managed to dodge Miss
Lindsay, and by creeping under the laurels in the plantation made her
way to a forbidden part of the garden which commanded a view of the
dressing-room window. Exactly underneath this window stood a greenhouse
with a sloping glass roof, and at the corner of the greenhouse there was
a long down spout to drain the gutters above. Meg advanced under cover
of the bushes with the caution of a scout, and reviewed the position
carefully before she ventured into the open.

"I believe I can manage it," she murmured. "My toe would fit into that
hole, and I could catch hold of the bracket. I haven't learnt
mountaineering for nothing, and if I could tackle that crag on Hawes
Fell I oughtn't to be stumped by a gutter pipe. I flatter myself there's
not another girl in the school who could do it, though. Between
half-past one and two is a good time. Probably no one will be round at
this side of the house, but I shall have to risk something, and trust to
luck."

The down spout certainly put Meg's climbing powers to the utmost test.
It was smooth and slippery, while the footholds in the wall were of the
very slenderest. With considerable difficulty she swung herself up, and
creeping over the roof of the greenhouse reached the small railed
balcony that gave access to the dressing-room window. She peeped in.
There was Gipsy, sitting, doing nothing, and looking the picture of
disconsolate misery.

"Gipsy!" called Meg, under her breath.

"Hello! It's never you! Oh, Meg, you angel!"

"Don't make such an idiotic noise, but help me in quietly. Mum's the
word! How are you getting on here?"

"Come in and I'll tell you. But you'll have to whisk out pretty quickly
if we hear Poppie's fairy footsteps in the passage. We must listen with
both ears open while we talk."

"Trust me! Oh, Gipsy, we're all so sorry for you!"

"You believe in me, then? How does the school take it?"

"Variously. Some are for you, and some are against. Dilys and Lennie and
Hetty of course stand up for you hard, and funnily enough so does
Leonora. She took your part this morning quite hotly, and had such a
quarrel with Maude and Gladys that she won't speak to them. I didn't
think Leonora would have behaved so decently. The Seniors are very
dubious, especially Helen Roper."

"Yes, Helen lashed into me when she brought my dinner. She's always
ready to think the worst of me."

"Poppie's furious," continued Meg. "She says you're only making your
punishment worse by obstinate falsehoods, and she means to make an
example of you."

"What's she going to do?" asked Gipsy with apprehension.

"I don't know--she didn't condescend to tell us."

"Look here, I'm sick of the whole business!" said Gipsy bitterly. "I'm
not wanted at Briarcroft. Poppie'd be only too delighted to get rid of
me. I'm not going to stay here any longer to be ordered about and
scolded, and accused of things I've never done. I'll run away. If you
can climb up the greenhouse roof, I can climb down it."

"Oh, Gipsy! Where will you go? Come to us! We'd hide you somewhere at
home, and Mother wouldn't give you up to Poppie, I know!"

But Gipsy shook her head emphatically. The very fact of the Gordons'
kindness made it impossible for her to trespass upon their generosity.
She knew that if she were to seek sanctuary at their house, she would
place Mrs. Gordon in a most awkward and difficult position, and her
natural delicacy of feeling caused her to shrink from such a course. It
would be a poor return indeed for their former hospitality.

"No, Meg; it's awfully good of you, but I must go farther away than
that. I'm off to Liverpool. Don't look so staggered; I've quite made up
my mind!"

"Liverpool! Why, that's miles and miles away! How will you go? And what
will you do when you get there?"

"I shall manage somehow to sell my watch. It's a gold one, you know, so
it ought to be worth enough to pay my railway fare, at any rate. It
belonged to my mother, and I wouldn't have parted with it under any
other circumstances than these. Thank goodness I put it on this morning!
I don't wear it always. When I get to Liverpool I have a plan. Captain
Smith--the captain of the vessel we were wrecked on--lives at a suburb
called Waterloo. I'll enquire and enquire till I find the house. If he's
at home, it's just possible that he could give me some little hint about
my father. Dad might have dropped something in talking to him that he
did not tell to me. I believe Captain Smith would help me if he could."

"But suppose he's gone to sea again?"

"That's quite likely. I've thought of that too. Well, I mean to go to
some of the shipping offices, and see if they'll give me a post on a
South African liner as assistant stewardess. Don't look so frightfully
aghast! It's work I could do very well, though it wouldn't be pleasant.
I've travelled so much about the world that I'm absolutely at home on
board ship. I know all the ins and outs of voyaging, and I'm a splendid
sailor, never seasick in the least. I could make myself most uncommonly
useful. I'd buy a packet of hairpins and tuck up my hair so that I'd
look much older, and I believe they'd engage me, because it's so
difficult sometimes to meet with assistant stewardesses. I'm nearly
fifteen now, and I'd rather earn my own living like that than stay here
at Briarcroft on Poppie's charity. American and Colonial girls are never
ashamed to work. When I get out to Cape Town, I'll go to the
headmistress of the school where I stopped three months. She was a
trump, and I believe she'd help me to find Dad."

So bold a plan almost took Meg's breath away, yet its ambitious daring
appealed strongly to her schoolgirl imagination. She had absolutely no
knowledge of the world, and the scheme which an older person would have
instantly vetoed sounded to her inexperienced young ears not only
perfectly feasible, but delightfully enterprising and romantic. She
entered into it with enthusiasm, absolutely certain that anything that
Gipsy proposed must be right. Having worshipped her friend for so long,
she could not believe her idol's judgment would be at fault.

"I'll tell you what we'll do!" she exclaimed. "Let's change dresses!
Then if Poppie tries to follow you, it will throw her off the scent.
Mine's longer than yours, too, so it will be better for a stewardess."

"Won't they notice it in school? It might give the thing away,"
hesitated Gipsy.

"It's Drawing the whole afternoon with Mr. Cobb, and he won't know the
difference. Quick, or somebody may be coming! Take my hat too. I'll get
yours out of the cupboard, or go home without one. None of the girls
would tell, and I'll dodge mistresses."

It did not take very long for the pair to effect an exchange of
costumes. They were soon arrayed in each other's dresses, an arrangement
which was certainly more to Gipsy's advantage than Meg's. They knew
there was no time to be lost, so, swinging themselves over the balcony
railings, they began creeping cautiously down the greenhouse roof. They
had just about reached the middle when Meg, who was first, suddenly
stopped with a stifled exclamation, and lay as flat and as still as she
could. Gipsy naturally followed suit, and looking downwards saw the
reason for the alarm. They were in horrible and imminent danger of
discovery. Miss Poppleton herself had entered the conservatory below,
and with a little watering can in her hand began to attend to her
plants. Would she look up and notice the two dark bodies on the roof
above her?

Gipsy felt she had never been so thrillingly interested in gardening in
the whole of her life. She watched while the geraniums and fuchsias
received their due sprinkling, and held her breath when the Principal
appeared about to stretch up to a hanging basket. Most fortunately for
the two girls, she changed her mind, and evidently thinking there was
not enough water in the can, emptied the remainder on a box of
seedlings, and went into the house for a fresh supply.

"Now!" breathed Meg. "As quick as you can, without putting your heels
through the glass!"

"It was the nearest squeak!" gasped Gipsy, as the pair, after a rapid
slide down the gutter pipe, reached the ground in safety. "She'll be
coming back directly."

"Rush under the shrubs--quick!" said Meg. "Oh, I say! There's the bell!
I must fly. I daren't walk in late, or your dress might be noticed at
call-over."

"I'm off too, then," returned Gipsy. "When Poppie unlocks the
dressing-room door, she'll find the bird has flown!"

"Goodbye! I can't wait! Oh, Gipsy! when shall I see you again?"

"Some day. I promise that! The bell's stopping! You'll be late, Meg, if
you don't scoot."

Torn in two between her reluctance to part from her friend and her
anxiety to be in time for call-over, Meg hurried away without further
farewell; and Gipsy, in wildest fear of detection, metaphorically
speaking burnt her boats, and darting through the side gate, ran with
all possible speed down the high-road.




CHAPTER XVII

A Tangled Story


MEG rushed to the lecture hall just in time to enter unobtrusively among
a crowd of other girls, and to take her seat for afternoon call-over
without attracting special notice from mistresses or monitresses. She
congratulated herself on having been promoted to Mr. Cobb's painting
class. The fact of her change of costume would be quite lost upon him,
though Miss Harris, the ordinary drawing mistress, might possibly have
recognized Gipsy's dress. One or two of her Form mates stared at her
curiously, but the greater number were too much preoccupied with
answering "present" to their names, and filing away to their various
classes, to pay any particular attention to her. The girls at the
painting lesson, with the exception of Fiona Campbell, were all Seniors.
If they realized any difference in Meg's appearance, there was no
opportunity either for them to make comments or for her to give
explanations. I am afraid the study in oil colours of carnations, upon
which she was engaged, did not make much progress that afternoon, for
her thoughts were entirely about Gipsy, wondering how far she had got
upon her travels, and whether Miss Poppleton had yet discovered her
absence.

Directly the four o'clock bell rang and the class was released, Meg,
leaving the other girls leisurely putting away their tubes of paints and
cleaning their palettes, scrambled her possessions together anyhow, and
bolted from the room before she could be questioned. Going boldly to the
boarders' cupboard in the hall, she purloined Gipsy's hat, and, without
waiting even to tell her story to Hetty and Dilys, departed from the
premises with all possible speed.

She had come to school that day on her bicycle, and fetching it hastily
from the shed where all the machines were stored, she rode away in the
direction of Greyfield. There was something slightly wrong with one of
her pedals, and her father had told her that morning that she had better
have it mended at once, so she intended to take the cycle to the depot
where it had been bought, and let it be thoroughly overhauled before she
returned home. The assistant at the shop promised to have the repairs
finished in about half an hour, and Meg therefore strolled into the
town, to wait with what patience she could muster. She walked up
Corporation Street and round by the Town Hall, peeped into the Parish
Church and the Free Library, then finding herself close to the railway
station, decided to go and buy a copy of _Home Chat_ or _Tit Bits_ at
the bookstall.

"Want a ticket, Miss?" asked a porter, as she passed the booking-office
near the entrance.

"No, thank you; I'm only going to get a paper," replied Meg, walking
briskly on.

She noticed that the man looked at her keenly, and said something to
another official. Immediately afterwards an inspector came on to the
platform, and eyed her with more than ordinary curiosity. She could
hear the telephone bell ringing hard, but it never struck her that these
occurrences had anything to do with herself. She walked to the
bookstall, and after spending some minutes looking at the various
magazines spread forth, bought a copy of _Tit Bits_, and strolled back
down the platform reading it as she went, and smiling over the jokes. At
the automatic sweet-machine she paused, put a penny in the slot, and had
just withdrawn her box of chocolates when, turning round, she found
herself face to face with a policeman.

"Very sorry, Miss," said the man civilly, "but I'm afraid you've got to
go along with me."

Meg was so surprised that she nearly dropped both _Tit Bits_ and the
chocolates.

"To go along with you!" she gasped. "Indeed I shan't do anything of the
sort."

"Better not make a scene, Miss," advised the policeman, with an
indulgent smile. "I'm sorry, but it's my duty to take you in charge."

"But what for? I've done nothing!" protested Meg in huge indignation.

"That's a little matter between your schoolmistress and yourself. It's
none of my business. My instructions are to take you straight to the
police station."

"But I tell you I won't be taken!"

"Better go quietly, Missy," said the station inspector, who had come
bustling up. "You don't want to attract a crowd, I'm sure, do you? No;
then let me put you in this cab, and drive you round to the police
station. It's only a couple of streets away. They'll explain everything
to you there."

There was sense in his remarks, for people on the platform were
beginning to stop and stare at Meg with an interest she deeply resented.
To enter the cab seemed the lesser evil, even if she must pay a visit to
the police station. The inspector handed her in politely, and entering
after, took the seat opposite, while the policeman mounted the box
beside the driver.

"They seem desperately afraid of my escaping! I wonder they don't
handcuff me!" thought Meg, waxing more and more angry at the indignity
of the proceeding. The little drive only occupied a few minutes, and
arrived at the police station, she was shown at once into the head
inspector's office.

"I should like to know what charge you have against me," demanded Meg,
determined to hold her own, and not to be frightened at her arrest.

"Withdrawing yourself from the hands of your lawful schoolmistress and
present guardian," replied the inspector pompously.

"But I was only on my way home!"

The official, however, was busy reading something from a notebook.

"'Surname Latimer, Christian name Gipsy. Height, 5 feet 1 inch. Eyes
brown, complexion dark, hair brown. Dressed in navy-blue alpaca frock
over white delaine blouse top, and probably wearing sailor hat with
blue-and-white striped band, and a pair of tennis shoes.' The whole
tallies exactly," he murmured, surveying Meg from head to foot, to see
that he had not omitted any of the items.

"You're making a mistake. My name's Margaret Gordon, not Gipsy Latimer!
I live at The Gables, near Willowburn. My father is a solicitor in the
town. His office is at 15 Wells Street."

"We'll soon see about that. I think I must trouble you for your
pocket-handkerchief, Missy, please."

Considerably mystified, Meg felt in her pocket and handed over the
article in question. The inspector examined it closely, then shook his
head.

"It has 'G. Latimer' marked in the corner. That doesn't look much like
Margaret Gordon, does it?"

Meg was furious at her own stupidity. She and Gipsy had never thought of
exchanging the contents of their pockets.

"Look here! Send for my father!" she begged. "He'll soon tell you who I
am, and explain the whole matter."

"We don't need to send for anybody," returned the official. "Miss
Poppleton's quite enough for us. We've got her description of you, and
our instructions are to take you straight back to the school. You'll
find you've not gained much by running away."

There was only one consolation for Meg, the remembrance that her capture
would possibly enable Gipsy to escape in safety.

"They must have been looking out for her at the railway station," she
thought, "but they wouldn't recognize her in my dress. I'd like to know
what Poppie'll say when I turn up instead!"

There was undoubtedly a humorous side to the situation, and Meg laughed
as she pictured the discomfiture of the officials when they discovered
their mistake. It seemed of no further use to try to prove her identity
at present, so she allowed herself to be once more escorted to the cab
and driven off, this time in the direction of Briarcroft.

"I wonder what sort of a scrape I'm in for," she thought, as they drew
up at the front door, and the constable in charge solemnly marched her
into the house. Miss Poppleton came hurrying out of the library into the
hall, followed by Miss Edith.

"I am happy to be able to inform you, Madam, that our search has been
successful," said the policeman, standing at attention.

"What? Have you found her?" cried Miss Poppleton eagerly; then she
stopped as she recognized Meg. "Ah! So that's it, is it? I'm sorry to
say, constable, that you've brought the wrong girl!"

Meg had thought out her plan of action carefully during her drive in the
cab, and took advantage of the sensation that followed to rush at the
Principal with an air of aggrieved and injured innocence.

"Oh, Miss Poppleton! Isn't it a horrible mistake!" she exclaimed. "I
told them my name, and they wouldn't believe me! Oh! please, may I go
home immediately? My mother will be so dreadfully anxious at my being so
late!"

"Meg, do you know where Gipsy is?" interposed Miss Edith, catching her
by the arm.

"Indeed I don't; I haven't the least idea!" replied Meg truthfully.
"Please let me go home, and relieve Mother's mind!"

"Yes, go at once!" answered Miss Poppleton distractedly; and turning to
the rueful constable, she began to explain matters with much volubility.

Meg vanished like the wind, thankful that in the general excitement
nobody had remarked upon the fact that she was wearing Gipsy's dress.
She considered that she had come out of the affair uncommonly well, and
congratulated herself upon her presence of mind in the emergency. She
hurried home as fast as she could, anxious to tell the tale of Gipsy's
escape and her own adventure, and rather proud of her share in both. To
her surprise her mother took an utterly different view of the case from
her own.

"Gipsy run away!" cried Mrs. Gordon in great consternation. "And you
changed dresses with her so as to help her? Oh, Meg! what have you done!
You naughty, foolish, foolish girl! You little know the dangers you may
have thrown her into. We must do our utmost to find her and bring her
back this very evening. We should never forgive ourselves if any harm
came to her. I must telephone at once, and see if Father's still at the
office."

"But, Mummie darling, Gipsy doesn't want to be caught and brought back
to Poppie's tender mercies. She's going to ship as a stewardess, and go
to South Africa to look for her father. I think it's ripping!"

"You don't know what you're talking about, Meg. Gipsy is too young to
manage her own affairs without consulting her elders. I would have had
the poor child here, rather than that she should run away. Tell me
everything you can remember of her plans. I expect Father will start for
Liverpool at once in search of her."

"You won't tell Poppie, Motherkins?"

"I shall send a note to Miss Poppleton as soon as I have telephoned to
Father. We must leave no stone unturned to find Gipsy. Miss Poppleton
will be as alarmed and anxious as I am myself. She may be a little
stern, but she is a good, conscientious person in the main."

Mrs. Gordon's estimate of Miss Poppleton's character was a correct one.
The latter, though she had been severe and even hard with Gipsy, had
meant well by her, and had intended to take charge of her until she
found an opportunity of sending her, under careful protection, to her
relations in New Zealand. She was in a state of the utmost concern at
the girl's rash action in running away, and had lost no time in
summoning the aid of the police to track her and ensure her safety. If
Gipsy were the black sheep of the flock, she was at any rate the lost
sheep, to be sought for diligently, and rejoiced over when found.

To Miss Edith the affair was a sad blow. She was genuinely fond of
Gipsy, and had been greatly distressed by the events of the last few
days. Though she dutifully accepted her sister's opinion, and believed
Gipsy guilty, she nevertheless was ready to welcome back the prodigal
with open arms. She did not dare to break down before Miss Poppleton,
who disliked a public exhibition of feeling, so she retired to the linen
room to wipe her eyes in private. Having indulged in a little
surreptitious weeping she felt better, and decided to try to distract
her mind by tidying her cupboards. Now, though Miss Edith was on the
whole a good housekeeper, she had a poor memory, and was very apt to put
things away and forget all about them. As she rearranged her drawers and
shelves on this particular evening, she was dismayed to find several
articles for which she had searched in vain elsewhere.

"Why, here's the tea cloth that I thought had been lost in the wash!"
she exclaimed. "And Miss Lindsay's dressing jacket--she was afraid she
must have left it in London. Why! and here's a coat of Daisy
Scatcherd's. I remember quite plainly putting it by last autumn, when
she had such a terrible cold. I thought it was too thin for her to wear.
Why didn't the child ask me for it? She's as forgetful as I am. It's
just the thing for chilly evenings, to slip on when she's been playing
tennis."

Miss Edith gave the coat a good shake, and as she did so there fell from
the pocket an unopened letter. She picked it up and looked at the
address:

          "MISS GIPSY LATIMER,
                   Briarcroft Hall,
                              Greyfield,
                                   England."

She read it twice before she realized its significance. Then, trembling
violently, she sank on to a chair, and gave way to what very closely
resembled a fit Of hysteria.

"Fetch Miss Poppleton!" she cried to the alarmed servant who ran to the
linen room at the sound of her wails. "Oh, dear! To think it's all my
fault!"

Miss Poppleton hurried to the scene at once, and though at first her
sister's explanation was rather incoherent, she managed to grasp the
main facts of the case.

"It's Gipsy's missing letter, Dorothea! It must have come after all, you
see, only I can't imagine how it got into Daisy Scatcherd's pocket. I
don't remember looking in the pockets when I put the coat by. And it's
been there all this time! Look, the postmark is Cape Town, 3 November.
Oh, isn't it dreadful? And the poor, dear child has just run away!
Dorothea, whatever are we to do about it?" moaned Miss Edith, almost
beside herself with horror at her discovery.

"In the circumstances I consider I am perfectly justified in reading the
letter," replied Miss Poppleton, solemnly tearing open the envelope.
"Why, here's an enclosure for me inside it!"

The long-delayed missive was from Gipsy's father, and contained the very
information for which Miss Poppleton had waited more than six weary
months. Mr. Latimer informed her that he was on the point of starting
with a pioneering expedition to prospect for minerals in the almost
unexplored district at the sources of one of the tributaries of the
Zambesi. It might be several months before he would be in any civilized
place whence it would be possible for him to communicate with her again,
but during his absence he was glad to know that his little daughter was
left in good hands. For all expenses in connection with Gipsy's
education, dress, and pocket-money, he begged to refer her to his London
bankers, Messrs. Hall & Co. of Lombard Street, who had instructions to
settle the account as soon as submitted to them.

"I hope my girlie will behave well, and give no trouble," he wrote. "She
is generally ready to attach herself to anybody who is kind to her."

Miss Poppleton turned a dull crimson as she finished reading the letter,
and handed it to Miss Edith.

"I must question Daisy Scatcherd at once," she remarked peremptorily. "I
can't understand how the letter came to be in her pocket at all."

The luckless Daisy, subjected to a searching examination, could at first
render no account of how she came to be mixed up in the affair. Then
little by little a vague remembrance returned to her, and she began
dimly to recall the circumstances.

"It must have been on my birthday," she faltered. "I have a kind of
recollection that I stopped the postman in the drive, and he gave me
several letters. But indeed I never noticed one for Gipsy! If I even
looked at the name, I didn't take it in properly. I suppose I only saw
it wasn't for me, and stuffed it in my pocket while I opened my own
letters. Then I utterly forgot all about it."

"It must be a warning to you, Daisy, against carelessness--a warning to
last you the rest of your life," said Miss Poppleton, relieving her
feelings by improving the occasion. "Your thoughtless act has had the
most unfortunate consequences. It's no use crying now" (as Daisy
dissolved into tears). "You can't mend matters. But I hope you'll take
this to heart, and be more careful in future."

"If we could only find that poor, unfortunate child, Gipsy," sobbed Miss
Edith, when the weeping Daisy had taken her departure. "I always said
perhaps her father wasn't an adventurer after all. I think you were too
hard on her, Dorothea--too hard altogether!" Which, was the nearest
approach to insubordination that Miss Edith, in all her years of meek
subserviency to her sister, had ever yet dared to venture upon.




CHAPTER XVIII

Gipsy at Large


AND where, all this time, was Gipsy, whom we left running down the road
in the direction of Greyfield?

She tore along at the top of her speed, until she had put a considerable
distance between herself and Briarcroft; then, panting and almost
breathless, she slackened her pace, and looked round to see whether
anyone was following her. As nobody of a more suspicious character than
an errand boy and a nurse girl with a perambulator was in sight, she
began to congratulate herself that she had escaped unobserved. How soon
her absence would be discovered depended upon when Miss Poppleton or one
of the monitresses next paid a visit to the dressing-room; and she
laughed to picture the consternation that would ensue when the door was
unlocked and her prison found to be vacant. No doubt they would send in
search of her, but in the meantime she had stolen a march upon them, and
given herself the advantage of a start, so she hoped by using all
possible haste to get away before she was traced.

As she strode rapidly along, all her old vagabond instincts arose, and
the gipsy element which had justified her name came strongly to the
fore. It was a delightful, mild afternoon, with blue sky and bright
sunshine; the gardens on either side of the road were gay with pink
hawthorn and long, drooping sprays of laburnum, while blackbirds,
thrushes, chaffinches, and tits were singing in a perfect chorus of joy.
It felt so glorious to be as free as the birds, to be rid of all the
tiresome rules and restrictions and conventions that had oppressed her
soul for the last eight months, to be accountable to nobody but herself,
and to be able to do just what she chose and go where she liked. School
seemed as a nightmare behind her, and the world a fresh wonderland which
it was her happy privilege to have the chance to explore.

"I'll never go back again--never!" she resolved. "Not if I have to sweep
a crossing or sell flowers! But I don't think it will come to that,
because I'm sure I can get a post on board ship. Oh, what a blissful
relief it is to be on my own for once! I've made up my mind to find Dad,
if I have to go to the ends of the earth to hunt for him."

In the exuberance of her spirits she almost danced along, humming now
Schubert's "Wander Song", with its ringing refrain:

          "Oh! surely he must careless be,
           Who never loved to wander free,
              To wander! To wander!"

or "The Miller of Dee", with special emphasis on the words:

          "I care for nobody, no, not I!
           And nobody cares for me."

The sight of the town of Greyfield, with its streets and shops, changed
the current of her thoughts, and brought the more sober reflection that
she had no money in her pocket, and that it was a matter of urgent
necessity to obtain some if she meant to reach Liverpool and start for
South Africa. The fare, she knew, was about seven shillings, and though
she hoped to be able to embark on board ship almost immediately after
her arrival at the port, she supposed she would require something in the
way of food on the journey. It went to her heart to be obliged to sell
her beautiful gold watch, but in the circumstances it seemed the only
thing to be done, and she braced her mind to part with it. She had no
previous experience of selling things, so, choosing out the best
jeweller's shop in the High Street, she marched blithely in, and taking
off her watch and chain laid them upon the counter.

"Yes, Miss; want repairing, I suppose?" enquired the assistant who came
to attend to her.

"No, they're in perfectly good order; but I wish to sell them. What
price can you give me for them?" returned Gipsy confidently.

The man looked at her in decided astonishment, then pushed back the
watch across the counter with a marked decrease of civility.

"We don't do that kind of business," he replied shortly.

"Won't you buy it then?" asked Gipsy in accents of blank disappointment.

"No; it's not in our line at all."

"Then where should I be able to sell it?"

"I couldn't say; probably at a secondhand shop. We only deal in new
articles."

Very much disconcerted and snubbed, Gipsy snatched up her watch and
chain and fled from the shop. She had evidently made a mistake in
applying at a first-class jeweller's, and she was angry at having
exposed herself to the humiliation of a rebuff. With two flaming spots
in her cheeks, she stalked down the High Street, and into one of the
narrower and more modest by-streets, where smaller shops were to be
found. She walked on for quite a long way without meeting with any place
that looked in the least degree likely; then at last, at the corner of
an even humbler street still, she found a secondhand furniture dealer,
who, to judge by the contents of his windows, seemed also to trade in a
variety of miscellaneous articles. On the pavement in front of the shop
were spread forth specimens of chairs, tables, and washstands, and
inside she could see a goodly array of glass, antique china, old
jewellery, old silver, prints, pictures, books, candlesticks, firearms,
and an assortment of small pieces of bric-a-brac. Over the door was the
name of Daniel Lucas.

"This looks more the kind of place," she murmured. "I'll have a try
here, at any rate."

The interior of the shop was so crowded with furniture that it was quite
difficult to walk between the piled-up sideboards and sofas to the
corner where a very dirty and shabby-looking individual, with untidy
grey hair and unshaven chin, was busy adding up accounts. He paused with
a grimy finger in the middle of a column of figures, and peered at Gipsy
with a pair of red, bleary eyes.

[Illustration: "HE PAUSED AND PEERED AT GIPSY"]

"I see you sell secondhand jewellery here, and want to know if you care
to buy a watch," she began, with rather less assurance than at her
former interview.

"It depends on the article. Have you brought it with you?" replied the
old man cautiously.

"It's real gold, and so is the chain," volunteered Gipsy, as she
produced her treasure.

Mr. Daniel Lucas examined both watch and chain with minute care, then
shook his head deprecatingly.

"I'm afraid it wouldn't be of much use to me. You see, it's not exactly
in the nature of an antique," he replied.

Gipsy's face fell. To get the money for her journey was a matter of
vital importance.

"Couldn't you offer me anything for it?" she pleaded.

The bleary red eyes glanced at her keenly, and appeared to appreciate
her disappointment.

"Well, to oblige you, I might go to a matter of seven and six."

"Couldn't you possibly make it ten shillings, with the chain?" hazarded
Gipsy. She had no idea of the value of secondhand articles, and thought
only of what amount would take her to Liverpool.

"All right--with the chain. But it's a poor bargain for me, mind you.
I'm only doing it just to oblige you," returned Mr. Lucas, opening a
drawer and counting out four half-crowns with an alacrity that belied
his words. Thankful to have concluded the transaction on any terms,
Gipsy seized the money and beat a hasty retreat. She was extremely
anxious to reach the station before Miss Poppleton missed her and sent
somebody in search of her. She had no idea of the times of the
trains, but trusted to luck to catch the next that would take her
anywhere in the right direction. With her four precious half-crowns
grasped tightly in her hand, she hurried back up the sordid street, and
took the shortest cut possible to the railway station. There was quite a
crowd at the booking office, so she was able to take her place in the
queue of prospective travellers and to obtain her ticket without
attracting any special attention.

"Liverpool?" said the inspector who stood at the platform door. "You've
just time if you're quick. That's the train over there on No. 3."

Gipsy fled across the bridge with a speed that seriously interfered with
the convenience of passengers coming in the opposite direction; she
rattled down the steps on to Platform 3, and, nearly falling over a pile
of luggage, flung herself into the first third-class compartment that
came to hand.

"Am I right for Liverpool?" she gasped tremulously to the collector who
came to punch her ticket.

"Quite right, Miss; change at Preston, that's all," replied the man as
he slammed the door.

The porters were thrusting some boxes into the luggage van, and a few
latecomers made a last dash for carriages; then the green flag waved,
the whistle sounded, and the train started with a jerk. Gipsy, hot,
excited, and agitated, drew a long, long breath of relief. She was
actually off! They were speeding fast out of the station, and she was
leaving Greyfield and Briarcroft, and all the painful experiences of the
last few months, entirely behind her. She could hardly believe her good
luck in thus slipping away unobserved. True, she had only a half-crown
and two pennies left after paying her fare, but she supposed that would
be enough to last her until she could go on board a vessel. Surely
chance had favoured her in enabling her to reach the station in the nick
of time to catch the train, and no doubt she would be equally fortunate
when she reached Liverpool. Her fellow passengers were uninteresting,
and she had no desire to talk to anyone and confide her affairs, so she
amused herself with her own thoughts and plans for the future. At
Preston she changed, and bought a bun at the refreshment rooms; her
dinner had been almost untasted, and she was growing hungry now. It
seemed funny to have absolutely no luggage, though in one respect it was
a great convenience not to be obliged to haul about a heavy handbag, or
to tip a porter out of her extremely small capital.

"I feel almost as if I'd been shipwrecked again--in a borrowed dress and
hat, and nothing else to call my own!" she thought with a smile.

It was half-past six before the train arrived at the big Liverpool
terminus--rather late in the day to begin all the numerous enquiries
which Gipsy was determined to make; but, nothing daunted, she set out at
once for Waterloo, to try to find the residence of her old friend
Captain Smith. She was directed by a policeman to take an overhead
electric car, and travelled several miles above what seemed a wilderness
of streets before she reached the suburb in question. Not knowing where
to make a beginning, she decided to go first to a post office, thinking
that there she might be able to gain the information she wanted. She
had somehow imagined Waterloo to be quite a little place, where by
diligent enquiry it would be fairly easy to trace such an important
person as a sea captain who had been wrecked in the Bay of Biscay;
greatly to her dismay, however, she found herself in the midst of what
seemed a large city in itself--a veritable maze of long streets and
small houses, stretching away into the distance with an endless vista of
chimneypots. In a distinctly sober frame of mind she entered the post
office and proffered her question.

"Smith? I couldn't tell you, I'm sure; there are so many Smiths," said
the girl at the counter, with a superior smile. "One of them may be a
sea captain, for anything I know. You'd better look in the Directory."

Gipsy seized upon the book with a sense of relief, and carried it off to
a less busy part of the office. She turned up Waterloo, found the list
of residents, and went through them in alphabetical order till she
reached the letter S. She was appalled to see the number of Smiths who
resided at Waterloo. To some of the names the Directory had appended an
occupation, but with many it gave no details. Taking one of the
telegraph forms she wrote down the addresses of about a dozen Smiths
who, she considered, might be likely; then, returning the Directory to
the girl at the counter, she started off on her arduous quest.

"I shall go to 'Ocean Villa' first," she thought. "It has a particularly
nautical sound. I shouldn't think anybody but a sea captain could
possibly live there. 'The Anchorage' sounds hopeful too, though it
ought to be the home of somebody who is retired. 'Sea View Cottage' is
doubtful, but 'Teneriffe House' is likely. The _Queen of the Waves_ used
to touch sometimes at Teneriffe. Oh, dear! the trouble will be to hunt
out where they all are."

Poor Gipsy had indeed undertaken a most difficult task. She was obliged
to ask her way again and again, and when at length she arrived at "Ocean
Villa" it was only to meet with the information that nobody of a
seafaring description was known there. Much disappointed, she trudged
away in an opposite direction to find "The Anchorage", and after walking
half a mile or more in search of it, was again confronted with ill
success. At "Sea View Cottage" and "Teneriffe House" she fared no
better; the occupiers, albeit they belonged to the great family of
Smiths, had no connection whatever with the sea: and though she went to
several other addresses on her list, the answer was invariably the same.

Utterly tired out, weary and despondent, Gipsy retraced her steps in the
direction of the post office. Having parted with her watch, she had no
idea of the time, but catching sight of a clock in a public building,
she was horrified to find it was nearly a quarter to nine. The days at
that season of the year were long, and this particular evening had been
more than usually light; moreover, she had been entirely preoccupied
with her quest, so she had never given a thought to the rapidly passing
hours. For the first time the question of where she must sleep presented
itself to her.

"I must get back to Liverpool," she thought, "and apply at one of the
shipping offices. The docks aren't very far away, so I can get engaged
as stewardess and go on board some ship at once, I expect."

But in the meantime a meal was an urgent necessity. She was sick and
faint from want of food, and felt as if her tired feet could scarcely
carry her farther. Seeing a modest confectioner's shop with a notice
"Teas Provided", she went in and asked for some refreshment. The
proprietress, a little elderly woman, struck partly by the weary look on
her face, and partly by the unusual circumstance of a girl of her age
coming into the shop alone to ask for tea at so late an hour, took her
into a small parlour, and while laying the table and bringing in the
meal, insinuated a few skilful questions as to where she was going.
Gipsy had decided to pose as a working girl, so she answered readily
enough that she was on her way to Liverpool, to find a post as assistant
stewardess; and she wished to be very quick over her tea, so that she
might go at once to the shipping offices, procure an engagement, and
proceed at once to her vessel.

The expression on the woman's face changed from curiosity to sympathy,
and then to utter consternation, as Gipsy briefly stated her intentions.

"But my goodness gracious! You'll never get a situation at this time of
night!" she broke out. "Why, don't you know all the offices close at
half-past five?"

Gipsy had not known, and the news struck her like a deadly blow.

"The offices all closed! Do you mean to say I can't get on board ship
to-night?" she gasped. "Then where in the world am I to go?"

The woman shook her head dubiously.

"Best go back where you've come from," she remarked.

"I can't! I can't!" cried Gipsy. "That's absolutely impossible. Oh! why
didn't I know of this before? What shall I do? What shall I do?" and
springing up excitedly from the table, she burst into a flood of tears.
For the first time she realized what an extremely rash thing she had
done in running away, and in what a terrible position she had placed
herself. Alone, friendless, and nearly penniless, in the midst of a
great, strange city, with no one who knew her, nowhere to go, and the
light already fading so fast that it was dark in the little parlour! She
had acted almost on the spur of the moment in leaving Briarcroft,
without seriously considering whether her plans were practicable, and
now she was reaping the bitter harvest of her own folly. She began
heartily to wish herself back at school; even Miss Poppleton's severest
scolding was as nothing to the misery of this present crisis, and she
yearned for the sight of Miss Edith with a longing that amounted to
home-sickness. Wishing and regretting, however, would not help her in
the least. She must find some way out of her difficulty, and that
promptly.

"I've only one and ninepence left," she faltered. "And out of that I
have to pay for my tea and keep a few pennies to go back into Liverpool
with by the car. Could I get a night's lodging anywhere very cheaply? Do
you know of a clean place?"

"Better not try cheap lodgings!" said the woman emphatically. "Can't you
go home again? No? That's a bad lookout." Then, noticing the utter
agony in Gipsy's face, she added: "Well, I'd be sorry to turn a young
girl like you out alone at this time of night. I'll let you sleep on the
sofa here, if you can manage, and you can get on to Liverpool first
thing in the morning."

Manage? Gipsy would have slept on the floor, instead of the sofa, if
required. She was only too thankful to be allowed to stay, and was
almost ready to hug the little confectioner with gratitude. She was so
utterly wearied that she was glad to lie down at once in the parlour,
and even before the tea-things were removed from the table she had sunk
into a sleep of absolute exhaustion. Her hostess scanned her face
narrowly, took in the details of her dress, and examined her school hat
with attention, then shook her head.

"Doesn't look much in the stewardess line of business," she muttered.
"There's something wrong here, I'm afraid. I'll have a talk with her
to-morrow." Then she locked the parlour door carefully before she went
back to the shop.

Gipsy slept straight on until eight o'clock the next morning, when she
was aroused by her landlady, who brought her a cup of tea and a piece of
thick bread and butter.

"If you'll take the advice of one who knows more of the world than you,"
said the woman, "you'll go back home as fast as you can. Your own folks
are the best to look after you. If you've spent all your money, they'd
help you at the police station. They'll always send a girl back to her
friends." Then, leaving Gipsy to digest her remarks while eating her
breakfast, she went to perform household tasks.

The last hint put Gipsy in a panic. With her long night's rest her
spirits had revived, and her courage returned. The idea of seeking her
father in South Africa appeared once more attractive, and she had no
wish to be taken charge of by the police and ignominiously packed back
to school. She wondered whether the little confectioner had already gone
to inform a constable of her whereabouts. She could and would not allow
herself to be thus treated. Hurriedly finishing the tea and bread and
butter, she laid all her money, with the exception of sixpence, on the
table, and finding the shop door already open, made her escape into the
street. It felt almost like running away a second time, and she was
sorry not to have said "Thank you!" for her night's lodging, but she
considered the emergency to be critical, and was glad when she turned
the corner and was out of sight of the shop. She made her way as fast as
possible to the electric railway, and took the first car for Liverpool,
determined not to waste any further time in looking for Captain Smith at
Waterloo, but to try her utmost to obtain a berth as stewardess. By dint
of diligent asking, she managed to find the quarters of one of the
shipping companies that ran a line of steamers to South Africa, and
after toiling up a long flight of stairs she boldly entered the office,
and stated her business to an astonished clerk. He gave her one
comprehensive glance, screwed up his mouth, and most impolitely
whistled.

"Whew! You're rather juvenile for the job, ain't you?" he asked
facetiously. "Ever been on the sea before? 'Tisn't nice when it's rough,
I can tell you."

"I'm older than I look," returned Gipsy with dignity, suddenly
remembering, however, to her confusion, that she had forgotten to buy a
box of hairpins and turn up her hair. "That's to say, I'm quite old
enough to be very useful on board ship, and I know all about long
voyages. I'd like to speak to the head of the office."

"I dare say you would! But he's not here yet--never comes down till ten
or half-past, and I don't believe he'd see you, either. We're not
wanting any stewardesses at present--leastways, those we engage have to
be on the wrong side of thirty."

"I'll wait and see the head of the office," announced Gipsy firmly.

"Well! Of all the cheek--!"

But at that moment the telephone bell rang violently in an inner room,
and the clerk fled to the instrument. After a few minutes he returned,
and with a complete change in his manner asked Gipsy to take a seat.

"The Chief will be here before long," he said affably. "If you don't
mind waiting a little, I can promise it will be to your advantage."

Gipsy sat down on one of the office chairs, and amused herself for about
the space of ten minutes in studying the shipping advertisements that
were hung round the walls. She turned eagerly at last when a footstep
was heard upon the staircase. Was it the manager of the Tower Line, she
wondered, and would he after all be willing to engage her for the work
she desired? Her heart beat and throbbed as the door swung open. But
instead of a stranger appeared the familiar figure of her friend Meg's
father.

"Gipsy! Gipsy!" cried Mr. Gordon reproachfully. "Thank Heaven I've found
you! Come along with me at once, child! We must go straight back to
Greyfield by the next express."




CHAPTER XIX

The United Guild Festival


MR. GORDON had been most seriously concerned at the news of Gipsy's
unauthorized flight, and considering the part which his daughter Meg had
played in helping her to escape, he held himself to be morally
responsible for the consequences of so foolish a step, and had started
at once for Liverpool in search of the truant. Until very late at night
he had used all efforts to trace her, but without success; then as soon
as possible in the morning, acting on the knowledge of Gipsy's plans
which Meg had supplied, he had telephoned to every steamship company in
the city that ran vessels to South Africa, giving a description of the
girl, and asking, if she called at the office, that she might be
detained until he could arrive and claim her. By a fortunate chance he
rang up the Tower Line at the very time when Gipsy had presented herself
to enquire for work, so, jumping into a taxicab, he had driven
immediately from his hotel to their offices.

On the whole, Gipsy was so relieved to see a friend who was prepared to
take charge of her that she submitted quite peaceably to be escorted
back to Greyfield. The clerk's hilarity at her application for a
stewardess-ship, and his assurance that such posts were only given to
middle-aged women, had upset her calculations, and remembering her
forlorn condition of the previous night, she was glad not to risk a
repetition of such a painful experience. Mr. Gordon had at first
intended to take her home with him to The Gables, but on telephoning to
his wife on his arrival at Greyfield station, he learnt about the
missing letter which had been discovered in Daisy Scatcherd's coat
pocket, and decided it would be better for her to go straight to
Briarcroft.

The prospect of a letter from her father was a magnet more than
sufficient to draw Gipsy back to school. All fear of Miss Poppleton's
wrath faded away in the excitement of this wonderful news.

"And to think that if I'd gone to South Africa I should have missed it!"
she exclaimed.

Miss Poppleton received the prodigal with wonderful graciousness, and
Miss Edith wept over her, upbraided her, and kissed her all at once.

"Gipsy, darling! How could you be so naughty? You might have known we
were your best friends. I never slept all night for worrying about you;
and I'm sure Miss Poppleton didn't either. To think that you should have
run away from us! And your letter was there all the time, if we'd only
known! It's locked up safely in my desk, all ready for you."

"Give it me now, please!" pleaded Gipsy.

Although Gipsy's return to Briarcroft had been a very desirable
conclusion to the episode of her running away, there were several
matters left which remained in a far from satisfactory condition. In the
first place, though her father's letter had relieved all anxiety about
her school fees and general expenses, and removed her from her former
most unpleasant position, it did not give any clue to his present
whereabouts. Beyond the brief information that he was going to the
sources of a tributary of the Zambesi, she knew nothing. There was no
address given to which she might write, or any definite date fixed for
his return to civilization. The London bankers, with whom Miss Poppleton
at once communicated, had no further knowledge. He seemed to have
disappeared into the unexplored wilds of Central Africa, and to have
left no trace. In view of the dangers to which a pioneering party, such
as he had joined, would be exposed from wild beasts, hostile natives,
lack of food and water, or the hardships of travelling in the interior
of the continent, there was cause for considerable uneasiness on his
behalf. It seemed high time that some news was received of the
expedition. It was now seven months from the date of Mr. Latimer's
letter, and he had apparently expected to return in three or four.

Poor Gipsy conjured up all kinds of fears for her father's safety. She
imagined him ill in some inaccessible spot, without medical aid, or
taken prisoner by a native chief, or--more terrible still--that he had
succumbed to the dangers and difficulties of the journey. She carried
his letter about as her greatest treasure, and kissed it a dozen times a
day; but she felt that, while appreciating its possession, she found it
a very unsatisfactory substitute for the fuller details she coveted of
his present welfare.

Her second trouble was the fact that she was still supposed to be guilty
of that surreptitious outing in the evening, and to have flatly told
falsehoods to screen herself. Gipsy had many faults, but she was
strictly truthful, and this imputation against her honour rankled
sorely. Miss Poppleton had not pressed the matter, probably thinking it
a secondary consideration to her greater crime of running away. In her
relief at receiving a handsome cheque from Mr. Latimer's bankers, the
Principal had decided to forgive Gipsy's past indiscretions, and to
start afresh on a different basis. By a little rearrangement she managed
to find room for Gipsy again in her old dormitory, and the manifold odd
duties which had been assigned to her were entirely removed. Once back
in her favourite No. 3, with a new set of summer clothes and an ample
supply of pocket-money, Gipsy felt reinstated in her former position in
school. With the utmost satisfaction she paid up her arrears of
subscriptions to the Guild, and put straight several other little
matters where she felt she owed a moral if not an actual debt.

"There's only one thing that makes me savage," she declared one evening
to some of her own set who were assembled in the Juniors' room, "and
that is that Poppie still believes I told those awful fibs about not
going out that wet evening. On my honour I spoke the truth. Somebody
else must have gone out in my waterproof."

"What does it matter, now it's all over?" asked Leonora. "Poppie's
forgiven you."

"Why, it matters a great deal. I don't want to be forgiven for what I've
never done. And I don't care to possess a reputation for telling fibs.
Whoever went out in my cloak ought to own up, and if she doesn't, she's
a mean, detestable, contemptible sneak!"

"Shielding herself at your expense!" added Hetty indignantly.

Leonora turned as crimson as the woolwork she was stitching.

"I never thought of it in that way! It really never struck me!" she
gasped. "I'm sure I've no wish to shield myself at anybody's expense.
Why, if you want to know, it was I who went out in your waterproof and
galoshes."

Leonora's announcement made the sensation it deserved.

"You! You!" cried the amazed girls.

"But why did you go?"

"How could you do such a thing?"

"Why didn't you tell?"

"I went for a very simple reason," replied Leonora coolly. "You know how
fond I am of sweets, and what an abominably mean rule there is here
about our not buying them. Well, I just couldn't stand doing without my
chocolates, so I used to dodge out whenever I dared to that little shop
in Mansfield Road, and buy some. On that particular wet evening I was in
a fearful hurry to go before I began practising, so I rushed to the hall
cupboard and seized on the first waterproof and hat and galoshes that
came to hand. I didn't know they were Gipsy's."

"And yet you let her bear the blame!" exclaimed Dilys heatedly.

"I thought, as she hadn't really done it, she'd very soon clear herself.
She could have 'proved an alibi' directly, if the thing had been
properly gone into. There were heaps of girls who could have witnessed
for her. Even though she did crawl under the table and go out of the
room, the times didn't fit in, as Poppie would have found directly, if
she'd troubled to ask."

"That's true. Poppie was utterly prejudiced; she asked a few hasty
questions, never noticed whether the stories agreed, and jumped to a
conclusion," said Hetty.

"Then, when Gipsy came back, Poppie dropped the matter entirely,"
continued Leonora. "I thought she knew she'd made a mistake. I didn't
see any use in getting myself into trouble if I could help it, so I held
my tongue."

"And disgustingly mean of you, too!" exploded Lennie.

"You're the most extraordinary girl, Leonora! I never saw anybody like
you!" commented Dilys.

"You'll tell Poppie now, won't you?" urged Hetty.

Leonora shrugged her shoulders.

"Of course I shall. She can do what she likes. I don't mind if she
expels me! I'm sick of Briarcroft and its strict rules. I'd rather try
another school, where they'd allow one to buy more sweets. I never much
wanted to come here. I think I'll go and explain to Poppie now; she'll
be in the study. If she expels me, I could just go home in time for next
Thursday. Mother's giving a big garden party, and having some Russian
dancers down from London. They're to give a performance on a platform on
the lawn. I'm simply wild to see them!"

As Leonora walked calmly from the room, the girls broke into a universal
"Well!" of astonished comment.

"She didn't even tell you she was sorry, Gipsy!" remarked Lennie.

"Never mind! As long as she sets me right with Poppie I don't care,"
returned Gipsy.

"She seems to want to be expelled," said Dilys.

"Poppie's pet won't be expelled, no fear!" laughed Hetty. "Catch Poppie
parting with her millionairess! She's much too good an advertisement for
the school."

"I think Poppie'll have somewhat to say on the subject, though!"
remarked Dilys.

Both Dilys and Hetty proved right. Leonora was not expelled, but Miss
Poppleton gave her a severe lecture on the error of her ways, and a
warning against any further transgression of Briarcroft rules. She
returned to the Juniors' room in a very chastened frame of mind.

"Poppie was as hard as nails," she volunteered. "She won't let me go
home on Thursday to the garden party, so I shan't see the Russian
dancers. Isn't it a shame?"

"Well, in my opinion it about serves you right, Leonora Parker,"
retorted Dilys. "You've looked at the affair all along entirely from
your own point of view. I don't believe you'd have told now if you
hadn't wanted to go home. You've not begged Gipsy's pardon yet."

"Oh, never mind!" said Gipsy magnanimously. "What do I care, now it's
all serene with Poppie? I've proved I don't tell fibs, anyhow. I like
people to know I'm straight and square and above-board, and since
that's put right, I vote we drop the subject."

"I shall have the picnic next week, even if I don't see the Russian
dancers," murmured Leonora.

The suggestion of a united picnic for the whole of the Lower School,
which had been unanimously carried at the Guild meeting, had been
approved by Miss Poppleton, and the date fixed for a day early in July.
As it was the first outing in connection with the United Guild, the
girls were anxious to celebrate the occasion with as much observance as
possible. It had been decided to visit a castle about six miles away,
and it was thought that the ruins would provide a picturesque setting
for something in the nature of a grand ceremony.

"Like the Freemasons, you know," said Gipsy, "or any of those old
'worshipful companies' that meet and have big dinners and enjoy
themselves."

"What do the Freemasons do?" enquired Lennie. "I thought their meetings
were dead secrets."

"So they are; but sometimes they have processions through the streets,
and carry banners. We might have a banner, and wear badges."

The idea of a banner appealed to the girls, who set to work with the
greatest enthusiasm to make one. It was designed by Fiona Campbell, and
carried out by a committee of six, chosen for their skill in needlework.
It had a cream-coloured ground, on which was a bold pattern, in
applique, of pink briar roses with green leaves, meant as a delicate
compliment to Briarcroft. In the centre, in large green letters, was the
motto chosen by the Guild: "United we Stand". It was decided at a
special meeting that every member must wear a briar rose for a badge,
and as real wild roses seemed too perishable to be of much use, an extra
committee undertook to construct a sufficient quantity of artificial
ones out of crinkled paper. Officers were to wear pale pink sashes, tied
over the right shoulder and under the left arm, and a wreath of pink
roses round their hats. The form of ceremony for the occasion was
entrusted to Gipsy's fertile brain, for nobody else felt equal to
inventing it. These preparations naturally absorbed all the energies of
the Lower School. Many willing hands set to work to make paper flowers,
copying a very pretty specimen of a briar rose twisted by the drawing
mistress out of pink crinkled paper, with a most natural-looking green
leaf, and secured with fine wire.

Gipsy, who wished the affair to be a great day in the annals of the
Juniors, kept adding fresh items to her ceremonial programme till she
made a list that filled her with satisfaction. There was nothing she
loved so dearly as inventing entertainments, and this festival gave her
just the opportunity for which she longed. As organizing secretary she
was allowed full powers of administration, so she picked out her
performers, called rehearsals, and arranged every detail with scrupulous
care and attention.

The school picnic had generally been held on Saturdays, but thinking the
castle would be more free from visitors on a Friday, Miss Poppleton had
granted a special half-holiday for the purpose. Most fortunately the day
turned out to be fine, and by two o'clock seventy-four excited Juniors
were waiting for the arrival of the wagonettes that were to convey them
to the ruins. Each Form was accompanied by its own mistress, and Miss
Poppleton and Miss Edith completed the party. Every girl wore her briar
rose badge, and the officers their sashes and wreaths. The banner was
carried rolled up, but ready to be unfurled when the ceremonies should
begin. Riggside Tower, the old ruined keep that was the goal of their
excursion, had a romantic history of its own, and had been the scene of
many an exciting struggle in border warfare. The guidebook related the
legends of illustrious prisoners, fierce hand-to-hand combats, doughty
champions, secret passages, underground dungeons, thrilling escapes, and
other episodes of the past that added greatly to the attraction of the
ancient building.

Some of the girls had been there before, but to others it was a fresh
spot, and all looked with interest as the wagonettes turned a particular
corner of the road where the first glimpse of the castle could be seen.
It was a grey, turreted fortress, with half of its west wall battered
down by Cromwell's cannon, and the rest in a crumbling state, chiefly
held together by the great masses of ivy that clung round the worn
stones. In former days it must have been grim and bare enough, but
kindly Nature had thrown her mantle of greenery around it, and softened
its rugged outlines. Wallflowers and scarlet valerian and the pretty
trailing ivy-leaved toadflax were growing in every nook and cranny where
they could find roothold; a thick grove of trees clothed the base of the
south front; and the courtyard was a strip of verdant sward thickly
covered with daisies. Gipsy took a survey of the old keep with the
greatest complacency. No place could possibly have provided a better
background for the pageant she had arranged. The courtyard made a
natural theatre, and the stones lying about would provide seats for the
audience. Happily there were very few visitors that day, so they had the
castle almost to themselves, and could go through their programme
without interfering with the convenience of other people. It was decided
to begin the ceremonies at once, so that they would be over in good time
before tea.

The banner, which had been rolled on two school pointers, was unfurled
and borne aloft by Lennie Chapman and Meg Gordon, and very fine it
looked with its design of wild roses and its motto in the centre. The
members of the Guild, walking two and two, fell into line, and, preceded
by the banner bearers and the chief officers, marched round the
courtyard.

Barbara Kendrick had been constituted crier, and, ringing a small
handbell, shouted the opening announcement in true mediaeval fashion:

"Oyez! Oyez! Oyez! Be it known to one and all that this worshipful
companie is the Briarcroft United Juniors' Guild."

As the girls marched they chanted a ditty, the words of which had been
composed by Gipsy for the event, though the music was out of one of the
school song books:

          "We've met to-day to celebrate
             A very great occasion,
           We wish to show by this display
             Our Guild's inauguration.

          "For be it known to one and all,
             This blissful companie
           Doth now unite all former Guilds,
             So many as there be.

          "Athletics, Music, Drama, Arts,
             We do include them all
           In the United Juniors' Guild
             We form at Briarcroft Hall.

          "Each member's pledged to do her best
             To aid the common weal,
           And to the tenets of the Guild
             Aye to be stanch and leal.

          "Then wave the banner, flaunt the badge,
             And Crier, ring the bell!
           Good luck to our United Guild!
             Long may it prosper well!"

Miss Poppleton, Miss Edith, and the mistresses, who composed the
audience, applauded heartily at the end of the marching song.

It had made a good introduction for the Guild, and an opening for the
proceedings which were to follow. Gipsy's programme had been drawn up
somewhat on the lines of a May Day masque; she herself called it "The
Festival of the Briar Rose". It consisted of a number of songs and
dances, appropriate to the occasion, which she had collected from the
repertoire of the Lower School. Each Form took its own turn. The little
girls of the First performed a charming flower dance, the Second sang a
madrigal in praise of summer and the Lower Third a May Day glee, the
Upper Third executed a lively Tarantella, the Lower Fourth took Sir
Roger de Coverley, the Upper Fourth chanted an Elizabethan Ode to the
Spring, while at the end the whole Guild joined in a morris dance.

Besides wearing their badges, the girls had brought with them some
garlands and a number of bunches of flowers, to be used in the dances,
so that the whole affair, seen against the background of the ancient
tower, had a most romantic and picturesque effect. A few parties of
visitors, who were looking over the castle, stopped to watch the
performance, and appeared greatly to enjoy it. To Miss Poppleton and the
teachers the various items were of course well known, as they had been
often rendered at school; but thus combined, in such suitable
surroundings, they made quite a pretty pageant. Gipsy was in her
element, marshalling, conducting, directing, and acting leader, while
all the time taking her own part in the singing and dancing. As the
members ranged themselves at the end, and wound up the programme with
"God Save the King", she felt a thrill of delighted gratification. The
Guild, which had begun under her auspices, and which she had so
carefully fostered, seemed a well-established institution of the Lower
School, likely to continue and flourish among the Juniors for many years
to come. If she had done nothing else during her three terms at
Briarcroft, it was a satisfaction to feel that she had accomplished this
much. Perhaps some such thought struck her companions.

"Hip, hip, hip, hooray for the Guild!" shouted Hetty Hancock. "And hip,
hip, hip, hooray for the Festival! And hip, hip, hip, hooray, girls, for
our secretary, Gipsy Latimer! She arranged it all, and she deserves a
hearty vote of thanks."

As the vigorous cheers rang out, Gipsy stood with flushed cheeks and
shining eyes. It was sweet to have her schoolgirl triumph, and to feel
that her efforts on behalf of her fellow Juniors had met with so much
appreciation.

When the applause died away and the girls broke up, a stranger, who from
behind a portion of the ruins had been an eager witness of the
proceedings, stepped up to Miss Poppleton.

"I should like to add my congratulations," he remarked. "Perhaps you
don't remember me? If I may have one word with the little secretary of
your Guild, she will tell you who I am."

But at that moment Gipsy caught sight of him, and with one wild cry of
"Father!" flung herself into his arms.

How Mr. Latimer had arrived upon the scene at such an extremely
opportune moment demands a word of explanation, so we will narrate his
story as he told it to Gipsy afterwards. In the previous November, after
landing at Cape Town, he had joined a pioneering expedition, and gone
far into the interior to prospect for minerals. The little party had
experienced many hardships, perils, and privations, but had been very
successful in its discoveries, finding a rich vein of gold that promised
a handsome return when worked. Once back at Cape Town, Mr. Latimer had
taken the first vessel to England, landing there with the mails. Finding
that he could reach Briarcroft as soon as a letter, he had decided to go
straight there in person, instead of writing to Gipsy to tell her of his
coming. On his arrival at the school, he had learnt that his daughter,
with a number of her companions, had started for a picnic at Riggside
Tower; so, keeping the taxicab in which he had driven from Greyfield
station, he had followed at once to the castle. Finding the Guild
celebrations in progress, he had not interrupted the programme, but,
concealing himself in an angle where he could see without being seen, he
had remained an interested spectator of the pageant, waiting till the
affair was over before he made his presence known.

Gipsy's rapture at this reunion was enough to compensate her for all the
trouble she had endured during her father's absence. "You won't go away,
Dad, and leave me again?" she pleaded.

"No, sweetheart! Fortunately I have business in connection with these
newly discovered mines that will keep me in England for a year or two.
You can continue at Briarcroft, where by all appearance you seem to be
much appreciated, and we can spend all your holidays together. No more
gadding about the world just at present. Will that suit you, little
woman?"

"Splendiferously!" answered Gipsy, with a sigh of ecstasy.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is very little more to be told. For Gipsy the sequel was a time of
intense thankfulness and utter content. Two matters, however, which
disturbed her, she brought to her father's notice, and he at once
settled them to their common satisfaction.

He paid a visit to the secondhand shop of Mr. Daniel Lucas in Greyfield,
and bought back her watch and chain; and though he was obliged to pay
four pounds to regain what she had parted with for ten shillings, he
was glad to get possession on any terms of what was to him a treasure to
be valued for old time's sake. He further hunted out the little
confectioner at Waterloo who had sheltered his daughter in her hour of
need, and gave her not only his heartfelt thanks, but a more substantial
token of his appreciation. Gipsy, you may be sure, lost no time in
introducing him to her friends the Gordons, for whose share in fetching
her back from Liverpool Mr. Latimer considered he owed a debt of
gratitude. It was arranged that the two families should spend a summer
holiday together in Switzerland--an event to which Donald, Meg, and
Gipsy, with their thoughts on the joys of mountaineering, looked forward
with the keenest anticipation.

"I've only one regret," confessed Gipsy on the breaking-up day. "If I'm
moved up next term into the Fifth, I shan't be Lower School any more,
and it will mean goodbye to the United Guild."

But as none of us can remain stationary, and all growings are
outgrowings, I think we may safely predict that Gipsy, who won her way
as leader of the Juniors, will have an equally successful career among
the Seniors, and that her name will be handed down in the annals of
Briarcroft institutions as that of one who upheld the common weal, and
whose record was an asset to the school.

       *       *       *       *       *

          PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
          _By Blackie & Son, Limited, Glasgow_

       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 66, "appearance" changed to "appearances" (but for appearances'
sake)

Page 116 "sh" changed to "she" (for it if she)

Page 256, "sake's" changed to "time's" (time's sake)





End of Project Gutenberg's The Leader of the Lower School, by Angela  Brazil

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEADER OF THE LOWER SCHOOL ***

***** This file should be named 28854.txt or 28854.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/8/5/28854/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
