The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hickory Limb, by Parker Fillmore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hickory Limb

Author: Parker Fillmore

Illustrator: Rose Cecil O'Neill

Release Date: May 20, 2009 [EBook #28886]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HICKORY LIMB ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Suzanne Shell, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








                        THE HICKORY LIMB



                               By

                         PARKER FILLMORE



                        Illustrations by

                       ROSE CECIL O'NEILL







                            NEW YORK

                   HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY




                        Copyright, 1907,

                     by The Ridgway Company

                        Copyright, 1910,

                      by John Lane Company

       *       *       *       *       *




TO MARTHA

       *       *       *       *       *




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

                                           PAGE

"I don't care what she says! I'm going!"     13

"Dare you to come in swimmin'! Dare
  you to come in swimmin'!"                  25

Eddie Grote was in a tight place             37

"Margery Blair, you come right out of
  that pond!"                                41

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HICKORY LIMB


     _Mother, may I go out to swim?
        Yes, my darling daughter;
      Hang your clothes on a hickory limb,
        And don't go near the water._




THE HICKORY LIMB


Gladys Bailey had a parasol in one hand and a card-case in the
other. From her own wide experience in social usage, she was
going to initiate the twins into the mystery of formal calls. She
had told them earlier in the day that they might bring their
younger sister, but later reflection decided her to withdraw this
permission. As Katherine and Alice were ready first, it was easy
to explain to them her reasons.

"Four," Gladys said, "are too many to go calling. Margery's too
little for our crowd anyway, and, besides, that would make three
from one family. We had just better start before she comes down."

For a moment the twins looked doubtful; then, as usual, agreed.
Thereupon, all three cautiously tiptoed off the porch and down
the lawn. Before they reached the street, Margery was after them,
calling: "Wait a minute, Katherine! Wait, Alice!"

The twins had barely time to slip through the gate and hear
Gladys's low injunction, "Don't let her come," when Margery was
upon them.

"You can't come with us, Margery," Katherine began, with an
assumption of innocence.

"Why, Katherine, you promised I could."

"That was for to-morrow," suggested Alice weakly.

Margery looked from her sisters to Gladys, who was staring vaguely
across the street. Her excessive aloofness was suspicious, and
Margery instantly jumped to conclusions.

"I bet I know what's the matter. That old Gladys Bailey doesn't
want me. But I'm going anyhow! I don't care what she says! I'm
going!"

[Illustration: "I don't care what she says! I'm going!"]

And, throwing herself against the gate, Margery pushed and kicked
and shook, while Katherine and Alice, holding it shut from the
outside, blushed with embarrassment that Gladys should hear, and
whispered fiercely, "Margery, keep still!"

But Margery would not keep still. At that moment she was
remembering against Gladys many a former indignity. How she hated
her--how she had always hated her for her prim, deceitful,
grown-up manners, for her patronizing airs, and, most of all, for
the strange influence she wielded over Margery's own sisters and
brother. It was bad enough that the twins should hang upon her
words, but worse, far worse, that even Henry, that model of
discretion, should be so completely taken in as to look upon
Gladys with an interest which bordered dangerously near to
admiration. Secure in the esteem of Katherine and Alice, and
conscious of her sway over Henry, Gladys saw no reason to
conciliate the youngest member of the family. "Margery's too
little for our crowd," she would say, and, while Margery fumed
and fought, would calmly reiterate the statement until it came to
be accepted as fact. Gladys never fought. As on this afternoon,
she was always the general, who, so to speak, directed from afar
the onslaughts of the actual combatants.

Though outnumbered two to one, Margery had the spirit of a host,
and for a while victory hung doubtful. Then fate decided the
issue, and, in guise of the maternal voice from the window,
called Margery off.

"Margery Blair," the voice commanded, "stop that noise this
instant! Aren't you ashamed to tease the girls so? Stop it! Do
you hear me?"

Yes, Margery heard; and, knowing from experience the futility of
argument, she stopped.

"Are we ready?" Gladys Bailey asked, suddenly awakening, as it were,
from a reverie. The twins, a little heated from their exertions, were
quite ready, and, holding their card-cases--envelopes filled with
cards of home manufacture--in young-ladyish fashion, they started off,
copying, as best they could, the mincing steps of Gladys.

If Margery shouted after them no parting taunt, it was not
because she had none ready. The ear corresponding to the maternal
voice was probably still at the window; and Margery, though
desperate enough for any fate sufficiently tragic, disliked the
thought of spending the afternoon in bed. Therefore she kept an
outward silence. But her heart would not be still, and every
little outraged feeling in her body, finding a voice of its own,
clamored aloud: "Oh, if we could only pay 'em back! Oh, if we
could only pay 'em back!" Margery, alas! had not yet learned that
forgiveness is sweeter than revenge. Of course she would forgive
them if, say, a milk-wagon should run over her and she had only a
few hours to live. Then how they would cry! But as it was too
late in the afternoon for any milk-wagons to be about, such a
death-bed forgiveness was clearly out of the question. So the one
thing left was revenge.

Yet what revenge was possible? None, absolutely none. That
afternoon she was utterly powerless to shake by any act of hers
the equanimity of those three complacent young persons. There was
nothing belonging to them which she could smash, hide, or
appropriate. There was nothing they had ever said or done which
now, in her hour of need, she could use against them. They were
in fact so impossibly, so hopelessly--no, not exactly virtuous,
but _proper_, that the mere contemplation of their colorless
lives threw Margery into a most deplorable state of hatred,
malice, and all uncharitableness.

As the hopelessness of revenge settled on Margery's spirit, a
feeling of loneliness began to creep over her. She could think of
nothing to do, and of nobody to whom she might appeal for
sympathy or amusement. The limitless expanse of an idle afternoon
stretched out before her like a desert. Henry had gone fishing,
and Willie Jones--_Willie Jones!_ With that name came a dazzling
thought, a plan full-blown, a balm sweet to her soul, a glorious
solution!

Margery skipped up to the porch and called out in a coaxing,
pleasant tone: "Mamma, may I take a little walk?" The maternal
voice, plainly relieved that the storm had spent itself, gave
consent, and Margery danced out the front gate and up the
street, her heart thumping fast in exultation.

O-oh! Let Katherine and Alice distribute as many of their
calling-cards as possible, for soon they will have no further use
for them. Soon--to be exact, by the time they get home--they will
be disgraced, horribly disgraced, and no one will ever care to
receive them or their visits again. Even Gladys, their adored
Gladys, will give them one cold glance of scorn and turn her
back. It was hard, certainly, not to be able to include Gladys in
the impending doom. But, after all, Katherine and Alice were the
more culpable, for had they not cast aside all feelings of
sisterly relationship? Let them, then, bear the brunt of the
punishment.

After a fashion Margery was grateful to Gladys, for it was really
Gladys who had placed in her hands the weapon she was about to
use. Gladys was forever saying to Katherine and Alice: "If you're
not careful, Margery will disgrace you all some day. Then how
will you feel? No one will play with you; no one will even speak
to you on the street. And it won't be your fault, either. But,
you see, everybody'll know Margery is your sister."

Yes, every one would know, and Margery, as she skipped along,
gloated in the thought. It went without saying that, in
disgracing the others, Margery was willing to sacrifice herself.
Willing? She was almost too willing. In fact, it must be
confessed that there was something in the present undertaking
which, quite apart from all anticipations of revenge, hummed a
gay little tune in her ear, and tempted her hurrying feet into
many a frisky little side-step. From time to time she had to
nudge herself, as it were, to remember that her purpose was one
of retributive justice, that the end was what her soul hungered
after--not the means.

She gave a passing regret to the afternoon shoes she was wearing,
the white stockings, the clean dress, the great pink bow of
ribbon in her hair. Likely enough these would be sadly draggled
before the deed was done. But even that thought did not check her
haste nor cause her for one second to pause or look back.

       *       *       *       *       *




Her road lay toward the open country. At last, leaving behind all
lines of houses, she crawled under a barbed-wire fence into a
broad meadow where a few cows were grazing; then over a creek
into another meadow, and up to a grassy knoll just ahead. From
beyond it faint shouts were coming. At the foot of the knoll
Margery rested a few moments, then pushed bravely on to the very
gate of her adventure.

From the top of the knoll she looked down the other side to a
tiny pond where five little boys were playing and splashing. The
minute they spied Margery they sank to their chins in the muddy
water and raised frantic hands and voices:

"Go 'way from here! Go 'way from here! We're swimmin'! We're
swimmin'!"

With considerable inward trepidation but outward calm, Margery
descended toward them.

"We're swimmin'! We're swimmin'!" the little boys kept on shouting
inanely until Margery was forced to make some acknowledgment of the
information.

"Oh!" she called out in sarcasm undisguised, "I thought you was
flying!"

That seemed to make the little boys angry. They redoubled their
cries and gesticulations.

"Go 'way from here! Go 'way from here! You're a girl! You're a
girl!"

"Is that so? I'm a girl, am I? I'm so glad to hear it!"

Margery sat down near the water's edge and gazed across defiantly
at the little boys, who were clustered together at the far end of
the pond. They were not her match at sarcasm and so were forced
to answer with inarticulate jeers. For a few seconds no more
words were exchanged. Then one of the boys attempted a parley.

[Illustration: "Dare you to come in swimmin'! Dare you to come in
swimmin'!"]

"Margery," he began. It was Willie Jones. There was a plea and a
protest in his voice.

"Well?"

Margery's sharp interrogation gave so little encouragement that
Willie Jones desisted.

Freddy Larkin next essayed the part of spokesman for the boys.
Freddy had curly hair and a lisp.

"Mardthery!"

"Well?"

"Dare you to come in thwimmin'! Dare you to come in thwim----"

Willie Jones choked further utterance with a splash of water.
But, though he silenced Freddy, the other three instantly took up
the cry, "Dare you to come in swimmin'! Dare you to come in
swimmin'!"

Margery's moment had come.

"Huh! You think I'm afraid, don't you? Well, I ain't!"

She pulled off her shoes, rolled down her white stockings, and
then, standing up, very deliberately began unbuttoning the back
of her dress.

For the boys this was a turn of events unexpected and most
disconcerting. Not for a moment did they really want her to
accept their dare. Why, whoever heard of a girl doing such a
thing? The very thought scandalized them deeply. Indeed, they
would stop her if they could, but it was utterly beyond their
powers of expression to tell her that the dare was a mere joke, a
pleasantry that had better be forgotten. Unable to explain this,
they wriggled about uncomfortably in the water and hid their
growing confusion in half-hearted jeers.

When the dress was discarded, every little boy there hoped in his
soul that this might be all. The proprieties would not be
utterly demolished if Margery would only treat as a bathing-suit
her skimp little undervest and bloomers. But Margery would not.
She calmly proceeded to undo the buttons which made these two
garments one.

"Margery!" There was an almost agonized pleading in Willie
Jones's voice.

"Willie Jones, will you shut up! Just because you live near us
you needn't think you're my brother. 'Cause you ain't. Besides,
girls can do the same as boys."

There was a last tug; those final garments which might have
served as a bathing-suit slipped down over her feet, and Margery
stepped forth, a skinny, defiant little Venus, challenging the
world to look if it dare. It was a most embarrassing moment for
the little boys. Their faces, bobbing about nervously on the
surface of the water, blushed violently, and their jeers
dwindled down to the merest quavers.

Her independence of custom and opinion thus emphatically
established, Margery lost no time in entering the water. Sitting
gingerly on the muddy bank, she slid forward one foot, then the
other. Ugh! The bottom of the pond was soft and slimy, and
squashed up between her toes like worms. For the first time a
dreadful misgiving came over her. What if, after all, swimming
were not the delightful pastime it was cracked up to be! However,
there was no turning back now.

Sitting in the water, she propelled herself forward with her
hands, slowly and cautiously. The little boys looked on in marked
though unexpressed disapproval. Margery was putting them into a
horribly awkward position--there was no doubt about that. They
didn't like it, either. But in spite of themselves they were
beginning to feel a certain admiration for her pluck. It was
almost a pity she was a girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Look out, Margery!" It was Tommy Grayson who gave the friendly
warning. "They's a tin can over there."

Margery shifted her direction, and soon reached deeper water,
where she was able to stand up without shocking the sensibilities
of any one. The little boys were still some distance from her.
The water, muddy beyond all chance of transparency, came up to
their chests. To them, however, this was not enough. The
excessive modesty of eight or nine made them keep even the white
of their angular little shoulders primly covered.

Now, human nature can not be expected to retain forever that
freshness of surprise which it feels over every new experience
in life. Time, philosophy tells us, accustoms man to almost
anything. It does the same for small boys. Beyond question it was
enough to take the wind out of any one to see a girl coolly strip
and come in swimming quite as though she were a boy, with all a
boy's peculiar rights and privileges. But, astonishing as that
might be, it was after all no reason for standing there all day
like sticks in the mud when you might just as well be having a
good time.

Margery, who was also standing like a stick, felt as bored as
they. With nothing to do but gently bounce with the slight
lap-lap of the water, she found herself wondering more and more
just where the fun of swimming came in.

She watched with envy the small beginnings that betokened in the
boys a return to the serious play of life. Charley Burns gave
Freddy Larkin an unexpected ducking. Freddy came up spluttering
and blowing, but with a handful of slimy mud which he plastered
over Charley's white head. Then a splash fight became general.
Every one splashed water into every one else's face. Margery
noted with interest the peculiar downward stroke of the flat hand
which brought about the finest results. She added her shouts to
the boys', and longed to add some splashes likewise.

Now, the progress of a splash fight is thus: At first there are
no sides--every man's splash is against every man's; but the
splashes of all turn immediately against him who shows first
signs of defeat; and he, the victim, may then use any means
whatever to protect himself.

Eddie Grote was the victim this time. When the deluge became
choking, he turned his back, ducked, and then let fly in the
general direction of the allied forces two slimy handfuls of
mud. In the excitement of the game the boys had clean forgot the
immodesty of bare shoulders, and had even broken away from their
original close grouping until, to all appearances, Margery was
one of them. So it happened that, when Freddy Larkin dodged
aside, one handful of the watery mud caught Margery square on the
head and splattered down over her face and ears.

"Aw, see what you done, Eddie Grote!" Tommy Grayson shouted
indignantly. "You went and throwed mud on Margery's hair ribbon!
Ain't you got no sense?"

In the pause that followed, four little boys reviled the fifth
with various forms of, "Aw, what'd you do that for?" And the
fifth stood still in awkward consternation, the mud still
dripping from his guilty hand.

For a moment Margery, too, was concerned, but only for a moment.
When, under any circumstances, one's world is coming to an end
within a few hours at furthest, a hair ribbon more or less
matters very little. Moreover, it suddenly flashed upon Margery
that here was a chance to make those few remaining hours more
golden and at the same time gratify her soul with a trial at that
masterly downward stroke of the flat hand. So before Eddie Grote
had time to close his astonished mouth, she filled it with a
mighty splash of water. Then, while Eddie choked and spluttered,
too surprised to defend himself, she sent another well-aimed
splash and another, until the gasping Eddie was forced to turn
and flee. Not even then did Margery stop, but, following up her
advantage, she drove him on and on toward shore.

In their ecstasy at the spectacle, the remaining boys leaped up
and down in the water like happy little trout, clapping their
hands and shouting:

"Hurrah for Margery!"

"Give it to him, Margery!"

"I bet on Margery!"

"What's the matter with Margery?"

Eddie Grote was in a tight place. All woman's rights to the
contrary, in a struggle of the sexes a man has to show the woman
some consideration or fly in the face of public opinion. Eddie
Grote, although hard pressed, realized that public opinion would
not in this instance stand for what, ordinarily, would be his
_modus operandi_, namely, to fling mud over his shoulder. If he
could but gain a moment's time thus, he might make a dash for the
deeper water. But he could not, and the other little boys, as
they saw his growing predicament, raised shriller, louder shouts
of joy:

"That's right, Margery! Chase him out of the water! Chase him
out!"

[Illustration: Eddie Grote was in a tight place.]

"Oh, Eddie Grote, ain't you ashamed? And before a girl, too! Oh!
Oh! Oh!"

Eddie Grote was ashamed, horribly ashamed. The water was fast falling
below his knees. To get back to the depths was impossible; to go
straight ahead were greater shame. Facing the inevitable, and
clutching frantically at the flying skirts of modesty, he doubled up
like a little turtle, chin to knees, and cried quits in those last
words of the conquered: "I give up! I give up!"

Margery, who knew the practices of modern warfare quite as well
as he, ceased fire and slowly backed away. She backed amid a
chorus that was like a triumphant "See the Conquering Hero
Comes." Freddy Larkin called out, "What's the matheh with
Mardthery?" and the others took up the chant:

      She's all right!
      Who's all right?
        MARGERY!

       *       *       *       *       *




Ah, what fun swimming was! Did anything else under heaven equal
it? Come, now, what might, she had drunk deep of one of life's
joys, and the memory of it would long sustain her. And then,
while the boys were still shouting her victory, while her heart
was still glowing with the thought of having made good before
them, it came--a voice that was like the voice of judgment.

"Margery!" it trumpeted sharply. "_Margery!_"

And at that voice five little Adams were suddenly afraid, and,
remembering the nakedness of their shoulders, hid themselves as
best they could in the muddy depths, and the solitary little Eve
covered herself likewise until the waters were up to her chin.
Then six little floating heads turned and gazed in speechless
dismay at the knoll. There stood Henry. In one hand he was
clutching a tin can full of something; from the other he had
dropped a seine.

[Illustration: "Margery Blair, you come right out of that pond!"]

"Margery!" he repeated as though scarce able to believe his eyes.
Then as the vision remained fixed, he changed his tone.

"Margery Blair, you come right out of that pond!"

All the outraged conventionalities of an elder brother sounded in
his voice and showed in the horrified expression of his face.

Margery did not question fate, but meekly obeyed. Slowly and
reluctantly she made her way to shore. Henry was at the water's
edge to hasten her landing. He reached out and dragged her in--no
longer a defiant young Venus, but a very frightened little girl
whose naughtiness had found her out. Henry pushed her roughly
toward her pile of clothes with the succinct order, "Now dress."
He made a screen of his body between her and the five pairs of
eyes that were bobbing about so exasperatingly on the water.

Behind the screen Margery shivered helplessly. "Ain't got nothin'
to wipe with," she sniffled.

Very carefully and deliberately, without exposing for an instant
the form of his frail sister, Henry deposited on the ground his
tin can of minnows, went through all his pockets, and finally
pulled out a small, dirty handkerchief. As he handed this over
his shoulder, the little boys in the water laughed.

"Say, Henry, will you lend me that towel when Margery's through
with it?" asked Charley Burns facetiously.

"I'll punch your head when I ketch you. That's what I'll do to
you."

Charley did not continue the subject.

Presumably the handkerchief served its purpose, for Margery's
next words showed that dressing had progressed a bit.

"I can't get my stockin's on," she quavered.

"Pull 'em on," grunted the screen unfeelingly.

A few moments later there was similar trouble with the shoes, and
Margery sent out a tearful announcement:

"They just won't go on."

"They got to," remarked the screen firmly.

"But I tell you they won't. They're my new ones and they won't go
on without a shoe-horn."

"Stamp on 'em!" commanded Henry gruffly.

Behind the screen convulsive excitement followed, accompanied by
a certain Jack-in-the-box effect which seemed highly to amuse the
little boys in the water.

"That's right, Margery. Stamp on 'em!" they repeated derisively
until cowed into silence by Henry's stony stare.

"I can't button my dress," was Margery's final plaint.

"You got to."

"But I tell you I can't," she insisted, her voice rising to a
long-drawn wail. "It buttons behind."

With the utmost dignity the screen slowly turned itself around.
That was a signal for the small boys in the water to break forth
into jeers and taunts. They spoke in that treble squeal which
little boys use when they seek to imitate girls' voices.

"Say, Henry, please lend me your towel to wipe my ears."

"Button my dress, Henry."

"Where's your shoe-horn, Henry?"

Apparently Henry's calm remained unshaken. In reality he made a
rather poor job of the buttoning. As soon as the back of the
dress promised to hold together, he stopped. Then, firmly
clutching Margery's arm in one hand and holding his seine and tin
can of minnows in the other, he faced his waspish little
tormentors.

       *       *       *       *       *




The moment had come for him to speak. He did not hesitate. Had he
been forty-five and bald, he could not have met the situation
with more determined conventionality. He realized, plainly
enough, that the family had been disgraced, and neither to
herself nor to the world would he minimize or excuse Margery's
culpability. Yet, nevertheless, he would do his best to hush up
the scandal.

"See here, you kids," he began warningly. Both hands were
occupied, so he could not emphasize his threat with the sight of
a clenched fist. His tones, however, carried conviction. "If any
of you's blab about this, I'll give you such a smashin'----"

Henry did not finish the sentence. There was no need to finish
the sentence. When one's thought has been fully enough expressed,
why go on further?

Henry paused a moment for the meaning to sink in. Then he started
up the knoll, dragging Margery after him. Instantly the pond was
in an uproar.

"Oh, Henry, can't guess who I seen in swimmin' this afternoon!"

"Comin' back to-morrow, ain't you, Margery?"

"Better slow up, Henry, or you'll drop your minnies."

"Say, Margery, your stockin's is comin' down."

Then Freddy Larkin started to chant at the top of his lungs:

     Motheh, may I go out to thwim?
       Yeth, my darlin' daughter;
     Hang your cloth' ...

Of course Margery knew that their wit was aimed at Henry, not at
her. But she breathed freer, nevertheless, once out of ear-shot.

Henry dragged her homeward at a furious pace. He held her arm so
tightly that it ached. The worst was that she couldn't make him
argue about it. He simply held on without talking.

"You just let my arm go, Henry Blair," she whimpered again and
again. "You ain't got any right to hurt me."

But Henry would only close his mouth more grimly and push on.

"Ain't you got any sense, Henry Blair? I ain't tryin' to run
off."

She might just as well be talking to a post.

Even the threat, "If you don't let me go, I'll holler," fell on
deaf ears.

This was said after they had reached the civilization of streets
and houses, where their appearance caused a mild sensation. And
small wonder. Margery's stockings were down in rolls about her
ankles. Behind, her dress was gaping open where Henry had missed
the buttons. In places there were yellow stains where the wet of
her body had soaked through. Her face was streaked with mud and
her hair was drying in a stiff mat that hung down heavily over
her eyes. The once gorgeous hair ribbon was little better than a
lump of mud.

Several little girls on different porches called out in amazed
curiosity, "Why, Margery, what _is_ the matter?" and a boy or
two, staring hard, remarked, "Hello, Henry. What you doin'?" For
all the attention he paid, Henry might not have heard. With lips
tightly closed, eyes looking straight ahead, he rushed on, never
once relaxing hold of his miserable victim's arm.

At their own gate they met the twins and Gladys Bailey just
returning from their round of calls. One look at the strange
pair, and even Gladys lost her air of blase indifference. Her
eyes opened wide and she took a deep breath of interest and
surprise.

"Why, Henry," she said, "what in the world has Margery gone and
done now?"

_What has Margery gone and done now?_ If that wasn't like Gladys,
before she knew a thing about it to decide that Margery had gone
and done something! And when it was Gladys herself who was the
cause of it all, anyhow! Remembering this, Margery turned on her
and snarled like some angry little animal.

At this fresh token of savagery in his younger sister, Henry's
face grew quite apoplectic with shame. But, still keeping his
mouth closed, he pushed by Gladys and the twins, and dragged
Margery up the steps of the front porch.

"Oh, look at Margery's hair!" Gladys called out in virtuous
concern. "What _has_ happened? You _must_ tell us, Henry!"

Family shame might keep Henry's mouth closed, but Margery felt no
such restraint. She wanted Gladys to know! She wanted everybody
to know! So while Henry was freeing one hand of tin can and
seine, preparatory to opening the door, she twisted around until
she, could shout out the news to the listening world.

"I went in swimmin'!" she cried, shaking her muddied locks at
Gladys. "That's what!" She had to hurry, for Henry was already
pulling at the screen door. "With boys, too! With _boys_!"

Henry jerked her roughly into the house, but not before she had
heard the beginning of Gladys's unctuous comment: "Oh, how
disgraceful! Ain't Margery just too awful!" She also had time to
realize vaguely that, disgraceful though it was, Gladys seemed in
no haste to turn on the twins that cold glance of scorn which, by
all reckoning, should instantly have been forthcoming. Why did
she stay on talking to them? A cold doubt began to creep into
Margery's mind. Had she, after all, disgraced only herself? The
doubt slowly grew to a certainty, until, by the time she found
herself dragged into the library, she felt as miserable and
forlorn as she looked.

Without a word Henry placed her before her mother. Her mother
raised languid eyes from a novel; then, like Gladys, showed
livelier interest.

"Margery! What have you been doing?"

"Swimmin'." Henry answered for her, in the first syllables he had
uttered since leaving the pond.

"Swimming!" repeated her mother faintly.

"With boys," added Henry gloomily.

"With boys!" echoed her mother, looking helpless and alarmed. The
occasion was evidently one which demanded a well-chosen reproof.
She paused a moment, then said impressively: "Why, I never heard
of a little girl doing such a thing!"

At that all Margery's waning spirit flared up. It was what they
always said! Whatever she did was bad, not because it _was_ bad,
but because _she_ was a girl!

"'Tain't my fault I'm a girl!" she cried, stamping her foot and
glaring out from under her muddy hair, more than ever like a
little creature of the woods. "I don't want to be a girl! I want
to be a boy, and you know I do!"

"That will do, Margery," said her mother coldly. "You may go to
bed now, and when your father comes home, I shall tell him how
you've been behaving and he can punish you. Henry, call Effie."

To Effie was intrusted the task of giving Margery a bath and
putting her to bed.

"She's been a bad girl this afternoon, Effie, and if she's rude
to you, you may spank her." And Margery's mother, thus shifting
her maternal responsibility, first to a servant, then to her
husband, returned to her novel with a troubled sigh.

When one is small and in the grip of adverse circumstances, there is,
perhaps, no process of life which can be made more humiliating than a
bath. In this instance, suffice to say that Effie was lavish in the
use of soap and water, especially soap, and, by the time she finished,
had reduced her charge to a state of quiescent misery.

       *       *       *       *       *




Margery's room was the small front corner room adjoining her
mother's. The window was open, and, as she lay in bed, feverish
and unhappy, the murmur of conversation from the porch below
reached her distinctly. She paid little attention until, hearing
Gladys Bailey's voice, it suddenly came over her that that young
woman had not yet gone home. Then Margery sat up and listened.

"I just feel so sorry for your poor father," Gladys's voice was
saying. "He'll feel so disgraced!" After a slight pause she
asked: "Don't you think he'll be home soon?"

So that was it! Gladys lingered on in hopes of witnessing the
last scene of Margery's humiliation. Oh, what a deceitful
creature Gladys was, pretending that the whole family was so
disgraced, yet remaining still as intimate with them as ever!
How horrid they all were--everybody except, perhaps--perhaps her
father! In the past he was the only one who had ever shown
himself superior to public opinion and circumstantial evidence.
Would he be the same this time? If he, too, were going to be
shocked and surprised, Margery felt that there was nothing left
for her but to go off somewhere alone and die.

"How many boys did you say they was, Henry?"

Henry evidently had not said, for he did not answer now. Nothing
daunted, Gladys went on.

"I suppose they was at least ten. Yes, I'm sure they must ha'
been ten."

"No, they wasn't," Henry blurted out. "They was only five."

Margery tossed about on her little bed in helpless rage and
scorn. Why, the creature was a regular Delilah!

"Who was they, Henry?"

Again Henry kept silence. But this time Gladys's question was
answered in another way. From up the street came the various
noises that announce the approach of a crowd of boys.

"Here they come now," Gladys exclaimed in candid satisfaction.

Yes, without doubt they were coming. When they saw Henry they
began immediately a taunting sing-song:

"Oh, Henry, can't guess who I seen in swimmin'! Can't guess who I
seen in swimmin'!"

Henry dashed off the porch and the chorus scattered in various
directions. One saucy voice sang as it ran:

     Motheh, may I go out to thwim?
       Yeth, my darlin' daughter;
     Hang your cloth' ...

Yes, that was the whole thing in a nutshell, Margery thought. It
was exactly how they always talked to girls.

     Hang your clothes on a hickory limb,
       And DON'T go near the water!

Wasn't it what her mother said to her a dozen times a day? _Now
be a good little girl and have a good time._ How could you be a
_good_ little girl and have a good time at the _same_ time? The
irony of it, when anybody with a grain of sense would know that
the two do not go hand in hand! If she had stayed home that
afternoon, she would have been good, but she would not have had a
good time. As it was, she had had a good time, but she had not
been good. So there you are!

The gate clicked, but it was not Henry, for Gladys offered the
conciliatory greeting, "Hello, Willie." So it must be Willie
Jones coming through their yard to get to his own. Margery
wondered whether Gladys would be able to work him as she had
worked Henry. Margery thought not, but if she were--well, she,
Margery Blair, would have very little more to say to Willie
Jones.

When, Margery judged, Willie Jones was passing the porch, Gladys
asked in her suavest tones, "Oh, Willie, did you see Margery,
too?"

For a moment Willie did not answer, and Margery, kneeling on the
floor behind the window curtain, held her breath. Then,
apparently without slowing his pace, Willie Jones grunted out in
his roughest manner:

"Aw, go on! You don't know what you're talkin' about!"

"Willie Jones is just the rudest boy," Gladys informed the twins.
"I wouldn't think your mother would let Margery play with him."

But, up-stairs, Margery wept for joy at this evidence of a true
and noble heart.

Henry returned from the chase with the interesting news that he
had almost caught Freddy Larkin.

"Well, I just pity your poor father," Gladys commented, "if he
goes down on the car to-morrow with Freddy Larkin's father."

"Why, Gladys?" chorused the twins anxiously.

"Because he'll laugh at your father and make fun of him for
having a girl that went in swimming with boys. Just you see! And
your father'll feel so disgraced!"

Would he really? Margery wondered forlornly. Of all her family,
her father was the one, the only one, she would have spared; and
now, if Gladys were to be trusted, he it was who would suffer
most. With a pang, she suddenly remembered how many times in the
past she had been sent to bed, as to-day, to await his coming,
and how kind and just he had always been, never pronouncing
punishment until he had sifted and weighed the evidence against
her. And, remembering this, her rebellious little heart softened
and a sense of regret came over her--the first she had felt that
afternoon. Why, why had she not remembered him sooner? How could
she _ever_ have forgotten him?

       *       *       *       *       *

In the midst of this incipient remorse, Gladys announced his
arrival.

He came in with a cheerful, "Hello, kidlets!" and almost
immediately asked, "Where's Margery?"

"Margery's in bed," Henry said significantly.

Margery heard her father pull over a porch chair and seat
himself.

"She's been bad," Katherine said.

Still her father made no comment.

It was Alice's turn to speak, and there was nothing left to tell
but the deed itself.

"She went in swimmin'," Alice whispered.

And then, of all things, as Gladys Bailey would say, what did her
father do but laugh! He laughed loud and long; but the others,
evidently surprised, did not join him.

It was Gladys who spoke first.

"You forgot to tell your father that she went in swimmin' with
boys."

"With boys!" her father echoed, and laughed harder than before.

Up-stairs, her head pressed against the window-sill, Margery
could scarcely believe her ears. Did he really think it was
funny? And then she had it. Her father was pretending! But that,
after all, was only half a clue. Why was he pretending? Why?

He stopped laughing after a time and began putting questions to
each of them in turn, until he had pieced together the whole
story.

"Katherine," he asked finally, "why did you and Alice not take
her with you when you went calling? If you had, this would not
have happened."

"Well, you see, papa," began Katherine, "she's too little for our
crowd."

"Too little? What nonsense! She's not a bit too little."

"Well, Gladys says she is," Katherine insisted.

Gladys corrected this statement kindly but firmly: "What I said
was, that, for first calls, four was perhaps too big a crowd."

"Oh, I see. That is very different. No doubt Gladys is entirely
right. But you've made your first calls now, haven't you?--and
hereafter Margery can go with you just as well as not, can't she,
Gladys? Why, you know, really, in crowds, the more the merrier.
Besides"--and Margery knew just as though she were there the kind
of look her father was giving Gladys--"as a favor to me!"

Gladys was completely taken in.

"I'll be glad to do anything I can for you, Mr. Blair," she said
politely. Then she added gratuitously: "Everybody ought to be
kind to each other."

"That's it, exactly. As Gladys says, the big boys and girls
should always be kind and gentle to the smaller ones. Now Henry
was right, when he found his little sister doing something wrong,
to bring her home. But next time he's going to be more gentle
about it, aren't you, Henry?"

Yes, Henry was, and Margery hugged herself in wonder and
amazement. Why, her father was simply workin' 'em for all they
was worth! He was just jollyin' 'em to beat the band! And it was
all for her sake, too! Under the magic of his words, already they
were ceasing to regard her as an outcast. And Margery, like many
another who has sought to overturn the pillars of society, was
strangely happy at the thought of being able once again to mingle
with her own kind.

"But, papa," she heard Alice ask, "what'll you say to Freddy
Larkin's father on the car?"

"What will I say to Freddy Larkin's father on the car, Alice?"

"Yes, papa, when he--Gladys--she says he'll make fun of you on
account of Margery."

And then her father rose to the occasion magnificently.

"What will I say," he repeated in a loud, full voice, "to Freddy
Larkin's father when he makes fun of me for having a little girl
who went in swimming with the boys?"

He paused impressively, and suddenly Margery understood. He was
the only one of them all who knew that of course she was
listening! And he had known it all along and had been sending
messages, no, not of excuse for her naughtiness--they would have
that out together, later--but of love and encouragement for
herself. Oh, how she would try never to grieve him again!

"I'll tell you what I'll say," his adorable voice continued.
"I'll say, 'Well, I just bet you a great big round dollar that
Freddy will never see Margery do such a thing again!' Why, do you
know, Gladys, I'd be willing to risk five dollars!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Then he came into the house and her mother kept him a moment in
the library. She could not hear what her mother said, but her
father's answer, "Of course I shall be severe, if necessary," put
a sudden chill on her heart.

Then she heard his foot on the stairs; and she buried her face in
the pillow, pretending to be asleep.

Her father stood over her a moment, looking down at her quietly.
She could feel him looking. Then he said, "Margery," softly,
gently. It seemed to her that she had never heard her name
pronounced so sweetly, so lovingly. Whatever little ice of
rebellion had formed anew around her heart melted that instant,
and, like a whirlwind, she threw her arms about her father's neck
and crushed her chill little nose and her burning face against
his cheek. There she sobbed out her love and repentance.

"And papa--papa," she gasped as soon as she could speak, "you can
bet him ten dollars if you want to, and you won't lose! I promise
you, papa, you won't lose! You _won't!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

Her mother supposed that, as usual, Margery had cajoled her
father into an easy mood, for, when she saw them an hour later,
Margery was seated on her father's knee, quiet and happy. In all
apparent innocence she was saying:

"_And oh, papa! Ugh! It just squashes up between your toes like
worms!_"

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hickory Limb, by Parker Fillmore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HICKORY LIMB ***

***** This file should be named 28886.txt or 28886.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/8/8/28886/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Suzanne Shell, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
