The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Surrender of Napoleon, by
Sir Frederick Lewis Maitland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Surrender of Napoleon
       Being the narrative of the surrender of Buonaparte, and
       of his residence on board H.M.S. Bellerophon, with a detail
       of the principal events that occurred in that ship between
       the 24th of May and the 8th of August 1815

Author: Sir Frederick Lewis Maitland

Editor: William Kirk Dickson

Release Date: May 23, 2009 [EBook #28934]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SURRENDER OF NAPOLEON ***




Produced by StevenGibbs, Christine P. Travers and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  THE

  SURRENDER OF NAPOLEON


  BEING THE

  NARRATIVE OF THE SURRENDER OF BUONAPARTE, AND
  OF HIS RESIDENCE ON BOARD H.M.S. BELLEROPHON,
  WITH A DETAIL OF THE PRINCIPAL EVENTS THAT
  OCCURRED IN THAT SHIP BETWEEN THE 24th OF MAY
  AND THE 8th OF AUGUST 1815


  BY

  REAR-ADMIRAL SIR FREDERICK LEWIS MAITLAND, K.C.B.




  _A NEW EDITION EDITED, WITH A MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR, BY_
  WILLIAM KIRK DICKSON

  WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS
  EDINBURGH AND LONDON
  MCMIV

  _All Rights reserved_




NOTE.


After Sir Frederick Maitland's death in 1839 his papers passed into
the hands of Lady Maitland, who liferented his property of Lindores in
Fife until her death in 1865. They then passed with the property to
Sir Frederick's nephew, Captain James Maitland, R.N., and on his death
to his brother, Rear-Admiral Lewis Maitland, my father, from whom they
came to me.

The preparation of the present volume has been undertaken by Mr.
Dickson at my request.

                                             FREDERICK LEWIS MAITLAND.

LINDORES, _December 9, 1903_.




PREFACE.


"You are publishing a great and interesting national document.... The
whole narrative is as fine, manly, and explicit an account as ever was
given of so interesting a transaction." So wrote Sir Walter Scott to
Captain Maitland after reading the manuscript of his _Narrative of the
Surrender of Buonaparte_. It is undoubtedly a historical document of
the first importance, not only as a record of "words by an eyewitness"
of an ever-memorable event, but as a vindication of the good faith of
the British Government in its conduct towards Napoleon.

In his Preface to the original edition, published by Henry Colburn in
1826, Sir Frederick Maitland wrote:--

"Immediately after the extraordinary and interesting events took place
which are here recorded, I was, by the earnest solicitations of my
friends, induced to throw together the notes and memoranda in my
possession, of the proceedings in which I bore so prominent a part. I
was further led to undertake this task, so foreign to my usual
occupations, in consequence of the many misrepresentations that
appeared at that time, respecting the conduct of Buonaparte while on
board the ship I commanded, as well as my treatment of him.

"The following Narrative was then written solely for the private
perusal of my friends, and not with a view to publication, many
reasons combining, at that time, in my opinion, to render such a
measure inexpedient.

"I made it my study to state events exactly as they occurred, and, in
doing so, to avoid, as much as possible, all prejudice, either
against or in favour of the extraordinary man whom it was my fortune
to secure and bring to this country. It may appear surprising that a
possibility could exist of a British officer being prejudiced in
favour of one who had caused so many calamities to his country; but to
such an extent did he possess the power of pleasing, that there are
few people who could have sat at the same table with him for nearly a
month, as I did, without feeling a sensation of pity, allied perhaps
to regret, that a man possessed of so many fascinating qualities, and
who had held so high a station in life, should be reduced to the
situation in which I saw him.

"Although many of the causes for withholding my Narrative from the
public eye have long been removed, I had no intention of bringing it
forward, until by accident it fell into the hands of a most celebrated
literary character [Sir Walter Scott]. He did me the honour, on
returning it, to express an opinion which I was not at all prepared to
expect, and so strongly to recommend its being published, that however
averse to appearing as an author, I have been induced, under the
sanction of such high authority, to present it to the public."

       *       *       *       *       *

The text and notes of the edition of 1826 have been reprinted
verbatim.

Sir Walter Scott's notes on the MS. of the Narrative are among the
papers at Lindores. They consist chiefly of verbal criticisms on Sir
Frederick's original rough draft. Unfortunately it is no longer in
existence, and most of Sir Walter's notes cannot be followed without
it. A few of his comments are printed as footnotes, in square
brackets, and a portion of his MS. is reproduced in facsimile at page
230.

A sketch of Sir Frederick's life, chiefly based on the journals at
Lindores, has been prefixed to the Narrative.

The Appendix of the original edition has been printed, with an
additional Appendix, consisting of (1) a list of the officers serving
on board the _Bellerophon_ in July 1815, supplied by the courtesy of
the Secretary to the Admiralty; (2) an unpublished letter from one of
the assistant-surgeons of the _Bellerophon_, giving an account of
Napoleon's surrender, recently acquired by the British Museum; and (3)
several extracts from _Memoirs of an Aristocrat, by a Midshipman of
the Bellerophon_. This extraordinary book, published in 1838, was
written by George Home, son of Lieutenant A. Home, R.N., who on the
death of the last Earl of Marchmont claimed the Marchmont peerage. It
contained violent attacks on various persons connected with the family
of Home of Wedderburn, and in particular on Admiral Sir David Milne of
Milne-Graden and Lady Milne. An action was raised against the author
and publishers, and damages were awarded against the former. The book
was withdrawn from circulation, and is now extremely scarce. Home
served as a midshipman on board the _Bellerophon_, and his
"hair-brained narrative," as he calls it, adds some interesting
details to his captain's record.

The frontispiece is from a portrait of Sir Frederick, painted by
Samuel Woodford, R.A., and engraved by Henry Meyer. The original is
now at Lindores.

The portrait of Lady Maitland at page lxviii is from a miniature at
Lindores. This is the miniature which hung in the cabin of the
_Bellerophon_, and which was seen and commented on by Napoleon.

The chart at page 1 is a slightly reduced copy of that in the original
edition.

The portrait of Napoleon at page 68 is from a sketch made on board the
_Bellerophon_ by Colonel Planat, _officier d'ordonnance_ to the
Emperor, and given by him to Captain Maitland.

Mr Orchardson's well-known picture is reproduced at page 108, by
permission of the Fine Art Company. It contains portraits of most of
the chief personages of the story.

The picture of the _Bellerophon_ at Plymouth at page 132 is
reproduced, by permission of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty,
from the original by J. J. Chalon, R.A., now in the Painted Hall at
Greenwich.

As is mentioned at page 202 of the Narrative, Napoleon desired to
present Captain Maitland with a box containing his portrait set in
diamonds. On Maitland's declining, in the circumstances, to accept any
present of value, the Emperor begged him to keep as a souvenir a
tumbler from his travelling case, bearing the crown and cipher of the
Empress Josephine. This relic is still preserved at Lindores. A
photograph of it is given at page 202.

                                                              W. K. D.




CONTENTS.


                                                                  PAGE

  MEMOIR OF SIR FREDERICK MAITLAND                                 xxv

NARRATIVE.

  [_The summary of the contents of the Narrative given here is
  that prefixed to the original edition. Sir Walter Scott's
  notes are printed at pp. 70, 84, 155, 165, 208, 223, 225, and
  229._]

  Captain Maitland sets sail in the _Bellerophon_, with sealed
  instructions                                                       1

  He arrives off l'Isle Dieu. Proceeds off Rochefort                 2

  Reconnoitres the French ships of war under l'Isle d'Aix            3

  Is joined by the _Cephalus_                                        4

  Captain Maitland hears of the victory of Waterloo. On June 30
  receives a communication, sent from Bourdeaux within a quill,
  respecting the probable flight of Buonaparte by sea             4, 5

  Blockades Rochefort, Bourdeaux, and la Teste d'Arcasson            8

  Destroys his prizes                                                9

  A man and boy in a flat punt saved                                10

  Captain Maitland watches the frigates at l'Isle d'Aix closely     11

  Receives Sir Henry Hotham's instructions              12, 13, 14, 16

  The _Mouche_ schooner, with Savary and Las Cases with a flag
  of truce, approaches the _Bellerophon_                            21

  Secret orders from Sir Henry Hotham                       21, 22, 24

  Letter of Count Bertrand, announcing Napoleon's intention of
  sailing to North America                                          26

  The captain's answer to Bertrand                                  29

  Conversation with Savary and Las Cases                            31

  Receives private information by a row-boat                        35

  Captain Maitland guards the Mamusson passage                      36

  The white flag is hoisted at Rochelle                         37, 38

  The _Bellerophon_ fires a royal salute                            37

  The French frigates appear ready to put to sea                    38

  English guard-boats continue to row near the frigates             38

  British flag of truce, its colour                                 39

  The _Mouche_ schooner, with Las Cases and General Lallemand,
  returns to the _Bellerophon_                                  39, 40

  Communication delivered from Napoleon                             42

  Captain Maitland's reply                                          42

  Buonaparte stated to be at Rochefort, but is at l'Isle d'Aix      44

  Design for effecting the escape of Buonaparte in a cask on
  board of a Danish vessel                                          45

  Las Cases, with General Gourgaud, returns to the _Bellerophon_    46

  They bring an important letter from Bertrand                      47

  List of Napoleon's suite                                          51

  The Emperor's letter to H.R.H. the Prince Regent                  54

  Captain Maitland promises to receive Buonaparte                   56

  Captain Sartorius is despatched to England, with a letter from
  Captain Maitland, and with General Gourgaud                       58

  Advice of Buonaparte's wish to escape repeatedly given            62

  July 15, Napoleon reaches the _Bellerophon_, in the barge of
  that ship. He comes on board. His uniform described           67, 68

  Napoleon cheered by the crew of _l'Epervier_                      69

  His address to Captain Maitland                                   69

  The ship's officers are introduced to him                         71

  His small knowledge of English                                    72

  He examines the _Bellerophon_                                     72

  Conversations between Napoleon and Captain Maitland
                                           73, 74, 75, 76, 90, 95, 106

  Buonaparte's naval opinions                               73, 74, 77

  Breakfast on board the _Bellerophon_                              78

  Rear-Admiral Sir Henry Hotham arrives off Rochefort. His
  conference with Captain Maitland                              79, 80

  The Admiral comes on board the _Bellerophon_                      81

  Conversation at dinner                                            83

  Buonaparte's portable library and camp bed                    82, 84

  He breakfasts on board the Admiral's ship                     85, 91

  Attachment for him evinced by the officers of his suite      92, 228

  The _Bellerophon_ sets sail for Torbay                        93, 96

  Buonaparte speaks of Sir Sydney Smith                             96

  The passage to England described                        98, 105, 107

  Card-parties                                                      99

  The captain's despatch to Lord Keith                             100

  His conversation with Countess Bertrand relative to a portrait
  of Napoleon                                                      103

  Speaks with the _Swiftsure_, Captain Webley                      104

  Count Las Cases                                                  107

  English coast in sight                                           107

  The _Bellerophon_ anchors in Torbay                              108

  Buonaparte's exclamation on viewing the shore                    108

  Admiral Lord Keith's orders                                      109

  English newspapers read by Napoleon                              112

  Observations of Madame Bertrand                             114, 120

  Persons refused admission on board the _Bellerophon_             115

  Lord Keith's approval of Captain Maitland's line of conduct 116, 117

  Concourse of spectators in boats                            115, 118

  Remarks of Buonaparte respecting the fishermen                   119

  The ships sail for Plymouth                                      119

  Observations on the breakwater                                   121

  Communications of civility interchanged between Buonaparte and
  Lord Keith                                                  117, 122

  Lord Keith's precautions                                    123, 125

  Buonaparte complains of the guard-ships                          127

  The Lords of the Admiralty approve of Captain Maitland's
  proceedings                                                      128

  Napoleon's letter to the Regent is forwarded                     129

  He is considered as a general officer                            130

  Orders received from the Admiralty                               130

  Sir Richard and Lady Strachan come alongside the ship            131

  Napoleon's compliment on seeing Mrs Maitland                     132

  Admiral Lord Keith is introduced to Napoleon                     134

  Repugnance of the prisoners to their banishment to St Helena
                                                              129, 134

  Crowd of boats round the ship                                    135

  Buonaparte's habits on board ship                                136

  Bertrand, Savary, and Lallemand fear proscription      137, 140, 142

  Buonaparte informed that he was to be sent to St Helena          139

  Sir Henry Bunbury visits him                                     140

  He complains bitterly                                            141

  He writes again to the Regent                                    142

  Captain Maitland's letter favourable to Savary and Lallemand
                                                              145, 152

  Buonaparte shows himself on deck                                 147

  Countess Bertrand much agitated at the thoughts of her husband
  going to St Helena                                               149

  Lallemand is reproved by Captain Maitland                        150

  Buonaparte's assertion that "he would not go to St Helena"
                                                         148, 151, 164

  Extravagant conversation of the attendant generals               151

  Mr O'Meara                                                       153

  Countess Bertrand attempts to cast herself into the sea          153

  Her retrospect of Buonaparte's conduct                      154, 156

  Her impatience. She writes to Lord Keith                         155

  She is overheard by the generals                                 157

  Buonaparte's inquiries as to St Helena                           158

  Report of an attempt to escape                                   159

  Rumour of an intention of serving a Habeas Corpus to bring
  Buonaparte ashore                                                162

  Ship prepared for sea                                            162

  The _Northumberland_ ordered to convey Buonaparte                162

  The _Bellerophon_ weighs anchor                                  164

  Service of a subpoena on Buonaparte frustrated by keeping the
  lawyer at bay                                                    165

  Note respecting writs of Habeas Corpus and subpoenas             165

  Buonaparte again writes to the Regent                            168

  He keeps entirely to the cabin; prepares a protest               169

  Buonaparte's protest                                             170

  He declares himself to be the guest of England, and no
  prisoner                                                         171

  Captain Maitland's observations thereon                          174

  Conversation on this subject with Count Las Cases                176

  Buonaparte speaks of the Army of the Loire, and of his party     178

  Mr O'Meara requested by Buonaparte to become his surgeon         179

  The _Northumberland_ in sight                                    180

  Arms required to be delivered up                                 181

  Lists of articles essential for the Trench officers and ladies
  forwarded to Plymouth                                            182

  Sir George Cockburn is introduced to Buonaparte                  182

  Buonaparte permitted to wear his sword                           183

  He requests an interview with Captain Maitland                   183

  He expresses his wish of living on a small estate in England     185

  He speaks in favour of Savary and Lallemand                      185

  Captain Maitland's letter to Count Bertrand                      186

  Lord Keith's order to the captain to deliver up General
  Buonaparte and others                                            187

  General Gourgaud                                                 190

  Countess Bertrand's remonstrances                                192

  A misunderstanding and reconciliation                            193

  Napoleon returns thanks to Captain Maitland                      194

  He speaks with regard of Count Bertrand                          195

  Search of the baggage                                            196

  The box of money temporarily taken charge of                     197

  Parting of Buonaparte with the captain                           200

  Buonaparte, accompanying Admiral Lord Keith, quits the
  _Bellerophon_                                                    200

  Count Montholon's polite intimation to Captain Maitland          201

  The captain declines the present of a portrait                   202

  Savary and Lallemand; their affecting parting with Napoleon in
  the presence of Captain Maitland                                 203

  The _Northumberland_ sails for St Helena                         204

  Description of Napoleon Buonaparte                               205

  His manners and conversation                                     206

  Anecdotes                                         207, 210, 215, 216

  He speaks of his wife and his son                                211

  Their pictures                                              211, 212

  Conversation respecting Kleber and Dessaix                       213

  Napoleon's resources in money                                    214

  The midshipmen act plays                                         217

  Buonaparte's observations on the British cavalry, and relative
  to the Duke of Wellington                                   218, 219

  Character of Count Bertrand                                      222

  Countess Bertrand, a daughter of General Dillon                  222

  Savary, Duke of Rovigo, described                                224

  Savary, Lallemand, and Planat are sent to Malta, and allowed
  to go to Smyrna                                                  225

  Character of Lallemand                                           225

  Count and Countess Montholon                                     226

  Count Las Cases and his son                                      227


APPENDIX.

  On what terms Captain Maitland received Buonaparte on board
  his ship; and documents relating thereto                         231


ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

  1. List of officers borne on the books of H.M.S. _Bellerophon_
  in July 1815                                                     241

  2. Letter from Ephraim Graebke, assistant-surgeon on board the
  _Bellerophon_, to his mother, giving an account of Napoleon's
  surrender, dated July 30, 1815                                   242

  3. Extracts from _Memoirs of an Aristocrat, by a Midshipman of
  the Bellerophon_ [George Home]                                   246




ILLUSTRATIONS.


  PORTRAIT OF SIR FREDERICK MAITLAND                    _Frontispiece_
  From an engraving by Henry Meyer, after Samuel Woodford, R.A.

  PORTRAIT OF LADY MAITLAND                             _At p._ lxviii
  From a miniature at Lindores.

  CHART OF THE BASQUE ROADS                               "          1

  PORTRAIT OF NAPOLEON                                    "         68
  From a sketch taken on board the _Bellerophon_ by Colonel
  Planat.

  NAPOLEON ON BOARD THE BELLEROPHON                       "        108
  From the picture by W. Q. Orchardson, R.A., in the Tate
  Gallery.

  H.M.S. BELLEROPHON AT PLYMOUTH                          "        132
  From the picture by J. J. Chalon, R.A., in the Painted Hall at
  Greenwich.

  TUMBLER GIVEN TO CAPTAIN MAITLAND BY NAPOLEON           "        202
  Photograph from the original at Lindores.

  FACSIMILE OF PART OF SIR WALTER SCOTT'S NOTES ON THE
  "NARRATIVE"                                             "        230
  Photograph from the original at Lindores.




MEMOIR

OF

SIR FREDERICK LEWIS MAITLAND.


The name of Sir Frederick Lewis Maitland has found a permanent place
in history as that of the captor of Napoleon. Apart from the rare
piece of good fortune which befell him in the Basque Roads in July
1815, his distinguished career of public service entitles him to an
honourable place in the records of the British Navy.

He was the third son of Captain the Hon. Frederick Lewis Maitland,
R.N., and was born at Rankeilour in Fife on September 7, 1777. His
father, Captain Maitland, was the sixth son of Charles, sixth Earl of
Lauderdale, grand-nephew of Charles II.'s famous minister, and was
godson to Frederick Lewis, Prince of Wales, the eldest son of George
II. He held various naval commands with distinction, served under
Rodney in 1782, and between 1763 and 1775 commanded the royal yacht.
He died in 1786, having been promoted rear-admiral just before his
death. Maitland's mother, Margaret Dick, was the heiress of the family
of Makgill of Rankeilour. The estates of that family were ultimately
inherited by her eldest son, Charles Maitland.

Young Maitland entered his father's profession at a very early age. He
served as a midshipman, first under Captain George Duff in the
_Martin_ sloop-of-war, and afterwards with the Hon. Robert Forbes in
the _Southampton_ frigate, in which he was present at Lord Howe's
great victory off Ushant on June 1, 1794,--the "glorious First of
June." On April 5, 1795, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant,
and appointed to the _Andromeda_, of 32 guns. From the _Andromeda_ he
was removed to the _Venerable_, the flagship of Admiral Duncan in the
North Sea. In April 1797 he went out to the Mediterranean to join Lord
St Vincent.

St Vincent had been a friend of his father's, and had promised to
promote him as opportunity should occur. The flagship had her full
complement of officers, so Maitland was appointed first lieutenant of
the _Kingfisher_, a brig mounting 18 six-pounders and commanded by the
Hon. Charles Herbert Pierrepont, afterwards Earl Manvers. In her he
was present at the capture of four French privateers. With one of
these, the _Betsey_, of 16 guns, a severe action was fought. When the
prize-money for her capture was distributed, the crew of the
_Kingfisher_ subscribed L50 to present Maitland with a sword in
recognition of his conduct.

Pierrepont was promoted to post rank in December 1798, and appointed
to the _Spartiate_, one of Nelson's prizes taken at the Nile. A few
days after his departure the _Kingfisher_, under Maitland's command,
was leaving the Tagus, when she grounded on Lisbon bar and became a
total wreck. Maitland was tried by court-martial at Gibraltar, and
acquitted of all blame in connection with her loss. Immediately after
his trial he was appointed flag-lieutenant to Lord St Vincent.

On June 23, 1799, the French and Spanish fleets effected a junction
at Cartagena, and in the following month they retired from the
Mediterranean and took refuge in Brest. They passed the Straits of
Gibraltar on July 7, when Maitland had an adventure which is described
in Tucker's _Memoirs of Earl St Vincent_.

"It is," he says, "an as yet untold anecdote of the presence of mind
and courage of one of the highest-minded characters that ever adorned
the British Navy, the late Rear-Admiral Sir Frederick Maitland.

"At this period that gallant officer was Lord St Vincent's
flag-lieutenant; and when the fleets were first descried, Johnny
Gilpin, as his lordship used to call him, was sent to order the
_Penelope_, a little hired cutter, to go, count, and dodge them. The
lieutenant commanding the cutter was found too ill to utter an order.
But Mr Maitland, well knowing his Chief, and that this was service
which must be done, at once assumed the command, and got the vessel
under weigh. He stood over to Ceuta. The night was so pitchy dark and
so calm that the cutter was unperceived by the enemy, and yet so close
among them that the words of command in French and Spanish could be
distinctly heard. At daybreak she was about gunshot distance from the
whole Spanish fleet. When they saw her their admiral signalled a
number of launches to tow a brig of 14 guns to attack her, but on
their arrival within shot from the little _Penelope_, the reception
she astonished them with was so spirited that the enemy dropped astern
again and retired; and a faint hope of escape appeared, for, there
being no wind, the cutter's boats were kept ahead all the forenoon,
towing to the southward. Then every ship in that mighty fleet, except
one frigate, actually turned their heads to the southward to give
chase to the cutter. But the frigate stood to the northward, and as
the afternoon's westerly breeze got up, it brought her down under
studding-sails near the _Penelope_, before the air had reached her.
When she was within cable's length, the frigate opened her broadside
fire. Mr Maitland told the cutter's crew to lie down upon the deck
till the frigate had discharged all her guns. The men lay down very
smartly; but when ordered to rise, splice the top-sail braces, and get
the vessel's head about, not a man of them would stir. 'Fighting,'
they said, 'was not their employ; they were not hired for it, and,
should they lose a limb, there was no provision for them;' and thus
the frigate now renewing her fire, the little _Penelope_ was taken.

"To the honour of the Spanish admiral it must be added, that, having
witnessed this bravery and heard that it was Lord St Vincent's
flag-lieutenant that had displayed it, he sent Mr Maitland in a cartel
to Gibraltar, declaring him free without exchange."

Tucker, who wrote in 1844, was not quite correct in saying that the
anecdote was "as yet untold." It had been given long before in
Marshall's _Naval Biography_. Marshall mentions, among other details,
that "the _Penelope_ had on board a sum of money intended for Minorca,
which it was not deemed advisable to remove, under the pressing
urgency for her immediate departure from Gibraltar. When her crew
found there was no chance of escape from the combined fleets, they
made an attempt to plunder the treasure, which Lieutenant Maitland
most honourably and successfully resisted, alleging that as public
property it was the lawful prize of the captors."

Lord St Vincent returned to England in August 1799, accompanied by
Maitland. On reaching Portsmouth he heard of an explosion of shells
which had taken place in May on board the _Theseus_, 74, resulting in
the death of her commander, Captain Ralph Willet Miller. A vacancy had
thus occurred in the Mediterranean before the admiral quitted that
station. He used his privilege as commander-in-chief and promoted
Maitland to the rank of commander in the _Cameleon_ sloop-of-war, the
promotion to date from June 14. Maitland at once went out to join his
new ship, which was then on the coast of Egypt under Sir Sidney Smith.
After the signing of the convention of El Arish he was sent home with
despatches. He returned and regained his ship, in which he made
several captures.

On December 10, 1800, he was appointed by Lord Keith to the
_Wassenaar_, 64. As she was then lying at Malta unfit for service, he
obtained permission to accompany Sir Ralph Abercromby's expedition to
Egypt.

The fleet anchored in Aboukir Bay on the 2nd of March 1801. On the
8th, Abercromby effected a landing in face of a large and strongly
posted French force. To Maitland fell the duty of commanding the armed
launches employed to cover the landing. The enemy were driven from
their positions, and retired towards Alexandria with the loss of seven
guns. Abercromby at once followed them up, and advanced on the neck of
sand lying between the sea and the Lake of Aboukir, leaving a distance
of about four miles between the English and French camps. On the 13th
he again attacked the French, and forced them back upon their lines
before Alexandria. The right flank of the British force rested on the
sea, the left on the Lake of Aboukir, and the flanks were covered by a
naval flotilla, the boats on the sea being under Maitland's command,
and those on the lake under that of Captain James Hillyar. Seven days
later Sir Sidney Smith, who commanded the naval battalion serving on
shore, received from a friendly Arab sheikh a letter informing him
that it was General Menou's intention to attack the British camp next
morning. The news was thought too good to be true, as in a few days
Abercromby would have been compelled to attack the lines of Alexandria
under every tactical disadvantage. It was, however, confirmed, and on
the 21st of March the battle of Alexandria was fought, the fate of
Egypt was decided, and Abercromby received his death-wound. Maitland
again covered the British right flank from the sea. In the detailed
plan of the battle given in Sir Robert Wilson's _History of the
British Expedition to Egypt_, Maitland's flotilla is shown a little to
the west of the ruins of Nicopolis, in a position to enfilade the
French attack. For his services on the 8th, 13th, and 21st Maitland
received the thanks of the naval and military commanders-in-chief, and
on March 22, the day after the battle, Sir Sidney Smith wrote to Lord
Keith warmly commending Maitland's conduct.

Maitland's post commission was confirmed by the Admiralty on the day
of the battle of Alexandria. In the ensuing month he was appointed to
the _Dragon_, 74, and shortly afterwards to the _Carrere_, a French
40-gun frigate taken near Elba. He remained in command of her in the
Mediterranean till the Peace of Amiens.

The _Carrere_ was paid off on October 4, 1802. Eleven days afterwards
Maitland was appointed by Lord St Vincent to the _Loire_, a fine
46-gun frigate. War broke out again on May 18, 1803, and the _Loire_
started on a brilliant career of captures,[1] which included the
10-gun brig _Venteux_, cut out from under the Isle of Bas by two of
the _Loire's_ boats, the _Braave_ privateer, and the 30-gun frigate
_Blonde_, captured in August 1804 after a pursuit of twenty hours and
a desperate running fight.

         [Footnote 1: They are fully detailed in Marshall's _Naval
         Biography_, vol. ii. part 1, pp. 387 _et seq._]

An official letter written by Maitland in June 1805, gives us a vivid
glimpse of frigate service in the old days:--


_Captain Maitland to Rear-Admiral Drury, Cork._

                                             LOIRE, MUROS ROAD, SPAIN,
                                                  _June 4, 1805._

SIR,--Being informed that there was a French privateer of 26 guns
fitting out at Muros, and nearly ready for sea, it struck me, from my
recollection of the bay (having been in it formerly, when lieutenant
of the _Kingfisher_), as being practicable either to bring her out or
destroy her with the ship I have the honour to command. I accordingly
prepared yesterday evening for engaging at anchor, and appointed Mr
Yeo, with Lieutenants Mallock and Douglas, of the marines, and Mr
Clinch, master's-mate, to head the boarders and marines, amounting,
officers included, to 50 men (being all that could be spared from
anchoring the ship and working the guns), in landing and storming the
fort, though I then had no idea its strength was so great as it has
proved. At nine this morning, on the sea-breeze setting in, I stood
for the bay in the ship, the men previously prepared, being in the
boats ready to shove off. On hauling close round the point of the
road, a small battery of 2 guns opened a fire on the ship; a few shot
were returned; but perceiving it would annoy us considerably, from its
situation, I desired Mr Yeo to push on shore and spike the guns;
reminding the men of its being the anniversary of their Sovereign's
birth, and that, for his sake, as well as their own credit, their
utmost exertions must be used. Though such an injunction was
unnecessary, it had a great effect in animating and raising the
spirits of the people. As the ship drew in, and more fully opened the
bay, I perceived a very long corvette, of 26 ports, apparently nearly
ready for sea, and a large brig of 20 ports, in a state of fitting;
but neither of them firing, led me to conclude they had not their guns
on board, and left no other object to occupy my attention but a heavy
fort, which at this moment opened to our view, within less than a
quarter of a mile, and began a wonderfully well-directed fire, almost
every shot taking place in the hull. Perceiving that, by standing
further on, more guns would be brought to bear upon us, without our
being enabled to near the fort so much as I wished, I ordered the helm
to be put down; and when, from the way she had, we had gained an
advantageous position, anchored with a spring, and commenced firing.
Although I have but little doubt that, before long, we should have
silenced the fort, yet, from the specimen they gave us, and being
completely embrasured, it must have cost us many lives, and caused
great injury to the ship, had not Mr Yeo's gallantry and good conduct
soon put an end to their fire.

I must now revert to him and the party under his command. Having
landed under the small battery on the point, it was instantly
abandoned; but hardly had he time to spike the guns, when, at the
distance of a quarter of a mile, he perceived a regular fort, ditched,
and with a gate, which the enemy (fortunately never suspecting our
landing) had neglected to secure, open a fire upon the ship. Without
waiting for orders he pushed forward, and was opposed at the inner
gate by the Governor, with such troops as were in the town, and the
crews of the French privateers. From the testimony of the prisoners as
well as our own men, it appears that Mr Yeo was the first who entered
the fort, with one blow laid the Governor dead at his feet, and broke
his own sabre in two. The other officers were despatched by such
officers and men of ours as were most advanced, and the narrowness of
the gate would permit to push forward. The remainder instantly fled
to the further end of the fort, and from the ship we could perceive
many of them leap from the embrasures upon the rocks, a height of
above 25 feet. Such as laid down their arms received quarter....

The instant the Union was displayed at the fort, I sent and took
possession of the enemies' vessels in the Road, consisting of the
_Confiance_, French ship privateer, pierced for 26 twelves and nines,
none of which, however, were on board; the _Belier_, French privateer
brig, pierced for 20 eighteen-pounder carronades; and a Spanish
merchant brig in ballast. I then hoisted a flag of truce, and sent to
inform the inhabitants of the town, that if they would deliver up such
stores of the ship as were on shore, there would be no further
molestation. The proposal was thankfully agreed to. I did not,
however, think it advisable to allow the people to remain long enough
to embark the guns, there being a large body of troops in the
vicinity. A great many small vessels are in the bay, and hauled up on
the beach. None of them having cargoes of any value, I conceive it an
act of inhumanity to deprive the poorer inhabitants of the means of
gaining their livelihood, and shall not molest them. On inspecting the
brig, as she had only the lower rigging overhead, and was not in a
state of forwardness, I found it impracticable to bring her away, and
therefore set fire to her: she is now burnt to the water's edge. I
cannot conclude my letter without giving the portion of credit that is
their due to the officers and men on board the ship. They conducted
themselves with the greatest steadiness and coolness; and although
under a heavy fire, pointed their guns with the utmost precision,
there being hardly a shot that did not take effect.... It is but fair
at the same time to state that, much to the credit of the ship's
company, the Bishop and one of the principal inhabitants of the town
came off to express their gratitude for the orderly behaviour of the
people, there not being one instance of pillage; and to make offer of
every refreshment the place affords.

I am now waiting for the land breeze to carry us out, having already
recalled the officers and men from the fort, the guns being spiked
and thrown over the parapet, the carriages rendered unserviceable, and
the embrasures, with part of the fort, blown up.

I have the honour to be, &c.,

                                                    FRED. L. MAITLAND.


On June 27, 1805, the Common Council of the City of London voted him
their thanks for his distinguished conduct in Muros Bay. The Committee
of the Patriotic Fund at Lloyd's presented him with a sword, and on
October 18 he received the freedom of the city of Cork in recognition
of his exertions for the protection of Irish trade.

In the following winter the _Loire_ had a narrow escape. Marshall thus
describes the incident:--

"On the 13th Dec. 1805, the _Loire_, accompanied by the _Alcmene_
frigate, fell in with the Rochefort squadron, consisting of six sail
of the line, three frigates, and three corvettes. Maitland immediately
sent the _Alcmene_ to the fleet off Brest, himself keeping company
with the Frenchmen. Being to leeward, and desirous of obtaining the
weather-gage, as the safest situation for his own ship, he carried a
heavy press of sail, and in the night of the 14th, having stretched
on, as he thought, sufficiently for that purpose, put the _Loire_ on
the same tack as they were. About two A.M., it being then exceedingly
dark, he found himself so near one of the largest ships as to hear the
officer of the watch giving his orders. As the noise of putting about
would have discovered the _Loire's_ situation, Captain Maitland very
prudently abstained from doing so, until, by slacking the lee braces
and luffing his ship to the wind, the enemy had drawn sufficiently
ahead. At daylight he had the satisfaction to observe them four or
five miles to leeward; and although he was chased both on that and the
following day by a detachment from the enemy's squadron, he returned
each evening and took his station on the French admiral's
weather-beam, sufficiently near to keep sight of them till the
morning. During the night between the 16th and 17th, several large
ships were seen to windward running down, and which, on perceiving the
_Loire_ and those to leeward of her, made such signals as proved them
also to be enemies. Captain Maitland had now no alternative but to
make sail in order to get from between those two squadrons, the latter
of which afterwards proved to be from Brest."

On November 28, 1806, Maitland was appointed to the _Emerald_, a
36-gun frigate. During the whole of her commission he cruised with
ceaseless activity and made a very great number of captures. He was
present with Lord Gambier's fleet outside Aix Roads in April 1809,
when Cochrane made his famous fire-ship attack on the French fleet.
The _Emerald_ was one of the few ships which, on the 12th, were sent
by Gambier, much against his will, to support Cochrane in the
_Imperieuse_. One can well imagine that her gallant commander shared
Cochrane's indignation at seeing so daring an enterprise shorn of its
fruits by the weakness and irresolution of their chief.

Maitland's next appointment, dated June 3, 1813, was to the _Goliath_,
a cut-down 74. He commanded her for twelve months on the Halifax and
West India stations. Having been found seriously defective, she was
paid off at Chatham in October 1814. In the following month Maitland
was appointed to the _Boyne_, then fitting at Portsmouth for the flag
of Sir Alexander Cochrane, commander-in-chief on the coast of America.

In January 1815 he was at Cork, and had collected a large fleet of
transports and merchant vessels bound for America. The fleet was ready
to sail, but was detained at Cove by a succession of strong westerly
winds. Before the wind changed the news came that Napoleon had escaped
from Elba.

Maitland's orders were at once countermanded, and he was removed to
the ship with which his name will always be associated, the
_Bellerophon_, 74. This famous old ship had fought on the First of
June, at the Nile, and at Trafalgar; she was now once more to render a
conspicuous service to the country.

She sailed from Plymouth with Sir Henry Hotham's squadron on May 24,
1815. Her commander's record of the memorable events which took place
on board her during the following weeks is in the reader's hands, and
nothing more need be said of them here. Let it suffice to note that
the controversies which have raged around the story of Napoleon's
exile, and which have tarnished so many reputations, have left
Maitland's without a stain. "My reception in England," said Napoleon
himself to Maitland, as he bade him farewell in the cabin of the
_Bellerophon_, "has been very different from what I expected; but it
gives me much satisfaction to assure you, that I feel your conduct to
me throughout has been that of a gentleman and a man of honour."

       *       *       *       *       *

Up to this point the materials for Maitland's biography are somewhat
scanty. After this his journal, preserved at Lindores, gives us a very
full record of his services.

In October 1818 he was appointed to the _Vengeur_, 74. She had been
intended to bear the flag of Rear-Admiral Otway on the Leith station.
In June 1819, however, she was ordered to join the squadron destined
for South America under the command of Sir Thomas Hardy--Nelson's
Hardy. The squadron left Spithead on September 9, having on board Mr
Thornton, H.B.M.'s minister to Brazil.

The following year was spent on the South American coast. In the
disturbed political condition of the Continent, the duties of the
British naval officers on the station were sometimes difficult and
delicate, as British ships and British subjects frequently got into
trouble with the forces of the revolted Spanish colonies. Maitland's
time was spent chiefly at Rio de Janeiro. In 1807, when Napoleon's
troops first appeared in the Tagus, the Portuguese Court had emigrated
to Brazil and had been there ever since. Maitland's journal contains
many amusing notes--not always printable--about King John VI. and his
disreputable family. "The king is very fond," he writes, "of comparing
himself to the Regent of Great Britain, and does it as follows: 'His
father is mad, so was my mother. I was Regent, so is he. I am very
fat, so is he. I hate my wife, so does he.'" One anecdote which he
tells of the king "must," he thinks, "raise him in the opinion of
every British subject. When the Count de la Rocca was Spanish
Ambassador at the Brazils, upon a rejoicing day the Portuguese ships
were dressed with the national flag at the main, the British colours
at the fore, and Spanish at the mizzen. The Count being at Court,
drew the (then) Prince to a window which commanded a view of the
harbour, and said to him, 'I have to ask your Royal Highness to look
at those ships. The British colours are at the fore and my master's at
the mizzen topmast-head. Were it only occasionally or alternately I
should not complain, but it is never otherwise, and I feel it my duty,
considering the close family connection that subsists between H.M. the
King of Spain and your Royal Highness, to represent it to you, as it
hurts my feelings in a manner I cannot express.' The King of Portugal
tapped him gently on the shoulder and said to him, 'I'll tell you
what, my friend, had it not been for that flag and the nation to whom
it belongs, neither your master nor I would have had a flag to hoist
at all.'"

That was true enough; still, the Portuguese were getting a little
tired of the British flag. The Peninsular War had made Portugal almost
a British dependency. Lord Beresford remained in command of the
Portuguese army after the peace, and many other important appointments
were held by English officers. The old monopoly of trade with Brazil
had been broken down in favour of the English, to the ruin of not a
few Portuguese merchants. These grievances, the continued absence of
the Court in Brazil, and the general misgovernment of the country, had
caused widespread discontent. Matters became critical after the
outbreak of the Spanish revolution in January 1820. In the spring of
that year Beresford went out to Brazil to lay the state of affairs
before the king, and to try to induce him to return to Portugal. The
king would neither go himself nor allow his son to go. On August 13,
Beresford sailed from Rio for Lisbon in Maitland's ship, the
_Vengeur_.

While she was crossing the Atlantic, revolution broke out in Portugal.
A military rising took place at Oporto on the 24th of August, and when
the _Vengeur_ reached Lisbon on October 10, Maitland found that the
Regency had been deposed and a provisional Junta installed in the
capital. Beresford was absolutely forbidden to land, even as a private
individual, and was requested to leave the port without delay. The
provisional Government told him plainly that in the existing state of
public feeling they could not be responsible for his safety if he came
on shore. After remaining for nearly a week on board the _Vengeur_ in
the Tagus, he went on to England in a packet-boat.

Maitland had expected to return to England, but at Lisbon he received
orders to proceed immediately to the Mediterranean on secret service.
On October 27 he reached the Bay of Naples, where he found a British
squadron of five ships under Sir Graham Moore.

Serious political trouble had arisen in Naples. After the fall of
Murat, Ferdinand IV. had been restored to his throne by the Congress
of Vienna, and in 1816 had assumed the title of King of the Two
Sicilies. Under the restored monarchy discontent had been steadily
growing. There had been no violent counter-revolution, but the
interests of the country had been sacrificed without scruple to those
of the king's friends, the swarm of courtiers who had shared his
ignoble exile at Palermo. The revolutionary society of the Carbonari
spread rapidly, alike in the army and in civil society. In Naples, as
in Portugal, the Spanish revolution brought things to a crisis. On
July 2, 1820, a military outbreak took place at Nola. This was
followed by a general demand for a Constitution, which the king was
powerless to resist. On July 13 he took the oath to the Constitution
before the altar in the royal chapel.

A revolution in Naples would in all probability be followed by similar
uprisings in the Papal States. Metternich was seriously alarmed. A
conference of sovereigns and ministers to consider the affairs of
Naples was arranged to be held at Troppau, in Moravia, in October
1820. England and France stood aloof from action, and the matter
remained in the hands of the Emperor of Austria, the Czar, and the
King of Prussia. It was resolved to invite King Ferdinand to meet his
brother sovereigns at Laibach, in the Austrian province of Carniola,
and through him to address a summons to the Neapolitans, requiring
them, in the name of the three Powers and under threat of invasion, to
abandon their Constitution.

Ferdinand could not leave the country without the consent of the
Legislature. This was only given on his swearing to maintain the
existing Constitution. He did so with effusions of patriotism, and on
December 13 he embarked on board the _Vengeur_, Maitland's ship, which
conveyed him to Leghorn. On reaching Leghorn he addressed a letter to
the sovereigns of the Great Powers repudiating all his recent acts. He
reached Laibach in due course; and the Congress which took place there
in January 1821 resulted in the restoration of absolutism at Naples
and the occupation of the country by the Austrians.

It was a curious coincidence that Maitland should within a few years
have had two sovereigns as passengers,--one the central figure of
modern European history, the other the good-natured elderly buffoon
who in this country is chiefly remembered as the husband of the friend
of Lady Hamilton. Maitland thus records the voyage:--

_Naples Bay, Wednesday, Dec. 13, 1820._--A good deal of rain during
the night; in the morning the wind to the east. A general order came
on board for the captains to attend the admiral in their barges, for
the purpose of attending the King of Naples off to the _Vengeur_,
dressed in full uniform, with boots and pantaloons; a note, likewise,
from the admiral telling me he intended to get the squadron under way
and see the King out of the bay, the _Revolutionnaire_ forming astern
of the _Vengeur_, and he, with the five ships in line of battle,
taking a position on our weather quarter; and when he takes his leave
each ship is to pass under our stern, and there and then salute. The
yards are to be manned and the ships to salute, beginning when the
_Vengeur_ fires her second gun. It is the intention of the French
squadron to weigh also and stand out. At three P.M. the King of Naples
came on board in Sir Graham Moore's barge, attended by the admiral and
all the captains of the squadron except myself (as I stayed on board
to receive him), and all the captains of the French squadron. He was
saluted and cheered by all the ships except the Neapolitan, one of
which manned her rigging, but no salute was given. As soon as the
King was on board, unmoored, as did _Revolutionnaire_ and _Duchesse de
Berri_. Employed beating out. At about ten P.M. the _Revolutionnaire_
was on our weather-bow when a thick heavy squall came on which blew
the main top-sail away. When the squall cleared away a little, I saw
the _Revolutionnaire_ close to us on our lee-bow, off the wind and
stemming for us, and so near it was impossible the ships could clear
each other. It therefore became necessary to adopt the measure which
would soften the first blow as much as possible, and I ordered the
helm to be put down. When the ship came head to wind she struck the
_Revolutionnaire_ just before the mainmast, slewed our cut-water right
across, carried away the jib-boom, spritsail yard, &c., and then
backed clear of her. A lad fell overboard from the _Revolutionnaire_
and made a great noise, which enabled us to send a boat and pick him
up, he having got upon one of our life-buoys. Got the runners up and
the messenger through the hawse-holes, and set them up with the top
tackles, which enabled us soon to make sail. Saw the _Duchesse de
Berri_ working out.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dec. 14._--Strong breeze to the westward, with sea getting up. Saw
_Revolutionnaire_ to leeward. On examination, found the cut-water so
much shook I determined to run on to Baia and secure the bowsprit;
made signal to prepare to anchor, and bore up little after 8 A.M.
Anchored in fifteen fathom water. The _Revolutionnaire_ was examined
also, when I found her mainmast was sprung; sent the master and
carpenter to survey the damage she had sustained, two or three of her
timbers being broke. They reported she might be put in a state to
proceed in two days. Sent Lieutenant Drewry up to the Admiral with a
letter giving an account of our disaster, and informing him I should
proceed as soon as the weather would admit of it, taking
_Revolutionnaire_ with me if she was ready, otherwise directing him to
follow. Got an answer from him in the evening offering the King any
ship, even _Rochefort_ (the flagship), if we could not proceed; and
that he had ordered _Active_ down here, to be ready to relieve
_Revolutionnaire_ if she could not go. In the morning, when the King
came out, he took hold of both my hands, squeezed them, and shook
them very heartily, saying, "I am infinitely obliged to you for the
way in which you manoeuvred the ship last night, for had it not been
for your promptitude she must have been dismasted." Dined with his
Majesty, who sent me an invitation, and took my place, by his
direction, at his right hand, in the way I used when Bonaparte was
with me, and was a good deal struck with the similarity of situation.
On the King's left sat the Princess of Paterna, created by him Duchess
of Floridia. She is married to him, but does not assume the title of
Queen, because she is not of blood royal. She is an uncommonly
handsome woman for her time of life,--which the Prince of Babro tells
me is very near fifty,--her manners pleasing, and quite those of a
woman of high rank. He seems much attached to her, was particular in
recommending good dishes to her, and once or twice when he spoke to
her took her hand, and shook and prest it in a friendly affectionate
way.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Baia, Dec. 15._--Strong gale, with very heavy squalls and showers of
rain. The King is, in my opinion, much better at an anchor here than
beating about the sea in a gale of wind. Employed securing the
bowsprit.... Dined with the King, who told us several anecdotes of his
sea excursions; and he really is a tolerably good sailor. In the
evening a deputation of the Parliament came on board to condole with
his Majesty on the accident that had befallen the ship, and to wish
him a pleasant voyage and a speedy return to his country. In the
evening pointed the yards to the wind.... While at dinner, H.M. sent
out to have "Rule Britannia" played by the band, and drank success to
the British Navy with three cheers.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dec. 16._--In the morning the weather fine, with light wind W.S.W.
Unmoored ship.... Stood over towards Capri till half-past one, when we
tacked. The King told us at dinner he had been one of six who in seven
days killed nine thousand quails on Capri Island, where in the month
of May some years they come in millions.... Got round Ischia at 10
o'clock P.M.......................................................

       *       *       *       *       *

_Leghorn Roads, Wednesday, Dec. 20._--Employed all night beating into
Leghorn Roads.... At eight, pratique boat came off and gave us
pratique, and soon after the Governor of Leghorn came to pay his
respects to the King, with a fine large barge. His Majesty soon got
very impatient to go on shore, and would hardly give us time to make
the necessary preparations for sending him out of the ship with due
honours. At half-past nine he left the ship, accompanied by the
Duchess of Floridia.... Saluted with twenty-one guns, and manned yards
and cheered him as he left the ship. I accompanied him on shore, and
when about to take my leave he asked me to dinner. I went, therefore,
to the Grand Duke's palace, which is in the square; and when I got
there the Marchese di Ruffo soon arrived, and, desiring my company in
another room, produced the Order of St Ferdinand of the second class,
and told me he had the King's sanction to present me with it; and when
we were talking about it his Majesty came into the room and put it
over my neck, and then led me by the hand and presented me to the
Princess Paterna, when I returned my humble thanks to his Majesty,
knelt, and kissed his hand. The princess told me it was her intention
to send by me something as a present from her to my wife. The Marchese
di Ruffo then came in and told me he had something further to
communicate, and took me into the other room, when he gave me from his
Majesty a remarkably handsome gold snuff-box with his portrait on
it,--a very good likeness, set with twenty-four diamonds, some of them
large, particularly four at the corners. He gave me also two other
boxes, one for Captain Pellew and the other for the captain of the
_Fleur de Lis_, and informed me he meant to give 3000 ducats to the
_Vengeur's_ ship's company and 1500 to each of the frigates. Dined
with the King, and came off in the evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dec. 21._--... To Franschetti the banker to obtain the money given by
the King of Naples to the ships' companies; and after waiting a long
time and having a great deal of trouble with a very stupid old fellow,
we managed to get it from him.... Got my patent as Commander of the
Order of St Ferdinand and of Merit, for which I had to pay ten ducats
as a fee to the secretary's clerk,--a part of the ceremony I did not
bargain for, as the order cannot be of any use to me, there being a
rule against officers accepting of foreign orders except in particular
cases.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dec. 22._--... At eleven the boats came off and brought all my traps,
and a small parcel from the Princess Paterna, containing a very
handsome gold necklace and bracelets, requesting I would accept them
for her sake and present them to my wife. His Majesty, as well as the
princess, have behaved to me in a most munificent way, having loaded
me with favours and marks of their affection, which I shall ever
remember with the warmest gratitude. As I have now done with the King
of Naples, it may be as well to say a few words of his person and
habits. He is a tall thin fair man, now seventy years of age,
uncommonly robust and active for that time of life, which may be
attributed in a great measure to his temperance and love of
field-sports, which has been ever his ruling passion, and often
occasioned him to neglect the more imposing and serious duties of a
king. As a man, he must be liked by every one who comes immediately in
contact with him, as he is cheerful and good-humoured, though not a
man of much information. While on board the ship he was generally up
before daylight,--which at this season of the year is not saying
much,--took a cup of coffee and a bit of biscuit,--to strengthen his
stomach as he said,--and then said prayers, having two friars and a
priest with him. At noon he dined, when he ate a very hearty meal, and
drank about half a bottle of Neapolitan wine a good deal diluted with
water, and ate nothing for the remainder of the day. In the evening he
played picquet, and went to bed at eight or half past....

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Vengeur_ returned to England in the spring of 1820, and Maitland
was appointed to the _Genoa_, guardship at Portsmouth, from which he
was superseded in October on the completion of his three years'
continuous service on the peace establishment. The midshipmen of the
_Genoa_ presented him with a sword as a mark of respect.

Then followed a period of rest. In 1816 he had bought from his mother
the estate of Lindores, near Newburgh, in Fifeshire, which had been in
her family since 1569. Here he now spent several years, chiefly
occupied in the improvement of the property. During the war he had
made some L16,000 out of prize-money, part of which was spent in
building the present mansion-house, overlooking the beautiful Loch of
Lindores. In the spring of 1826 he visited London to arrange for the
publication of the _Narrative_, which, after some fruitless
negotiations with John Murray, was accepted by Colburn on satisfactory
terms.

On February 13, 1827, Maitland was appointed to the _Wellesley_, 74.
In December 1826, Mr Canning, in response to an appeal from the
Portuguese Regency, had sent English troops to Lisbon to protect the
Government of Portugal against the threatened attack of Spain.
Maitland was ordered to Lisbon, and the _Wellesley_ spent the autumn
and winter of 1827 in the Tagus. After a spring cruise up the
Mediterranean, she returned to England in May 1828. On June 26 she
again sailed for the Mediterranean, carrying the flag of Admiral Sir
Pulteney Malcolm, who was then going out to succeed Sir Edward
Codrington in command of the Mediterranean station. On August 24 she
joined the squadron under Codrington at Navarino.

Maitland remained in Greek waters for the next two years. The tragic
drama of the Greek Revolution, after seven years of horrors, had now
reached its final act. By the Treaty of London, in July 1827, England,
Russia, and France had undertaken to put an end to the conflict in the
East, and to establish the autonomy of Greece. In the following
October the battle of Navarino had been fought, and the Turkish fleet
destroyed. Ibrahim Pasha still held the fortresses of the Morea, which
he was shortly to evacuate under the pressure of a French army corps.
In April 1828 war had broken out between Turkey and Russia.

Desultory fighting was still going on in Crete, which had been utterly
devastated by years of barbarous warfare. In October the _Wellesley_
went to Suda Bay, and most of the winter was spent by Maitland on the
coast of Crete, endeavouring to bring about an armistice, and
superintending the blockade which the Powers had established in order
to prevent military supplies from reaching the Turks in the island.
The blockade was raised early in 1829; and during the following months
Maitland visited nearly every point of interest on the Greek coast and
in the Greek islands, as well as Sicily, the coast of Asia Minor, and
Constantinople. Like most Englishmen who have served in the Levant, he
developed a considerable respect for the Turk, and a quite unbounded
contempt for the Greek. After the armistice negotiations in Crete he
writes: "I found the conduct of the Turkish chiefs throughout manly,
straightforward, and sincere, while that of their opponents was very
much the reverse;" and in another place he writes of the Greeks that
"a more perfidious, ferocious, and cruel race does not exist."
Needless to say he did not think much of "our pretty Greek Committee."

In the summer of 1830 the _Wellesley_ returned to England. Maitland
attained his flag on July 22, 1830. At the reconstruction of the Order
of the Bath in 1815 he had been made a C.B.; on November 17, 1830, he
was advanced to be a K.C.B. In 1835 he received the Greek Order of the
Redeemer.

During his South American and Mediterranean cruises Maitland kept a
very full and interesting private journal. It reveals him to us as a
man of immense mental activity and power of observation, hard humorous
common-sense, and an almost Pepysian interest in all the doings of
mankind. Politics, archaeology, cricket, theatricals, scandal, the
terms of a treaty, the _menu_ of a good dinner, the armament of a
foreign frigate, the toilette of a pretty woman,--everything interests
him, and is observed, remembered, and noted in his diary. A few
extracts have been given; within the limits of this sketch they cannot
be multiplied. His account of the slave-market at Constantinople may
serve as a specimen of his power of picturesque description.

       *       *       *       *       *

_October 12, 1829._--... We then crossed the harbour, and went to the
slave-market. It is held in a small square, with some houses in the
middle, and on two sides of the square are small rooms, where the
slaves for sale are kept until their turn comes to be put up.
Adjoining the doors of these rooms or cells are raised platforms of
wood on which a number of black women and girls were sitting; and I
saw a few white ones inside. Outside these platforms are others, where
the purchasers or those intending to purchase slaves were placed; and
between the two platforms there is a passage three or four feet wide.
At another corner of the market there were some black men and boys,
chained by the legs to prevent their escaping, and among them we saw a
very good-looking respectably dressed young man, also in chains. We
were told he was a Georgian, but could not discover his history,
though it is probable that his master had died, and that he was sold
in consequence. He was smoking a pipe, and looked very disconsolate. A
little after nine o'clock, the chief of the market arrived, and the
sale began. Two or three black girls were first put up. A crier went
round the square, followed by the slave for sale, passing through the
passage before mentioned. When any person bids, the crier goes on,
calling the sum bid, until some one bids higher, and continues calling
till no more is bid, when the slave becomes the property of the
highest bidder. There were three or four criers, with each a slave
following them, going round the bazaar at the same time. At last a
very pretty-looking white girl about sixteen years of age was put up
for sale. Several bids had been made before I discovered her; and when
I came up to the place where she was standing, Lambrino, the admiral's
interpreter, asked the crier what sum was bid for her. He answered
1200 piastres; upon which the girl turned round in a rage, and said to
Lambrino, "You dog-faced fellow, what is that to you?" and the
interpreter being a little man, with high shoulders and a face very
much shaped like a dog's, the girl's remark excited a general laugh.
The crier, however, was by no means pleased at the young lady for
making such a display of her temper, as it was likely to hurt her
sale, and he therefore reprimanded her. They then passed on along the
passage and came to one of the divans, where a man about forty was
sitting smoking his pipe. He stopped the crier, and took the girl by
the hand, felt all up her arm to the shoulder, then drew her a little
nearer and opened her waistcoat, which exposed a beautiful white
bosom, and the effect seemed electric, for he immediately bid 1300
piastres, and after pulling down the lower part of her veil so as to
show the whole of her face, and looking at her teeth, he allowed the
crier to proceed. The girl had been angry at Lambrino, and seemed a
good deal distressed when the Turk was examining and handling her. I
saw a blush of either modesty or indignation cross her countenance;
but the instant the additional piastres were bid (whether from
gratified vanity or what other cause I cannot say, for these poor
creatures are very proud of bringing a high price) a smile of
satisfaction beamed over her face, and she marched off in apparent
good humour. I had seen enough of this horrid scene, and was tired of
seeing a fellow-creature paraded about and handled like a horse,
therefore was rejoiced when the admiral proposed we should leave it.
Before we went away, a fellow, apparently an Armenian, came up and
said he had a handsome young Greek girl for sale if we would like to
see her. As, however, none of us under any circumstances could have
purchased her, we declined his offer....

       *       *       *       *       *

A characteristic feature of Maitland's diary is his constant reference
to his wife. He had married, in 1804, Catherine, second daughter of
Daniel Connor of Ballybricken, County Cork. They had only one child,
who died in infancy. Maitland loved his wife with lifelong devotion;
wherever the service called him, her picture hung in his cabin, and he
carried her image in his heart. Every letter she wrote to him is noted
in his journal; and it is full of references to her in words of
devoted attachment. Thus on the voyage home from South America in 1820
he writes: "Crossed the equator at eleven o'clock at night, and we are
once more, Heaven be praised, in the northern hemisphere, which
contains all I love and delight in in this world, and every mile we go
draws us nearer to the sole mistress and possessor of my heart.... A
more affectionate, kind, attached wife no man on earth is blessed with
than myself." He was bitterly disappointed when from Lisbon he was
ordered to the Mediterranean. As the ship passed Gibraltar he wrote:
"This was the day I had settled in my own mind that I was to arrive at
Portsmouth, and there meet the dearest and best of wives.... I had
expected this day to be the happiest of human beings, and now the
event that would make me so appears as distant as ever." When he was
at Naples, Mrs Maitland appears to have fallen under religious
influences of the kind which often embitter family relations; and it
is pathetic to read the expression of her husband's grief and anxiety
lest the love which was the chief joy of his life should be estranged.
"I fear much," he writes, "I shall have to regret the longest day I
have to live, having left her in Scotland, instead of taking her
abroad with me, as she was in a nest of fanatical foolish women who
have the madness to believe they are inspired from above." Happily the
cloud soon passed, and he notes the receipt of "one of her own dear
affectionate kind letters, such as she used formerly to write." A
little later comes the joyful entry: "Bore up and made sail, with a
fine strong Levant wind, which cleared us of the Gut of Gibraltar by
noon; and I can now look forward with confidence to meeting my beloved
Kate in about two weeks' time."

From 1832 to 1837 Maitland was Admiral Superintendent of the dockyard
at Portsmouth. In July 1837 he was appointed commander-in-chief in the
East Indies and China. He hoisted his flag on his own old ship the
_Wellesley_, now commanded by Captain Thomas Maitland, afterwards Earl
of Lauderdale, and sailed for Bombay on the 11th of October. Lady
Maitland accompanied him to the East.

When the advance from Bombay towards Afghanistan was made in 1838, it
was decided that a naval force should proceed along the coast to
co-operate with the troops. In January 1839, Maitland, in the
_Wellesley_, joined the squadron in the Indus, and was requested by
Sir John Keane, the military commander-in-chief, to "proceed to
Kurrachee and take it." He arrived with his squadron before Kurrachee
the 1st of February, and sent a flag of truce, summoning the fort of
Manora, which formed the chief defence of the town. The Baluchi
garrison refused all terms, and fired on the boats of the squadron,
which were engaged in landing troops. The _Wellesley_ accordingly
opened fire, and soon reduced the fort to ruins and brought the
commandant to terms. The British flag was hoisted on the fort by
Lieutenant Jenkins of the _Wellesley_. The town also surrendered, and
was occupied by the 40th Regiment and the 2nd Bombay Native Infantry.
The British Government thus easily obtained possession of the chief
port of the Punjab.

After the capture of Kurrachee, Maitland returned to Bombay, and
thence proceeded to Bushire, where difficulties had arisen with the
Persian authorities. At an interview with the Governor, the Admiral
demanded permission for himself and his officers to land and
communicate freely with the British Resident. The Governor agreed to
this, but refused to allow the Admiral to embark from the
landing-place opposite the Residency. Next morning, March 25, all the
boats of the squadron, manned and armed, proceeded to the shore to
protect the embarkation of the Admiral and other officers. The
following account by an eyewitness of what then took place is given in
Low's _History of the Indian Navy_:--

"The Persians had assembled to the number of several hundreds, and the
Governor, with his body-guard, was determined to prevent, if possible,
the property being shipped before the Residency. The first boat which
approached the shore was fired upon, and one Persian had his musket
presented at Captain Maitland. He was just on the eve of firing, when
fortunately the Admiral and two Indian naval officers in a moment
wrenched it from his hands, and kept possession of the piece, which
they found loaded with a heavy charge. You may imagine how strongly
inclined the marines must have been to fire. The benevolent spirit of
the Admiral, however, would not allow it till the throwing of stones,
and continued firing from the Persians, called forth two volleys,
which caused the Persians to evacuate the breastwork. One was killed
and two wounded; their fire upon us, fortunately, did not injure any
one, but the Commodore and several other officers were struck with
stones. After this the Residency was put in a state of defence,
Captain Hennell (the Political Agent), had all the property conveyed
as quickly as possible on board the _Wellesley_, _Elphinstone_,
_Clive_, and _Emily_, and finally abandoned the Residency on the
morning of the 28th, when surrounded by four or five hundred armed
Persians, composed of Bushirees and Tungustanees, with Baukr Khan at
their head.... And on the morning of the 29th the _Wellesley_ and the
other vessels reached Kharrack, bringing along with them the whole
Residency establishment."

On May 9, 1839, the Officiating Secretary to the Government of India
wrote to Maitland: "The Right Hon. the Governor-General highly
applauds the cordial and able assistance offered by the officers and
crews of H.M.'s and the Hon. Company's ships, in the removal on board
the ships of the Resident and his suite from the Residency at
Bushire,--an operation which, but for their aid, might have been
attended with difficulty and danger." Maitland was bitterly attacked
by the Anglo-Indian press for his forbearance on this occasion, which
it was said had lowered British prestige in the eyes of the Persians.
It is possible that our relations with Persia might have been improved
by the slaughter of the Bushire mob by the _Wellesley's_ marines, but
apparently the Admiral thought otherwise.

The Bushire incident was followed by a cruise round the Persian Gulf,
in the course of which the Admiral had various interviews with the
local chiefs, and impressed upon them the necessity of keeping the
peace and respecting British interests.

It was his last service. He died at sea, off Bombay, on November 30,
1839. A letter from the late Admiral Philip Somerville,[2] then a
lieutenant on board the _Wellesley_, describes the closing scenes.

         [Footnote 2: Admiral Somerville married Mary Stuart, eldest
         daughter of David Maitland Makgill Crichton of Rankeilour,
         and grand-niece of Sir Frederick. I am indebted for the use
         of this letter to the courtesy of his son, Mr D. M. M.
         Crichton Somerville.]

       *       *       *       *       *

"On our arrival at Bombay, Nov. 3," he writes, "the tents had not been
pitched more than a week or so, and the one fitted by the Government
for the Admiral was so very large that, after our arrival, he had to
remain for some days on board ship ere it was ready. You may fancy
the state the ground was in after five months' heavy rain,--the chill
and damp scarcely possible to describe,--evaporation of course
following the excessive heat of the day. A week had scarcely passed
ere he felt its effects, but he could say nothing. On the 15th
November I dined with him on shore. He seemed then tolerably well. On
Sunday, 17th, he visited the ship, and returned to his tent. On the
18th he dined with her Majesty's 6th Regiment, and complained a little
that day. The 21st, he was out to see our sailors and marines
exercising. The complaint from that time made rapid progress.
Saturday, 23rd, Lady Maitland went to a large party, but returned to
the Admiral very early. Sunday 24th and Monday 25th he was dangerously
ill; 26th and 27th, rather easier. Preparations were made for going to
sea. On the 28th, the poor old fellow was brought off and hoisted on
board in a palankeen. I saw him for a moment. Poor Sir Frederick lay
with his head thrown back, his mouth a little open, his cheeks sunk,
and his whole frame totally changed. He was conveyed to his cabin. We
immediately got under way. All gloom, and solemn silence prevailed. I
daresay some at least were in deep thought, some thinking of his
former prosperity, others of the money he had made; perhaps some
thought of the happy and honourable day on which Bonaparte
surrendered. After lingering until Saturday the 30th, at 11.45 he
expired. One can scarcely conceive the sensation caused by the
mournful event. The countenances of all evinced deep sorrow for their
chief, a man who was looked up to by all who knew him, and greatly
beloved by those under his command....

"On Monday morning, preparations having been made the previous day,
the troops of the garrison and boats from the ships began to assemble.
The ship was painted black all over, and her yards topped in mourning.
The body was conveyed in his own boat, the barge, the other boats
following in order with their colours half-mast, presenting a very
imposing sight. On leaving the ship, minute-guns began; and on the
corpse reaching the shore, it was received with a guard of honour, and
the fort commenced firing minute-guns as we formed in procession. The
troops had their arms reversed, and the same people who received the
Admiral that day fortnight at the dinner given by the 6th Regiment
formed part of the parade that sorrowful moment. They lined the road
through which we passed, and reached to the church. Here the body was
received in the usual way, and all the respectable attendants followed
it into the cathedral. The lesson was read by the officiating
Archdeacon, and on coming to the grave in the aisle of the church, the
Bishop read the service in a very affecting and solemn manner. After
the ceremony we returned to our respective ships."

       *       *       *       *       *

A monument to Sir Frederick's memory was erected in Bombay Cathedral
by the officers of his command. "Among names," writes Lieutenant Low
in his _History_, "which will ever be held in affection by the
officers whose record of service is now 'as a tale that is told,' that
of Maitland, the gallant and chivalrous seaman, to whom the mighty
Napoleon surrendered his sword on the quarter-deck of the
_Bellerophon_, will ever be prominent; and this record of his worth
and nobility of character, and that other memorial on the walls of the
Cathedral Church of St Thomas, will testify to the grateful
remembrance in which his memory is held by the officers of the Indian
Navy."




NARRATIVE


On Wednesday the 24th of May, 1815, I sailed from Cawsand Bay, in
command of His Majesty's ship Bellerophon, and under the orders of
Rear-Admiral Sir Henry Hotham, whose flag was hoisted in the Superb. I
received sealed instructions, part of which were to be opened on
getting to sea, and part only to be examined in the event of my being
separated from the Admiral. Those which I opened contained directions
to detain, and send into port, all armed vessels belonging to the
Government of France.

On Sunday the 28th of May, we joined His Majesty's ships Astrea and
Telegraph, stationed off Isle Dieu, on a secret service; and the
following day, three transports, under charge of the Helicon, arrived
from England, having on board arms and ammunition, to supply the
Royalists in La Vendee, for whose support and assistance I now found
the squadron, of which the Bellerophon formed one, was destined.

On Tuesday the 30th of May, I received orders from Sir Henry Hotham,
to take the Eridanus under my command, and proceed off Rochefort, for
the purpose of preventing a corvette from putting to sea, which,
according to information received by the British Government, was to
carry proposals from Buonaparte to the West India Colonies, to declare
in his favour. I had likewise orders to reconnoitre the Roadstead of
Rochefort, and report to the Admiral the number and state of the ships
of war lying there. Accordingly, on the 31st of May, I ran into
Basque Roads, and found at anchor, under Isle d'Aix, two large
frigates, a ship corvette, and a large brig, all ready for sea, which
I afterwards ascertained to be the Meduse, Saale, Balladiere, and
Epervier. Nothing occurred worth mentioning until the 9th of June,
when the Vesuve French corvette came in from the northward, and got
into Rochefort, notwithstanding every effort to prevent her; the ships
under my orders having been driven to the southward, during the night,
by a strong northerly wind, accompanied by a southerly current. She
was from Guadaloupe, and immediately on passing the Chasseron
light-house, hoisted the tri-coloured flag.

On the 18th of June, I detained and sent to Sir Henry Hotham, the
AEneas French store-ship, commanded by a lieutenant of the navy, with a
crew of fifty men, loaded with ship-timber for the arsenal of
Rochefort; but he, being of opinion that she did not come within the
intention of the order, liberated her.

On the 21st of June, I detained and sent to the Admiral, under charge
of the Eridanus, the Marianne French transport, from Martinique,
having on board 220 of the 9th regiment of light infantry, coming to
France to join the army under Buonaparte. The Eridanus was sent to
England with her, and did not return to me, being employed on other
service.

On the 27th of June, the Cephalus joined us, bringing with her the
declaration of war against France; after which we were employed
several days, taking and destroying chasse-marees, and other small
coasting vessels.

On the 28th of June, I received intelligence, from one of the vessels
captured, of Napoleon's defeat at Waterloo; and on the 30th, a boat
came off from Bourdeaux, bringing the following letter, without date
or subscription, written on very thin paper in English, and concealed
within a quill. I give the contents verbatim.


Copy of a Letter received by Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon,
off Rochefort, on the 30th of June, 1815, without date or
subscription.


"With great degree of certainty, being informed that Buonaparte might
have come last night through this city from Paris, with the new Mayor
of Bourdeaux, with a view to flight, by the mouth of this river, or La
Teste, the author of the last note sent by Mr ---- hastily drops these
few lines, to give the British Admiral advice of such intention, that
he may instantly take the necessary steps, in order to seize the man.
His ideas will certainly have brought him to think it natural, that
the British stations will be less upon their guard in this quarter
than any where else. The writer benefits by this opportunity to inform
the Admiral that, since the last note, some alteration has taken place
with regard to the troops spread in these two Divisions; in lieu of
800 to 1000 in this city, there are now 5000, which is supposed owing
to the intention of compressing the minds of this populace in this
decisive instant.

"It is supposed the British Admiral is already informed of the Grand
Army being totally defeated and destroyed, the abdication of
Buonaparte, &c. and the arrival of the allies near the Capital.

"An attempt should be made on this Coast, with no less than 8000 men
altogether. Immediate steps are wanted to put a stop to the supposed
flight.

"Should the attempt be made on the Coast from La Teste to Bourdeaux,
an immediate diversion should be made on this side; the success is
beyond any doubt.

"A sharp eye must be kept on all American vessels, and particularly on
the Susquehannah, of Philadelphia, Captain Caleb Cushing; General
Bertand and another goes with him. The two entrances of Bourdeaux and
La Teste must be kept close; a line or two is expected, on the return
of the bearer from the Admiral, or Chief Officer on the Station. As
this is writing, the news is spread generally, that the Duc de Berri
and Lord Wellington are in Paris."

The note alluded to had been received, and forwarded unopened, to the
Admiral in Quiberon Bay.

Though my attention was called so strongly to Bourdeaux, or la Teste
d'Arcasson, as the parts of the coast from whence Buonaparte would
probably attempt to escape, it was my decided opinion that Rochefort
was much more likely to be the port where the trial would be made. I
therefore sent the Myrmidon off Bourdeaux, the Cephalus to Arcasson,
and remained with only the Bellerophon, off Rochefort. From this
period, until my return to England, the ship was never, by day or
night, more than three miles from the land. Considering it of much
importance to communicate the intelligence contained in the letter
from Bourdeaux, to my commanding officer, with as little delay as
possible; as I had no vessel left with me, after detaching the two
ships under my orders, I sent the Bellerophon's barge, under the
charge of a lieutenant, with directions to endeavour to join some one
of the cruisers stationed off Isle Dieu. I gave him an order,
addressed to the Captain of any of His Majesty's ships he might fall
in with, to proceed without loss of time, to join the Admiral in
Quiberon Bay, with the despatch accompanying it. This boat was
fortunate enough to fall in with His Majesty's ship Cyrus, Captain
Carrol; who, in consequence, after hoisting in the barge, proceeded to
Quiberon Bay.

As the coasting-vessels were not worth sending into port for
condemnation, (and considering the circumstances under which the ship
I commanded was placed, I should not have felt justified in weakening
her complement, even for a prize of value,) I was in the habit of
using such captures, as marks for the men to practice firing at. The
Cephalus had a chasse-maree in tow for that purpose, when the letter,
inserted above, was received; and I detached her so shortly
afterwards, that Captain Furneaux had no opportunity of destroying
her, but was obliged to cast her off. After he had left me some time,
I observed the vessel drifting to sea, and determined to run down and
sink her. While approaching her in this view. I was sweeping the
horizon with my glass, when I discovered, at a considerable distance,
a small white speck on the water, which had the appearance of a
child's boat with paper sails; but I could plainly perceive something
that had motion in it; and, after firing on and destroying the
chasse-maree, I stood towards the object which had engaged my
attention, and found it to be a small punt, about eight feet long,
flat-bottomed, and shaped more like a butcher's tray than a boat. In
it were a young man about eighteen years of age, and a boy about
twelve, who had got into the punt to amuse themselves, and, happening
to lose one of their oars, were drifted to sea. They had been
thirty-six hours without refreshment of any kind, and with only one
oar and a bit of board, which they had formed into something like
another; they were quite exhausted with fatigue, and their hands very
much blistered. When we picked them up, there was a strong breeze
blowing off the land, so that there cannot be a doubt, had not
Providence sent us to their assistance, they must have perished. I
kept the boys on board two or three days, for the purpose of
recruiting their strength, and then landed them with the punt, close
to their village, to the great joy and wonder of their parents and
countrymen.

On the first of July, we spoke a ship from Rochefort, the master of
which gave information, that the frigates in Aix Roads had taken in
their powder, and were in all respects ready to put to sea; also, that
several gentlemen in plain clothes, and some ladies, supposed to form
part of Buonaparte's suite, had arrived at Isle d'Aix: in short, upon
the whole, that there was little doubt of its being his intention to
effect his escape, if possible, from that place, in the frigates. On
receiving this information, I anchored the Bellerophon as close to the
French squadron as the batteries would permit, kept guard-boats rowing
all night, and prepared my ship's company for the description of
action in which I thought it was probable they would be engaged. I
trained one hundred of the stoutest men, selecting them from the
different stations in the ship; it being my intention, after firing
into and silencing one frigate, to run the Bellerophon alongside of
her, throw that party in, and then, leaving her in charge of the first
lieutenant, to have proceeded in chase of the other.

His Majesty's ship Phoebe joined us this evening, and brought with her
the Bellerophon's barge. Captain Hillyar having orders to take a
station off Bourdeaux, I recalled the Myrmidon from that service.

On the 7th of July, I received a letter from Sir Henry Hotham,
together with fresh orders, from which the following are extracts:--


Extract of a Letter from Rear-Admiral Sir Henry Hotham, K.C.B.,
addressed to Captain Maitland of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Quiberon
Bay, July 6, 1815.


"It is impossible to tell which information respecting Buonaparte's
flight may be correct; but, in the uncertainty, it is right to attach
a certain degree of credit to all: that which I now act on, is
received this morning, from the chief of the Royalists, between the
Loire and the Vilaine.

"Although the force of the Bellerophon would be sufficient for the
ships at Isle d'Aix, if they were to give you an opportunity of
bringing them to action together, you cannot stop them both, if the
frigates separate; I am, therefore, now anxious you should have a
frigate with you: therefore if any of them should be with you, keep
her for the time I have specified; but if you have no frigate, and
this should be brought to you by a twenty-gun ship, keep her with you
for the same time; she will do to keep sight of a French frigate,
although she could not stop her.

"If this is delivered to you by Lord John Hay of the Opossum, do not
detain him, as her force would be of no use to you, and I want him
_particularly_, to examine vessels which sail from the Loire."


Extract of an Order from Rear-Admiral Sir Henry Hotham, K.C.B.;
addressed to Captain Maitland of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Superb,
Quiberon Bay, 6th July, 1815.


"Having this morning received information that it is believed Napoleon
Buonaparte has taken his road from Paris for Rochefort, to embark from
thence for the United States of America, I have to direct you will use
your best endeavours to prevent him from making his escape in either
of the frigates at Isle d'Aix; for which purpose you are,
notwithstanding former orders, to keep any frigate which may be with
you, at the time you receive this letter, in company with the ship you
command, for the space of ten days, to enable you to intercept them in
case they should put to sea together: but if you should have no
frigate with you at the above time, you will keep the ship delivering
this, (which will probably be the Slaney or Cyrus,) in company with
the Bellerophon, ten days, and then allow her to proceed in execution
of the orders her Captain has received from me."

The Slaney brought the letter and order, parts of which are extracted
above, and having no frigate in company, I detained her as part of the
force under my command, though she was, on the 8th, sent down to the
Mamusson passage, with orders for Captain Green of the Daphne, and did
not return until the evening of the 11th.

On the 8th of July, I was joined by a chasse-maree bringing a letter
from Sir Henry Hotham, part of which is as follows:--


Extract of a Letter from Rear-Admiral Sir Henry Hotham, K.C.B.,
addressed to Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Superb,
Quiberon Bay, July 7, 1815.


"Having sent every ship and vessel out from this bay, to endeavour to
intercept Buonaparte, I am obliged to send the chasse-maree, which has
been employed in my communications with the Royalists, with this
letter, to acquaint you that the Ferret brought me information last
evening, after the Opossum had left me, from Lord Keith, that
Government received, on the night of the 30th, an application from the
rulers of France, for a passport and safe conduct for Buonaparte to
America, which had been answered in the negative, and, therefore,
directing an increase of vigilance to intercept him: but it remains
quite uncertain where he will embark; and, although it would appear
by the measures adopted at home, that it is expected he will sail from
one of the northern ports, I am of opinion he will go from one of the
southern places, and I think the information I sent you yesterday by
the Opossum is very likely to be correct; namely, that he had taken
the road to Rochefort; and that he will probably embark in the
frigates at Isle d'Aix; for which reason I am very anxious you should
have force enough to stop them both, as the Bellerophon could only
take one, if they separated, and that might not be the one he would be
on board of. I have no frigate to send you; if one should join me in
time, I will send her to you, and I hope you will have _two_
twenty-gun ships with you. I imagine, from what you said in your
letter by your barge, that you would not have kept the Endymion with
you, especially as the Myrmidon would have rejoined you, by the
arrangements I sent down by the Phoebe for Sir John Sinclair to take
her place off the Mamusson; therefore, I trust that my last order to
Captain Hope will not have deprived you of his assistance, but hope it
may have put him in a better situation than before. The Liffey is
seventy or eighty miles west from Bourdeaux, and the Pactolus, after
landing some person in the Gironde, goes off Cape Finisterre, where
the Swiftsure is also gone; and many ships are looking out in the
Channel and about the latitude of Ushant.

"Buonaparte is certainly not yet gone; I presume he would naturally
await the answer from our Government, which only left London on the
1st; my own opinion is, that he will either go with a force that will
afford him some kind of security, or in a merchant vessel to avoid
suspicion.

"The orders from the Admiralty, received last evening, are, that the
ships which are looking out for him, should remain on that service
_till further orders, or till they know he is taken_, and not regard
the time of ten days or a fortnight, which they first named: therefore
you will govern yourself by that, and keep any ship you have with you
till one of those events occurs, without attending to the ten days I
specified in my letter to you by the Opossum yesterday, and make the
same known to any ship you may communicate with. The information you
sent me, which had been transmitted to you from Bourdeaux, is now
proved to have been erroneous, by our knowing that Buonaparte was at
Paris as late as the 30th of June, and that paper must have been
written on the 29th, as you received it on the 30th. The Eridanus will
not rejoin you; she has been stationed, by Lord Keith, off Brest.

"Let me know by the return of the chasse-maree, particularly, what
ships you have with you, and where the other ships are, as far as you
know, and what position you keep in. If you had ships enough to guard
Basque Roads, and the Channel between Isle d'Oleron and the long sand
(where a frigate may pass), you would be sure of keeping them in, by
anchoring; but that would afford you little chance of taking
Buonaparte, which is the thing to be desired; therefore I think you
would be better off the light-house, where I dare say you keep
yourself; and on that particular subject I do not think it necessary
to give you any instructions, as I depend on your using the best means
that can be adopted to intercept the fugitive; on whose captivity the
repose of Europe appears to depend. If he should be taken, he is to be
brought to me in this bay, as I have orders for his disposal; he is to
be removed from the ship in which he may be found, to one of his
Majesty's ships."

Nothing of consequence occurred on the 9th; but on the 10th of July,
at daylight, the officer of the watch informed me that a small
schooner was standing out from the French squadron towards the ship:
upon which I ordered everything to be ready for making sail in chace,
supposing she might be sent for the purpose of reconnoitring. On
approaching, she hoisted a flag of truce, and joined us at seven A.M.
She proved to be the Mouche, tender to the ships of war at Isle d'Aix,
and had on board, General Savary Duc de Rovigo, and Count Las Cases,
chamberlain to Buonaparte, charged with a letter from Count Bertrand
(Grand Marechal de Palais) addressed to the Admiral commanding the
British Cruisers before the port of Rochefort.

Soon after the Mouche arrived, I was joined by the Falmouth, bringing
me a letter and secret orders from Sir Henry Hotham, some extracts
from which I shall insert for the better understanding what follows,
previous to entering into what passed with Buonaparte's attendants.


Extract of a Letter from Rear-Admiral Sir Henry Hotham, K.C.B.,
addressed to Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon; not dated, but
must have been written on the 8th of July, 1815.


"I sent a chasse-maree to you yesterday with a letter, and you will
now receive by the Falmouth, officially, the orders which I therein
made you acquainted with.

"I send you four late and very interesting French papers, by which you
will see all that has been done and said on the subject of providing
for Buonaparte's escape from France: you will see that the Minister of
the Marine had been directed to prepare ships of war for that purpose;
that they were placed at Buonaparte's disposal; and that two frigates
in particular had been provided for him: also that it was announced to
the two Chambers, that he left Paris at four o'clock on the 29th;
likewise that it was believed in Paris, he had taken the road by
Orleans to Rochefort; and I have no doubt that the two frigates at
Isle d'Aix are intended for him, and I hope you will think so too, and
I am sure you will use your utmost endeavours to intercept him. I am
sorry I have not a frigate to send you; I have literally none but the
Endymion under my orders. Captain Paterson is off Brest, by Lord
Keith's order; and the Phoebe is also ordered to that station, when
the Hebrus arrives off the Gironde.

"The attention at home appears to be paid chiefly to the ports in the
Channel, but I have received no additional means whatever to guard
those of the Bay. I have long been expecting a frigate from the Irish
station, but none has yet appeared; and I have written to Lord Keith
for two frigates; but they cannot join me in time, I fear."


Extract of an Order from Rear-Admiral Sir Henry Hotham, K.C.B.,
addressed to Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated H.M.S.
Superb, Quiberon Bay, 8th July, 1815.


"The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty having every reason to
believe that Napoleon Buonaparte meditates his escape, with his
family, from France to America, you are hereby required and directed,
in pursuance of orders from their Lordships, signified to me by
Admiral the Right Honourable Viscount Keith, to keep the most vigilant
look-out for the purpose of intercepting him; and to make the
strictest search of any vessel you may fall in with; and if you should
be so fortunate as to intercept him, you are to transfer him and his
family to the ship you command, and there keeping him in careful
custody, return to the nearest port in England (going into Torbay in
preference to Plymouth) with all possible expedition; and on your
arrival you are not to permit any communication whatever with the
shore, except as herein after directed; and you will be held
responsible for keeping the whole transaction a profound secret, until
you receive their Lordships' further orders.

"In case you should arrive at a port where there is a flag-officer,
you are to send to acquaint him with the circumstances, strictly
charging the officer sent on shore with your letter, not to divulge
its contents: and if there should be no flag-officer at the port where
you arrive, you are to send one letter express to the Secretary of the
Admiralty, and another to Admiral Lord Keith, with strict injunctions
of secrecy to each officer who may be the bearer of them."

Messrs Savary and Las Cases, who came on board, from the Schooner
above mentioned, at seven o'clock on the 10th of July, presented the
following letter to me:--


                                                  "Le 9 Juillet, 1815.

"Monsieur l'Amiral,

"L'Empereur Napoleon ayant abdique le pouvoir, et choisi les Etats
Unis d'Amerique pour s'y refugier, s'est embarque sur les deux
fregates qui sont dans cette rade, pour se rendre a sa destination. Il
attend le sauf conduit du Gouvernement Anglais, qu'on lui a annonce,
et qui me porte a expedier le present parlementaire, pour vous
demander, Mons. l'Amiral, si vous avez connoissance du dit sauf
conduit; ou si vous pensez qu'il soit dans l'intention du Gouvernement
Anglais de se mettre de l'empechement a notre voyage aux Etats Unis.
Je vous serai extremement oblige de me donner la-dessus les
renseignemens que vous pouvez avoir.

"Je charge les porteurs de la presente lettre de vous faire agreer
mes remercimens et mes excuses, pour la peine qu'elle a pu vous
donner.

  "J'ai l'honneur d'etre,
        Monsieur l'Amiral,
              de Votre Excellence, &c. &c.
                                     Le Grand Marechal Cte. BERTRAND."

"A Monsieur l'Amiral commandant les Croisieres avant Rochefort."


TRANSLATION.

"SIR,

"The Emperor Napoleon having abdicated the throne of France, and
chosen the United States of America as a retreat, is, with his suite,
at present embarked on board the two frigates which are in this port,
for the purpose of proceeding to his destination. He expects a
passport from the British Government, which has been promised to him,
and which induces me to send the present flag of truce, to demand of
you, Sir, if you have any knowledge of the above-mentioned passport,
or if you think it is the intention of the British Government to throw
any impediment in the way of our voyage to the United States. I shall
feel much obliged by your giving me any information you may possess on
the subject.

"I have directed the bearers of this letter to present to you my
thanks, and to apologise for the trouble it may cause.

  "I have the honour to be,
       Your Excellency's most obedient, &c. &c.
                                        Grand Marshal Count BERTRAND."

"To the Admiral commanding the Squadron before Rochefort."


The bearers of the letter had instructions to demand of me, whether I
would prevent Buonaparte from proceeding in a neutral vessel, provided
I could not permit the frigates to pass with him on board. Having
received, in my orders, the strictest injunctions to secrecy, and
feeling that the force on the coast, at my disposal, was insufficient
to guard the different ports and passages from which an escape might
be effected, particularly should the plan be adopted of putting to sea
in a small vessel; I wrote the following reply to the above
communication; hoping, by that means, to induce Napoleon to remain for
the Admiral's answer, which would give time for the arrival of
reinforcements.


                                                  "H.M.S. Bellerophon,
                                       off Rochefort, July 10th, 1815.

"SIR,

"I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yesterday's date,
addressed to the Admiral commanding the English cruisers before
Rochefort, acquainting me that the Emperor, having abdicated the
throne of France, and chosen the United States of America as an
asylum, is now embarked on board the frigates, to proceed for that
destination, and awaits a passport from the English Government; and
requesting to know if I have any knowledge of such passport; or if I
think it is the intention of the English Government to prevent the
Emperor's voyage.

"In reply, I have to acquaint you, that I cannot say what the
intentions of my Government may be; but, the two countries being at
present in a state of war, it is impossible for me to permit any ship
of war to put to sea from the port of Rochefort.

"As to the proposal made by the Duc de Rovigo and Count Las Cases, of
allowing the Emperor to proceed in a merchant vessel; it is out of my
power,--without the sanction of my commanding officer, Sir Henry
Hotham, who is at present in Quiberon Bay, and to whom I have
forwarded your despatch,--to allow any vessel, under whatever flag
she may be, to pass with a personage of such consequence.

  "I have the honour to be,
                  Sir,
          Your very humble servant,
                  FRED. L. MAITLAND,
          Captain of H.M.S. Bellerophon."

"Le Grand Marechal Comte Bertrand."


The Duke of Rovigo and Count Las Cases remained on board between two
and three hours, during which time I had a great deal of conversation
with them, on the state of affairs in France; in which they did all
they could to impress me with the idea that Buonaparte was not reduced
to the necessity of quitting Europe; but that, in doing so, he was
actuated solely by motives of humanity; being unwilling, they said,
that any further effusion of blood should take place on his account.
They declared also, that his party was still very formidable in the
centre and south of France, and that, if he choose to protract the
war, he might still give a great deal of trouble; and that, although
his ultimate success might not be probable, there was still a
possibility of fortune turning in his favour, and therefore they
argued it was the interest of England to allow him to proceed to
America. To all this I could give little or no reply, being quite
ignorant of what had occurred in France, further than the decisive
victory obtained by the Duke of Wellington at Waterloo. During the
time the Frenchmen were with me, I received some French newspapers
from Sir Henry Hotham; but my time was so fully occupied in writing to
him, and in discussions with my visitors, that it was not in my power
to read them: I therefore drew them back to the subject that had
occasioned their visit, and said, "Supposing the British Government
should be induced to grant a passport for Buonaparte's going to
America, what pledge could he give that he would not return, and put
England, as well as all Europe, to the same expense of blood and
treasure that has just been incurred?"

General Savary made the following reply: "When the Emperor first
abdicated the throne of France, his removal was brought about by a
faction, at the head of which was Talleyrand, and the sense of the
nation was not consulted: but in the present instance he has
voluntarily resigned the power. The influence he once had over the
French people is past; a very considerable change has taken place in
their sentiments towards him, since he went to Elba; and he could
never regain the power he had over their minds: therefore he would
prefer retiring into obscurity, where he might end his days in peace
and tranquillity; and were he solicited to ascend the throne again, he
would decline it."

"If that is the case," I said, "why not ask an asylum in England?" He
answered, "There are many reasons for his not wishing to reside in
England: the climate is too damp and cold; it is too near France; he
would be, as it were, in the centre of every change and revolution
that might take place there, and would be subject to suspicion; he has
been accustomed to consider the English as his most inveterate
enemies, and they have been induced to look upon him as a monster,
without one of the virtues of a human being."

This conversation took place while I was writing my despatches to Sir
Henry Hotham; and the Frenchmen were walking in the cabin, frequently
interrupting me, to enforce their statement of Buonaparte's situation
being by no means so desperate as might be supposed; from which I took
the liberty of drawing a conclusion directly opposite to the one they
were desirous of impressing on my mind.

Captain Knight, of the Falmouth, who carried my despatches to the
Admiral, was present during the whole of this conversation, but did
not join in it. This was the first certain information I had received
of Buonaparte's position since the battle of Waterloo.

Tuesday, the 11th.--About noon, a small boat came off from the Island
of Oleron, to where the ship was at anchor in Basque Roads, rowed by
four men, in which sat two respectable-looking countrymen, who asked
for the Captain; and upon my being pointed out to them, requested to
speak with me in private. When shown into the cabin, where I went
accompanied by Captain Gambier, of the Myrmidon, they acquainted me,
that a message had been sent from Isle d'Aix, early that morning, for
a man who was considered the best pilot on the island for the Mamusson
passage, being the only person that had ever taken a frigate through;
that a large sum of money had been offered to him to pilot a vessel to
sea from that passage, and that it certainly was Buonaparte's
intention to escape from thence; either in the corvette, which had
moved down some days before, or in a Danish brig, which was then lying
at anchor near the entrance.

On receiving this information, I immediately got under weigh, and
though the flood-tide had just made in, beat the ships out of the
Pertuis d'Antioche before it was dark, when I sent the Myrmidon off
the Mamusson, with orders to anchor close in with the entrance, when
the weather would admit of it; while I remained with the Bellerophon
and Slaney, which rejoined me that evening, under weigh between the
light-houses.

On the 12th of July, the Cyrus being seen in the offing, I ordered her
by telegraph to take a position close in with the Baleine
light-house, and to examine strictly every vessel that might attempt
to put to sea from the Pertuis de Breton, as Buonaparte was on the
spot, endeavouring to escape to America.

The same evening, the white flag made its appearance for the first
time on the towers of Rochelle; on seeing which, I felt it my duty to
run into Basque Roads, accompanied by the Slaney; and having anchored,
I hoisted the Bourbon colours at the main-top-gallant mast-head, and
fired a royal salute. During the whole of this afternoon, however, two
tri-coloured flags were kept flying in Rochelle; and before sunset all
the white flags were struck, and every where replaced by those of
Buonaparte.

On the 13th of July, nothing of importance occurred, except the white
flag being once more hoisted all over Rochelle, as well as on the
Isle of Oleron, to the entire exclusion of the tri-coloured ensign. We
could plainly perceive, that the frigates, from whom we were distant
about three miles, were perfectly ready to put to sea, should an
opportunity offer; having their sterns covered with vegetables, their
top-gallant yards across, studding sail gear rove, and numerous boats
passing between them and the island the whole day:--all indications,
well known to professional men, of preparing for sea.

The ships under my command were accordingly kept with slip buoys on
their cables, and, as soon as it was dark, the top-sail and
top-gallant yards were swayed to the mast-heads, the sails stopt with
rope yarns, and every thing kept ready to make sail at a moment's
warning. Guard-boats were also kept rowing all night, as near the
frigates as they could venture, having signals established to show in
the event of the enemy getting under sail.

On the 14th of July, at daybreak, the officer of the watch informed
me, that the Mouche was standing out from Isle d'Aix, bearing a flag
of truce, which I ordered to be accepted. Here it is necessary to
mention, that the British flag of truce, being a white flag at the
fore-top-gallant mast-head, which was also hoisted as a matter of
course when Buonaparte was received on board, has by some persons been
construed into the Bourbon flag, and thence into an intentional insult
to him. It never was my intention, nor do I believe it could have been
that of any British officer, to treat with insult any fallen enemy,
much less one who had shown such confidence as to throw himself on the
protection of his former foe.

When the schooner, the Mouche, reached the ship, Count Las Cases came
on board, attended by General Count Lallemand. This meeting was highly
interesting to me, as Lallemand had been a prisoner for three weeks in
the Camelion under my command in Egypt, with Junot, whose Aid-de-Camp
he then was; and General Savary, who accompanied Count Las Cases in
his first visit to the Bellerophon, had lived nearly as long at Sir
Sydney Smith's table with me, at the Turkish camp at El Arish, when
the convention, which takes its name from that place, was under
discussion, being Aid-de-Camp to General Dessaix, who negotiated on
the part of the French.

On their coming on board, I made the signal for the Captain of the
Slaney, being desirous of having a witness to any conversation that
might pass, as our communications were chiefly verbal: he arrived
while we were at breakfast.

When Count Las Cases came on the quarter-deck, he informed me that he
was sent off to learn whether I had received an answer from the
Admiral to the letter he had brought off on the 10th instant. I told
him that I had not, but, in consequence of the despatch which I had
forwarded to him, I had not a doubt he would immediately repair here
in person, and I was hourly in expectation of seeing him, adding, "If
that was the only reason you had for sending off a flag of truce, it
was quite unnecessary, as I informed you, when last here, that the
Admiral's answer, when it arrived, should be forwarded to the frigates
by one of the Bellerophon's boats; and I do not approve of frequent
communications with an enemy by means of flags of truce." I then went
into the cabin and ordered breakfast, to prevent further discussion
until the arrival of Captain Sartorius.

When breakfast was over, we retired to the after-cabin. Count Las
Cases then said, "The Emperor is so anxious to spare the further
effusion of human blood, that he will proceed to America in any way
the British Government chooses to sanction, either in a French ship of
war, a vessel armed _en flute_, a merchant vessel, or even in a
British ship of war." To this I answered, "I have no authority to
agree to any arrangement of that sort, nor do I believe my Government
would consent to it; but I think I may venture to receive him into
this ship, and convey him to England: if, however," I added, "he
adopts that plan, I cannot enter into any promise, as to the reception
he may meet with, as, even in the case I have mentioned, I shall be
acting on my own responsibility, and cannot be sure that it would meet
with the approbation of the British Government."

There was a great deal of conversation on this subject, in the course
of which Lucien Buonaparte's name was mentioned, and the manner in
which he had lived in England alluded to; but I invariably assured Las
Cases most explicitly, that I had no authority to make conditions of
any sort, as to Napoleon's reception in England. In fact, I could not
have done otherwise, since, with the exception of the order inserted
at page 24, I had no instructions for my guidance, and was, of course,
in total ignorance of the intention of His Majesty's ministers as to
his future disposal. One of the last observations Las Cases made
before quitting the ship was, "Under all circumstances, I have little
doubt that you will see the Emperor on board the Bellerophon;" and, in
fact, Buonaparte must have determined on that step before Las Cases
came on board, as his letter to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent
is dated the 13th of July, the day before this conversation.

During the above-mentioned conversation, I asked Las Cases where
Buonaparte then was? He replied, "At Rochefort; I left him there
yesterday evening." General Lallemand then said, "The Emperor lives at
the Hotel in the Grand Place, and is now so popular there, that the
inhabitants assemble every evening in front of the house, for the
purpose of seeing him, and crying, 'Vive l'Empereur!'"

I then asked how long it would take to go there: Las Cases answered,
"As the tide will be against us, it will require five or six hours."
Why these false statements were made, I cannot pretend to say; but it
is very certain that Buonaparte never quitted the frigates or Isle
d'Aix, after his arrival there on the 3rd of July.

General Lallemand took occasion to ask me if I thought there would be
any risk of the people, who might accompany Buonaparte, being given
up to the Government of France: I replied, "Certainly not; the British
Government never could think of doing so, under the circumstances
contemplated in the present arrangement."

They left me about half-past nine A.M. In the course of the day, I was
joined by the Myrmidon, Captain Gambier, who had been sent to me by
Captain Green, of the Daphne, with a letter he had received from
Captain Aylmer, of the Pactolus, in the Gironde, bringing information
that it was the intention of Buonaparte to escape from Rochefort in a
Danish sloop, concealed in a cask stowed in the ballast, with tubes so
constructed as to convey air for his breathing. I afterwards inquired
of General Savary, if there had been any foundation for such a report;
when he informed me that the plan had been thought of, and the vessel
in some measure prepared; but it was considered too hazardous; for had
we detained the vessel for a day or two, he would have been obliged
to make his situation known, and thereby forfeited all claims to the
good treatment he hoped to ensure by a voluntary surrender.

The two Captains dined with me, and afterwards went on board the
Myrmidon, to take up a position to the north-east of the Bellerophon,
to prevent vessels from passing close in shore, and thus to render the
blockade of the port more complete.

Soon after they left me, a barge was perceived rowing off from the
frigates towards the Bellerophon with a flag-of-truce up; on which I
recalled Captains Sartorius and Gambier, by signal, that they might be
present at any communication that was to be made. The boat got
alongside about seven P.M. and brought Count Las Cases, accompanied by
General Baron Gourgaud, one of Buonaparte's Aid-de-Camps. On their
coming on deck, I immediately addressed Las Cases, saying, "It is
impossible you could have been at Rochefort, and returned, since you
left me this morning." He replied, "No; it was not necessary; I found
the Emperor at Isle d'Aix, on my arrival there." He then told me, he
was charged with a letter from General Bertrand. We walked into the
cabin, when he delivered it to me; it was as follows:--


                                                 "Le 14 Juillet, 1815.

"Monsieur le Commandant,

"Monsieur le Comte de Las Cases a rendu compte a l'Empereur de la
conversation qu'il a eue ce matin a votre bord. S. M. se rendra a la
maree de demain, vers quatre ou cinq heures du matin, a bord de votre
vaisseau. Je vous envoye Monsieur le Comte de Las Cases, Conseiller
d'Etat, faisant fonction de Marechal de Logis, avec la liste des
personnes composant la suite de S. M. Si l'Amiral, en consequence de
la demande que vous lui avez adressee, vous envoye le sauf conduit
demande pour les Etats Unis, S. M. s'y rendra avec plaisir; mais au
defaut du sauf conduit, il se rendra volontiers en Angleterre, comme
simple particulier, pour y jouir de la protection des loix de votre
pays.

"S. M. a expedie Monsieur le Marechal de Camp Baron Gourgaud aupres du
Prince Regent, avec une lettre, dont j'ai l'honneur de vous envoyer
copie, vous priant de la faire passer au Ministre auquel vous croyez
necessaire d'envoyer cet officier general, afin qu'il ait l'honneur de
remettre au Prince Regent la lettre dont il est charge.

  "J'ai l'honneur d'etre,
        Monsieur le Commandant,
            Votre tres humble et tres obeissant Serviteur,
                                      Le Grand Marechal,
                                                      COMTE BERTRAND."

"A Monsieur le Commandant des Croisieres devant Rochefort."


TRANSLATION.

"SIR,

"Count Las Cases has reported to the Emperor the conversation which he
had with you this morning. His Majesty will proceed on board your ship
with the ebb tide to-morrow morning, between four and five o'clock.

"I send the Count Las Cases, Counsellor of State, doing the duty of
Marechal de Logis, with the list of persons composing His Majesty's
suite.

"If the Admiral, in consequence of the despatch you forwarded to him,
should send the passport for the United States therein demanded, His
Majesty will be happy to repair to America; but should the passport be
withheld, he will willingly proceed to England, as a private
individual, there to enjoy the protection of the laws of your
country.

"His Majesty has despatched Major General Baron Gourgaud to the Prince
Regent with a letter, a copy of which I have the honour to enclose,
requesting that you will forward it to such one of the ministers as
you may think it necessary to send that general officer, that he may
have the honour of delivering the letter with which he is charged to
the Prince Regent.

  "I have the honour to be,
                        Sir,
                          Your very humble servant,
                                                      COUNT BERTRAND."

"To the Officer commanding the Cruizers off Rochefort."


_List of persons composing the suite of Napoleon Buonaparte, enclosed
in the above Letter, and the manner in which they were distributed
during the passage to England._


BELLEROPHON.

_Generaux._

  Le Lieutenant General Comte Bertrand, Gd. Marechal.
  Le Lieutenant General Duc de Rovigo.
  Le Lieutenant General Baron Lallemand Aide de Camp de S. M.
  Le Marechal de Camp Comte de Montholon Aide de Camp de S. M.
  Le Comte de Las Cases Conseiller d'Etat.

_Dames._

  Madame la Comtesse Bertrand.
  Madame la Comtesse de Montholon.

_Enfans._

  3 Enfans de Madame la Comtesse Bertrand.
  1 Enfant de Madame la Comtesse de Montholon.

_Officiers._

  M. de Planat, Lieutenant-Colonel.
  M. Maingaut, Chirurgien de S. M.
  M. Las Cases, Page.

_Service de la Chambre._

  M. M. Marchand               1 Valet de Chambre.
  Gilli                        Valet de Chambre.
  St Denis                     Valet de Chambre.
  Novarra                      Idem.
  Denis                        Garcon de Garderobe.

_Livree._

  Archambaud                   1 Valet de pied.
  Gaudron                      Valet de pied.
  Gentilini                    Id.

_Service de la Bouche._

  M. M. Fontain                1 Maitre d'Hotel.
  Pieron                       Chef d'Office.
  La Fosse                     Cuisinier.
  Le Page                      Idem.

  2 Femmes de Chambre de Madame la Comtesse Bertrand.
  1 Femme de Chambre de Madame la Comtesse de Montholon.

_Suite des personnes qui accompagnent S. M._

  1 Valet de Chambre           du Duc de Rovigo.
  1 do.                        du Comte Bertrand.
  1 do.                        du Comte de Montholon.
  1 Valet de pied              du Comte Bertrand.
      Total 7.


_Recapitulation._

  Generaux                                     5
  Dames                                        2
  Enfans                                       4
  Officiers                                    3
  Service de la Chambre de S. M.               5
  Livree de S. M.                              3
  Service de la Bouche                         4
  Suite des personnes qui accompagnent S. M.   7
                                              --
  Total                                       33
                                              --


LA CORVETTE.

_Officiers._

  Le Lieutenant Colonel        Resigni.
  Le Lieutenant Colonel        Schultz.
  Le Capitaine                 Autrie.
  Le Capitaine                 Mesener.
  Le Capitaine                 Prontowski.
  Le Lieutenant                Riviere.
  Le Sous Lieutenant           Ste Catherine.

_Suite de S. M._

  Capriani                     Maitre d'Hotel.
  Santini                      Huissier.
  Chauvin                      Id.
  Rousseau                     Lampiste.
  Archambaud                   Valet de pied.
  Joseph                       Id.
  Le Charron                   Id.
  Lisiaux                      Garde d'Office.
  Ortini                       Valet de pied.
  Fumeau                       Idem.


_Recapitulation._

  Officiers                                    7
  Suite                                       10
                                              --
  Total                                       17
                                              --


Enclosed was likewise a copy of the well-known letter addressed by
Buonaparte to His Royal Highness the Prince Regent.

"Altesse Royale,

"En butte aux factions qui divisent mon pays et a l'inimitie des plus
grandes puissances de l'Europe, j'ai termine ma carriere politique, et
je viens comme Themistocle m'asseoir sur le foyer du peuple
Britannique. Je me mets sous la protection de ses loix, que je reclame
de votre Altesse Royale, comme au plus puissant, au plus constant, et
au plus genereux de mes Ennemis."

  "Rochefort, 13 Juillet, 1815,
                                                    "Signe, NAPOLEON."


TRANSLATION.

                                          "Rochefort, July 13th, 1815.

"Your Royal Highness,

"A victim to the factions which distract my country, and to the enmity
of the greatest powers of Europe, I have terminated my political
career, and I come, like Themistocles, to throw myself upon the
hospitality of the British people. I put myself under the protection
of their laws; which I claim from your Royal Highness, as the most
powerful, the most constant, and the most generous of my enemies.

                                                            NAPOLEON."


On reading the above, I told Monsieur Las Cases that I would receive
Buonaparte on board, and immediately forward General Gourgaud to
England by the Slaney, along with my despatches to the Admiralty; but
that he would not be allowed to land until permission was received
from London, or the sanction of the Admiral at the port he might
arrive at obtained. I assured him, however, that the copy of the
letter with which he was charged would be forwarded without loss of
time, and presented by the Ministers to his Royal Highness. Count Las
Cases then asked for paper, that he might communicate by letter to
Bertrand my acquiescence in the proposal he had brought, for my
receiving, and conveying to England, Buonaparte and his suite.

When General Gourgaud was about to write the letter, to prevent any
future misunderstanding, I said, "Monsieur Las Cases, you will
recollect that I am not authorised to stipulate as to the reception of
Buonaparte in England, but that he must consider himself entirely at
the disposal of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent." He answered, "I
am perfectly aware of that, and have already acquainted the Emperor
with what you said on the subject."

It might, perhaps, have been better if this declaration had been given
in an official written form; and could I have foreseen the discussions
which afterwards took place, and which will appear in the sequel, I
undoubtedly should have done so; but as I repeatedly made it in the
presence of witnesses, it did not occur to me as being necessary; and
how could a stronger proof be adduced, that no stipulations were
agreed to respecting the reception of Buonaparte in England, than the
fact of their not being reduced to writing? which certainly would have
been the case had any favourable terms been demanded on the part of
Monsieur Las Cases, and agreed to by me.

The French boat was soon after despatched with the letter to Bertrand,
in charge of a French naval officer, who had attended Las Cases on
board; and as soon as I had finished the following despatch to the
Secretary of the Admiralty, I sent Captain Sartorius, of the Slaney,
to England, accompanied by General Gourgaud.


Extract of a Letter from Captain Maitland, of His Majesty's ship
Bellerophon, addressed to the Secretary of the Admiralty, dated in
Basque Roads, 14th July, 1815.


"For the information of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, I
have to acquaint you that the Count Las Cases and General Lallemand
this day came on board His Majesty's ship under my command, with a
proposal from Count Bertrand for me to receive on board Napoleon
Buonaparte, for the purpose of throwing himself on the generosity of
the Prince Regent. Conceiving myself authorised by their Lordships'
secret order, I have acceded to the proposal, and he is to embark on
board this ship to-morrow morning. That no misunderstanding might
arise, I have explicitly and clearly explained to Count Las Cases,
that I have no authority whatever for granting terms of any sort, but
that all I can do is to carry him and his suite to England, to be
received in such manner as his Royal Highness may deem expedient.

"At Napoleon Buonaparte's request, and that their Lordships may be in
possession of the transaction at as early a period as possible, I
despatch the Slaney (with General Gourgaud, his Aide de Camp),
directing Captain Sartorius to put into the nearest port, and forward
this letter by his first Lieutenant, and shall in compliance with
their Lordships' orders proceed to Torbay, to await such directions as
the Admiralty may think proper to give.

"Enclosed, I transmit a copy of the letter with which General
Gourgaud is charged, to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, and
request that you will acquaint their Lordships, that the General
informs me, he is entrusted with further particulars, which he is
anxious to communicate to his Royal Highness."

When these gentlemen had left the ship, as well as the Saale's barge,
I said to Monsieur Las Cases, I propose dividing the after-cabin in
two, that the ladies may have the use of one part of it. "If you allow
me to give an opinion," said he, "the Emperor will be better pleased
to have the whole of the after-cabin to himself, as he is fond of
walking about, and will by that means be able to take more exercise."
I answered, "As it is my wish to treat him with every possible
consideration while he is on board the ship I command, I shall make
any arrangement you think will be most agreeable to him."

This is the only conversation that ever passed on the subject of the
cabin; and I am the more particular in stating it, as Buonaparte has
been described, in some of the public Journals, as having taken
possession of it in a most brutal way, saying, "Tout ou rien pour
moi:"--All or nothing for me. I here therefore, once for all, beg to
state most distinctly, that, from the time of his coming on board my
ship, to the period of his quitting her, his conduct was invariably
that of a gentleman; and in no one instance do I recollect him to have
made use of a rude expression, or to have been guilty of any kind of
ill-breeding.

As the ship had for some time been kept clear for action, with all the
bulkheads down, it became necessary to prepare for the reception of so
many guests, by putting the cabins up again: in consequence of making
the requisite arrangements, it was past one o'clock in the morning
before I could get to bed. About ten at night, the officer of the
watch informed me that a boat from the shore had asked permission to
come alongside. A man being allowed to come on board from her; "I am
sent off from Rochelle," said he, "to inform you that Buonaparte this
morning passed that town in a chasse-maree, with another in company,
for the purpose of escaping to sea by the Pertuis de Breton: he is now
in that passage, and means to set sail this night." I told him, "that
I doubted his information, having at that moment one of his attendants
on board, who had come with a proposal for me to receive him into the
ship." I then asked him how he came by his intelligence? He answered,
"The vessels passed close to a boat that I was in; and I saw a man
wrapt up in a sailor's great coat, whom one of the people with me
asserted to be him: for my part, I am not acquainted with his
appearance, never having seen him; but when the owner of the vessels
attempted to go on board of them, he was kept off, and told that they
were required for two or three days, when they would be restored with
ample payment." He told his story so circumstantially, and with such
confidence, that I feared there must be grounds for what he stated;
and the anxiety of my situation may be easily conceived, when it is
recollected that I had sent off a ship to England with despatches,
announcing the intention of Buonaparte to embark the following morning
in the Bellerophon. After a little consideration, I determined to
inform Las Cases abruptly of the intelligence I had received, and
endeavour to judge by the effect it had on his countenance, whether
there was any truth in the report or not. I accordingly went into the
cabin and did so; he seemed perfectly calm and collected, saying,
"Pray at what hour does your informant state the Emperor to have
passed Rochelle?" "At ten A.M." "Then I can safely assert, on my
honour, that he was not in either of those vessels. I left him at
half-past five this evening, when it was his full intention to come on
board this ship to-morrow morning; what he may have done since that
hour, I cannot be responsible for." I answered, "As you give your word
of honour that Buonaparte had not left Isle d'Aix when you quitted it,
I shall trust to what you say, and take no steps in consequence of the
information that has been brought to me, but conclude it has
originated in some mistake."

About three in the morning, the officer of the watch awoke me, and
said that another boat wished to come alongside. I rose and went upon
deck immediately, and found that she brought the same intelligence
from another quarter; and they both eventually proved correct, to a
certain extent: for two chasse-marees, as I was afterwards informed,
had been prepared, manned, and officered from the frigates, to be used
as a last resource to attempt an escape in, in the event of Las
Cases' mission to the Bellerophon not being successful; and they had
actually passed Rochelle, in their way to Pointeau d'Aguillon, at the
hour specified, and were there to await his joining them should it
prove necessary.[3]

         [Footnote 3: Chasse-Marees are small decked vessels, rigged
         as luggers; they are generally from twenty to thirty-five
         tons burthen, and are used almost exclusively for the
         coasting trade of France. Though there is no doubt that,
         during the summer months, a vessel of this description might
         succeed in making the voyage to America; yet if we take into
         consideration the indolent habits that Buonaparte had of late
         years given way to; the very small space for the
         accommodation of himself and suite, and for the stowage of
         provisions, water, and other necessaries; that there was no
         friendly port he could have touched at, to gain
         supplies;--the utter impracticability of his reaching his
         destination in a vessel of that description, even if he had
         eluded the vigilance of our cruisers, will at once be evident
         to every one.]

After I had determined to abide by Las Cases' assurance, that
Buonaparte had not quitted Isle d'Aix, I enquired of the person who
brought off the information in the evening, "What was the state of
Rochelle, and whether I might with safety send a boat there to
purchase refreshments?" as the white flag was then hoisted all over
the town; he said, "he would not recommend it, as, though the
towns-people were well inclined towards the Bourbon family, the
garrison, consisting of four thousand men, were all attached to
Buonaparte; but if he were once on board the ship, there would be no
risk in doing so, as their fear of his meeting with bad treatment
would keep the soldiers in awe."

At break of day, on the 15th of July, 1815, l'Epervier French brig of
war was discovered under sail, standing out towards the ship, with a
flag of truce up; and at the same time the Superb, bearing Sir Henry
Hotham's flag, was seen in the offing. By half-past five the ebb-tide
failed, the wind was blowing right in, and the brig, which was within
a mile of us, made no further progress; while the Superb was
advancing with the wind and tide in her favour. Thus situated, and
being most anxious to terminate the affair I had brought so near a
conclusion, previous to the Admiral's arrival, I sent off Mr Mott, the
First Lieutenant, in the barge, who returned soon after six o'clock,
bringing Napoleon with him.

On coming on board the Bellerophon, he was received without any of the
honours generally paid to persons of high rank; the guard was drawn
out on the break of the poop, but did not present arms. His Majesty's
Government had merely given directions, in the event of his being
captured, for his being removed into any one of his Majesty's ships
that might fall in with him; but no instructions had been given as to
the light in which he was to be viewed. As it is not customary,
however, on board a British ship of war, to pay any such honours
before the colours are hoisted at eight o'clock in the morning, or
after sunset, I made the early hour an excuse for withholding them
upon this occasion.

Buonaparte's dress was an olive-coloured great coat over a green
uniform, with scarlet cape and cuffs, green lapels turned back and
edged with scarlet, skirts hooked back with bugle horns embroidered in
gold, plain sugar-loaf buttons and gold epaulettes; being the uniform
of the Chasseur a Cheval of the Imperial Guard. He wore the star, or
grand cross of the Legion of Honour, and the small cross of that
order; the Iron Crown; and the Union, appended to the button-hole of
his left lapel. He had on a small cocked hat, with a tri-coloured
cockade; plain gold-hilted sword, military boots, and white waistcoat
and breeches. The following day he appeared in shoes, with gold
buckles, and silk stockings--the dress he always wore afterwards,
while with me.

On leaving the Epervier, he was cheered by her ship's company as long
as the boat was within hearing; and Mr Mott informed me that most of
the officers and men had tears in their eyes.

General Bertrand came first up the ship's side, and said to me, "The
Emperor is in the boat." He then ascended, and, when he came on the
quarter-deck, pulled off his hat, and, addressing me in a firm tone of
voice, said, "I am come to throw myself on the protection of your
Prince and laws." When I showed him into the cabin, he looked round
and said, "Une belle chambre," "This is a handsome cabin." I answered,
"Such as it is, Sir, it is at your service while you remain on board
the ship I command." He then looked at a portrait that was hanging
up, and said, "Qui est cette jeune personne?" "Who is that young
lady?" "My wife," I replied. "Ah! elle est tres jeune et tres jolie,"
"Ah! she is both young and pretty."[4] He then asked what countrywoman
she was, begged to know if I had any children, and put a number of
questions respecting my country, and the service I had seen. He next
requested I would send for the officers, and introduce them to him:
which was done according to their rank. He asked several questions of
each, as to the place of his birth, the situation he held in the ship,
the length of time he had served, and the actions he had been in. He
then expressed a desire to go round the ship; but, as the men had not
done cleaning, I told him it was customary to clean the lower decks
immediately after their breakfast, that they were then so employed,
and, if he would defer visiting the ship until they had finished, he
would see her to more advantage.

         [Footnote 4: I have been induced to insert Buonaparte's
         observation on Mrs M.'s portrait, as well as one he made on
         seeing her alongside of the Bellerophon in Plymouth Sound, as
         they show, in a strong point of view, a peculiar trait in his
         character; that of making a favourable impression on those
         with whom he conversed, by seizing every opportunity of
         saying what he considered would be pleasing and flattering to
         their feelings.

         [I have passed over the important and interesting passage
         respecting Mrs M. I trust she will consent it should remain,
         for I think everything connected with such a remarkable
         passage of history becomes historical. Perhaps it will
         somewhat change the view of the subject, and relieve Mrs M.'s
         delicacy, if we consider it not as immediately applicable to
         Mrs M. personally, but as a point illustrative of Bonaparte's
         address. It was of importance to him to secure Capt.
         Maitland's good opinion, and he took a delicate and ingenious
         way of giving pleasure. I have always understood that there
         could be only one opinion of the justice of the compliment,
         yet I think the praise would have been bestowed even had the
         portrait less charm. I do pray that Mrs M. will consent to be
         _immortal_.--SCOTT.]]

At this time I proposed to him to allow me to address him in English,
as I had heard he understood that language, and I had considerable
difficulty in expressing myself in French. He replied in French, "The
thing is impossible; I hardly understand a word of your language:" and
from the observations I had an opportunity of making afterwards, I am
satisfied he made a correct statement, as, on looking into books or
newspapers, he frequently asked the meaning of the most common word.
He spoke his own language with a rapidity that at first made it
difficult to follow him; and it was several days before I got so far
accustomed to his manner of speaking, as to comprehend his meaning
immediately.

In about a quarter of an hour, he again intimated a desire to go round
the ship; and although I told him he would find the men rubbing and
scouring, he persisted in his wish of seeing her in the state she then
was. He accordingly went over all her decks, asking me many questions;
more particularly about any thing that appeared to him different from
what he had been accustomed to see in French ships of war. He seemed
most struck with the cleanliness and neatness of the men, saying "that
our seamen were surely a different class of people from the French;
and that he thought it was owing to them we were always victorious at
sea." I answered, "I must beg leave to differ with you: I do not wish
to take from the merit of our men; but my own opinion is, that perhaps
we owe our advantage to the superior experience of the officers; and I
believe the French seamen, if taken as much pains with, would look as
well as ours. As British ships of war are constantly at sea, the
officers have nothing to divert their attention from them and their
men; and in consequence, not only is their appearance more attended
to, but they are much better trained to the service they have to
perform."

"I believe you are right," said he. He then went on to talk of
several naval actions; adding, "Your laws are either more severe, or
better administered, than ours; there are many instances of French
officers having conducted themselves ill in battle, without my being
able to punish them as they deserved:" among others, he mentioned the
names of two naval officers; and speaking of one of them, said, "He
ought to have suffered death, and I did all I could to bring it about,
but he was tried by a French naval court-martial, which only dismissed
him the service." I observed, "The laws appear sometimes to be
administered with more than sufficient severity. I commanded a frigate
in the affair of Basque Roads; and in my opinion, the sentence of
death on the Captain of the Calcutta was unjust: he could do no more
to save his ship, and she was defended better and longer than any one
there." He answered, "You are not aware of the circumstances that
occasioned his condemnation; he was the first man to quit his ship,
which was fought some time by her officers and crew after he had left
her."

He next said, "I can see no sufficient reason why your ships should
beat the French with so much ease. The finest men of war in your
service are French; a French ship is heavier in every respect than one
of yours, she carries more guns, those guns of a larger calibre, and
has a great many more men." I replied, "I have already accounted for
it to you, in the superior experience of our men and officers." "I
understand," said he, "from some Frenchmen who were on board your ship
for several days,[5] that you take great pains in exercising your
guns, and training your men to fire at a mark." I answered, "I did so,
because I considered it of the greatest importance;" and I added,
"that if the frigates had attempted to put to sea, he would probably
have had an opportunity of seeing the effect of it." He asked me "if I
thought two frigates, with four-and-twenty pounders on their main
decks,[6] were a match for a seventy-four gun ship; and whether it was
my opinion, if he had attempted to force a passage in the ships at
Isle d'Aix, it would have been attended with success." I replied,
"that the fire of a two-deck ship was so much more compact, and
carried such an immense weight of iron, in proportion to that of a
frigate, and there was so much difficulty in bringing two or three
ships to act with effect at the same time upon one, that I scarcely
considered three frigates a match for one line-of-battle ship;--that,
with respect to forcing a passage past the Bellerophon, it must have
depended greatly on accident, but the chances were much against it; as
the frigates would have had to beat out against the wind for three or
four leagues, though a narrow passage, exposed to the fire of a
seventy-four gun ship, which, from being to windward, would have had
the power of taking the position most advantageous for herself." He
then said, reverting to what had passed before about firing at marks,
"You have a great advantage over France in your finances: I have long
wished to introduce the use of powder and shot in exercise; but the
expense was too great for the country to bear." He examined the sights
on the guns, and approved of them highly; asked the weight of metal on
the different decks, disapproving of the mixture of different calibres
on the quarter-deck and forecastle. I told him the long nines were
placed in the way of the rigging, that they might carry the fire from
the explosion clear of it, which a carronade would not do: he
answered, "That may be necessary, but it must be attended with
inconvenience." His enquiries were generally much to the purpose, and
showed that he had given naval matters a good deal of consideration.

         [Footnote 5: They were part of the officers and crew of the
         AEneas store-ship, mentioned as having been detained on the
         18th of June, who were on board the Bellerophon about a week,
         and were landed at Isle d'Aix, in a chasse-maree, a few days
         before Buonaparte's arrival there.]

         [Footnote 6: I was afterwards told, that one of the frigates,
         at Isle d'Aix, had changed her eighteen pounders for
         twenty-fours.]

On seeing the additional supply of wads for each deck made up along
with the shot-boxes, in the form of sophas, with neat canvass covers,
he observed, "The French ships of war have all the preparations for
action that you have, but they have not the way of combining
appearance with utility."

We had breakfast about nine o'clock, in the English style, consisting
of tea, coffee, cold meat, &c. He did not eat much, or seem to relish
it; and when, on enquiry, I found he was accustomed to have a hot meal
in the morning, I immediately ordered my steward to allow his Maitre
d'Hotel to give directions, that he might invariably be served in the
manner he had been used to; and after that we always lived in the
French fashion, as far as I could effect that object.

During breakfast he asked many questions about English customs,
saying, "I must now learn to conform myself to them, as I shall
probably pass the remainder of my life in England."

The Superb, as I before observed, had been seen in the offing early in
the morning, and was now approaching with a light breeze: he asked two
or three times how soon she would anchor, seemed very anxious to know
whether the Admiral would approve of my having received him; and when
I went to wait on Sir Henry Hotham, requested I would say he was
desirous of seeing him.

The Superb anchored about half-past ten, and I immediately went on
board, and gave the Admiral an account of all that had occurred,
adding, "I trust I have done right, and that the Government will
approve of my conduct, as I considered it of much importance to
prevent Buonaparte's escape to America, and to get possession of his
person." Sir Henry Hotham said, "Getting hold of him on any terms
would have been of the greatest consequence; but as you have entered
into no conditions whatever, there cannot be a doubt that you will
obtain the approbation of his Majesty's Government."

He then said, "How do you feel as to keeping him? would you like to
part with him?" "Certainly not," was my answer: "as I have had all the
anxiety and responsibility of conducting this matter to an issue, I am
of course desirous of taking him to England; but, as I do not wish to
keep him, or any man, in my ship against his will, if he desires to
remove into another, I shall certainly not object."

I then delivered Buonaparte's message, that he was desirous of
receiving a visit from the Admiral, who said he would wait upon him
with much pleasure.

I soon after returned to the Bellerophon, and told Buonaparte that the
Admiral meant to wait on him; upon which he desired Count Bertrand to
go and pay his respects to Sir Henry. I accompanied him, and while the
Admiral was preparing for his visit, Captain Senhouse attended General
Bertrand through the ship.

In the afternoon, Sir Henry Hotham, accompanied by Captain Senhouse,
and Mr Irving, his secretary, came on board the Bellerophon. They were
introduced to Buonaparte by General Bertrand, in the after-cabin,
where he had a good deal of conversation with them: he showed his
portable library, which was laid out in small travelling cases round
the cabin; asked various questions, principally relative to the
discipline and regulation of our ships of war, and finally invited
them all to remain to dinner.

Dinner was served about five o'clock upon Buonaparte's plate. This was
arranged by his Maitre d'Hotel, whom I had told to regulate every
thing in the manner most likely to be agreeable to his master.

When dinner was announced, Buonaparte, viewing himself as a Royal
personage, which he continued to do while on board the Bellerophon,
and which, under the circumstances, I considered it would have been
both ungracious and uncalled for in me to have disputed, led the way
into the dining-room. He seated himself in the centre at one side of
the table, requesting Sir Henry Hotham to sit at his right hand, and
Madame Bertrand on his left. For that day I sat as usual at the head
of the table, but on the following day, and every other, whilst
Buonaparte remained on board, I sat by his request at his right hand,
and General Bertrand took the top. Two of the ward-room officers dined
daily at the table, by invitation from Buonaparte, conveyed through
Count Bertrand.

He conversed a great deal, and showed no depression of spirits: among
other things, he asked me where I was born. I told him, in Scotland.
"Have you any property there?" said he. "No, I am a younger brother,
and they do not bestow much on people of that description in
Scotland." "Is your elder brother a Lord?" "No, Lord Lauderdale is the
head of our family." "Ah! you are a relation of Lord Lauderdale's! he
is an acquaintance of mine, he was sent Ambassador from your King to
me, when Mr Fox was Prime Minister: had Mr Fox lived, it never would
have come to this, but his death put an end to all hopes of peace.
Milord Lauderdale est un bon garcon;" adding, "I think you resemble
him a little, though he is dark and you are fair."[7]

         [Footnote 7: [It was an odd idea that you should be like Lord
         Lauderdale.--SCOTT.]]

When dinner was over, a cup of strong coffee was handed round; he then
rose and went into the after-cabin, asking the Admiral and all the
party to accompany him, the ladies among the rest. This was the only
time I ever saw them in the apartment in which he slept.

After some conversation, he said, in a cheerful and playful way, that
he would show us his camp bed; and sent for Marchand, his premier
valet de chambre, who received his order, and soon returned with two
small packages in leather cases; one of which contained the bedstead,
which was composed of steel, and, when packed up, was not above two
feet long and eighteen inches in circumference; the other contained
the mattress and curtains, the latter of green silk. In three minutes
the whole was put together, and formed a very elegant small bed, about
thirty inches wide.

He then went out, and walked the quarter-deck for some time, and
retired to his cabin about half-past seven o'clock. Soon after, when
the Admiral was going to return to his ship, he proposed to Bertrand
to take leave of him. He went into the cabin, but returned immediately
with an apology, saying he was undressed, and going to bed.

In the course of the afternoon, the Admiral invited Buonaparte, with
the ladies and all his principal officers, to breakfast, the following
day: which invitation was accepted, apparently, with much
satisfaction.

When I went on deck, early the next morning, (the 16th of July) I
observed that the Superb had the tompions out of her guns, and the man
ropes on her yards, as if for the purpose of saluting and manning
ships; and as I had received Buonaparte without even the guard
presenting arms, I felt that he might conceive I had intentionally
treated him with disrespect. I therefore sent the officer of the watch
with my compliments to Sir Henry Hotham, and begged to know if it was
his intention to salute Buonaparte on his going on board, and to
receive him with manned yards; and, if so, whether I was to do the
same, on his quitting the Bellerophon. He sent for answer, that it was
not his intention to salute, but he meant to man ship; that I was not
to do so on his quitting the Bellerophon, but was at liberty to man
yards on his return. I likewise received directions from the Admiral
to hoist a signal, when the boat with his visitors was ready to leave
the ship, that he might have time to make the necessary preparations.

About ten A.M. the barge was manned, and a captain's guard turned out.
When Buonaparte came on deck, he looked at the marines, who were
generally fine-looking young men, with much satisfaction; went through
their ranks, inspected their arms, and admired their appearance,
saying to Bertrand, "How much might be done with a hundred thousand
such soldiers as these." He asked which had been longest in the corps;
went up and spoke to him. His questions were put in French, which I
interpreted, as well as the man's answers. He enquired how many years
he had served; on being told upwards of ten, he turned to me and said,
"Is it not customary in your service, to give a man who has been in
it so long some mark of distinction?" He was informed that the person
in question had been a sergeant, but was reduced to the ranks for some
misconduct. He then put the guard through part of their exercise,
whilst I interpreted to the Captain of Marines, who did not understand
French, the manoeuvres he wished to have performed. He made some
remarks upon the difference of the charge with the bayonet between our
troops and the French; and found fault with our method of fixing the
bayonet to the musquet, as being more easy to twist off, if seized by
an enemy when in the act of charging.

On getting into the boat, he looked at the barge's crew, and said,
"What a very fine set of men you have got!" He then turned to Las
Cases, who had come on board the ship in plain clothes, but now
appeared in a naval uniform, and said jocularly, "Comment, Las Cases,
vous etes militaire?" "What, Las Cases, are you a military man? I
have never till now seen you in uniform." He answered, "Please your
Majesty, before the revolution I was a lieutenant in the navy; and as
I think an uniform carries more consideration with it in a foreign
country, I have adopted it."

His attention was now drawn to the men on the Superb's yards, as well
as to the appearance of the ship, about which he made some
observations, and asked several questions; among others, whether she
was French or English; what her age was; the number of guns she
carried, and the weight of metal on each deck.

On going alongside, General Bertrand went up and announced to the
Admiral, that the Emperor, for they always gave him that title, was in
the boat. He then went up, and was received by Sir Henry Hotham on the
quarter-deck, where a captain's guard was turned out to him. He was
immediately shown into the cabin, and, after looking round him,
requested to have the officers presented, which was done; when he
asked nearly the same questions of each, that he had put to those of
the Bellerophon the day before. He then expressed a wish to go through
the ship; and did so, accompanied by several of his own suite, the
Admiral, Captain Senhouse, and myself. The men were drawn up at
divisions, and every thing was in the nicest order. He appeared much
pleased with all he saw, and drew many comparisons between French and
English ships of war. On going through the wings and storerooms, he
said to General Savary, "Our ships have nothing of this sort:" who
answered, "All the new ones, built at Antwerp, were constructed on
this plan." When he returned to the quarter-deck, he questioned the
Admiral and myself very minutely, about the clothing and victualling
of the seamen. It was then, on being told that all that department
was under the charge of the purser, he said in a facetious way, "Je
crois que c'est quelquefois chez vous, comme chez nous, le commissaire
est un peu coquin." "I believe it happens sometimes with you, as it
does with us, that the purser is a little of a rogue." This was
addressed to the Admiral and me, with whom he was conversing, and not
to the people, as has been represented; nor was there a man that could
have understood it, as it was spoken in French, and not within their
hearing. He asked to see the Chaplain, put a few questions to him as
to the number of Catholics and foreigners in the ship, and whether any
of them spoke the French language. A Guernsey man was pointed out to
him, but he had no conversation with him.

He was then shown into the cabin, where breakfast was prepared: during
which meal he talked a good deal, but ate little, the breakfast being
served in the English manner. I observed, during the whole time of
breakfast, that Colonel Planat, who was much attached to him, and of
whom Buonaparte always expressed himself in terms of affection, had
tears running down his cheeks, and seemed greatly distressed at the
situation of his master. And, from the opportunities I afterwards had
of observing this young man's character, I feel convinced he had a
strong personal attachment to Buonaparte;--and this, indeed, as far as
I could judge, was the case also with all his other attendants,
without exception.

On rising from the breakfast-table, the whole party went into the
after-cabin, where a discussion took place about Buonaparte's horses
and carriages, which had been left at Rochefort, and which he was
desirous of having forwarded to England. I had formerly agreed, in the
event of their arriving, to receive two carriages, and five or six
horses, as many as the ship could conveniently stow; but as they had
not come, the Admiral now consented to give a passport for a vessel to
transport the whole of them, consisting of six carriages and
forty-five horses: which was accordingly made out, and forwarded to
Monsieur Philibert, the senior naval officer at Isle d'Aix, but I
believe it was never acted upon.

We all returned to the Bellerophon about noon, when the ships present
manned their yards, the boat was immediately hoisted in, and the ship
got under weigh, in pursuance of orders from the Admiral, of which the
following is an extract.


Extract of an Order from Rear Admiral Sir Henry Hotham, K.C.B.,
addressed to Captain Maitland of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Superb, in
Basque Roads, July 15th, 1815.


"You are hereby required and directed to take the Myrmidon under your
orders, and, putting on board her such persons composing a part of
the suite of Napoleon Buonaparte as cannot be conveyed in the
Bellerophon, you are to put to sea in H.M.S. under your command, in
company with the Myrmidon, and make the best of your way with Napoleon
Buonaparte and his suite to Torbay, and there landing the officer of
the ship bearing my flag, whom I have charged with a despatch
addressed to the Secretary of the Admiralty, as well as an officer of
the ship you command, for the purpose of proceeding express to
Plymouth with the despatch you will herewith receive, addressed to
Admiral Lord Keith, and a copy of these instructions (which you will
transmit to his Lordship,) await orders from the Lords Commissioners
of the Admiralty, or his Lordship, for your further proceedings."

During the time we were heaving the anchor up, and setting the sails,
Buonaparte remained on the break of the poop; and was very
inquisitive about what was going on. He observed, "Your method of
performing this manoeuvre is quite different from the French;" and
added, "What I admire most in your ship, is the extreme silence and
orderly conduct of your men:--on board a French ship, every one calls
and gives orders, and they gabble like so many geese." Previous to his
quitting the Bellerophon he made the same remark, saying, "There has
been less noise in this ship, where there are six hundred men, during
the whole of the time I have been in her, than there was on board the
Epervier, with only one hundred, in the passage from Isle d'Aix to
Basque Roads."

Soon after the ship was under weigh, the Mouche joined, with three or
four sheep, a quantity of vegetables, and other refreshments,--a
present from the French Commodore to Buonaparte. After receiving them
on board, we made sail, accompanied by the Myrmidon, for England.

In working out, we passed within about a cable's length of the Superb.
He asked me if I considered that was near enough for a naval
engagement: I answered, that half the distance, or even less, would
suit much better; as it was a maxim in our navy, not to be further
from our enemy than to give room for working the yards, and
manoeuvring the ship.

He remained upon deck all the time the ship was beating out of the
Pertuis d'Antioche. Having cleared the Chasseron shoal about six P.M.,
dinner was served. He conversed a great deal at table, and seemed in
very good spirits; told several anecdotes of himself; among others,
one relating to Sir Sydney Smith. Knowing that I had served under that
officer on the coast of Syria, he turned to me and said, "Did Sir
Sydney Smith ever tell you the cause of his quarrel with me?" I
answered he had not. "Then," said he, "I will.--When the French army
was before St Jean d'Acre, he had a paper privately distributed among
the officers and soldiers, tending to induce them to revolt and quit
me; on which I issued a proclamation, denouncing the English
commanding-officer as a madman, and prohibiting all intercourse with
him. This nettled Sir Sydney so much, that he sent me a challenge to
meet him in single combat on the beach at Caiffa. My reply was, that
when Marlborough appeared for that purpose, I should be at his
service; but I had other duties to fulfil besides fighting a duel with
an English commodore." He pursued the subject of Syria, and said,
patting me (who was sitting next him) on the head; "If it had not been
for you English, I should have been Emperor of the East; but wherever
there is water to float a ship, we are sure to find you in our way."

During the 17th and 18th of July, the weather was very fine, and
nothing of note occurred. Several strange vessels were seen, about
which Buonaparte and his attendants were very inquisitive, in order, I
presume, that they might judge whether they would probably have
escaped or not, had they put to sea. The only ship of war fallen in
with on those days was the Bacchus sloop, which I pointed out; and at
the same time informed him, that we had several frigates cruising in
this position, for the purpose of intercepting him, had he got past
the ships stationed close in with the land. This, as it afterward
appeared, was not the case: the Endymion having gone into the Gironde,
the Liffey having sprung her bowsprit and returned to England, and the
others, from various causes, having quitted the station; so that, had
he passed the squadron off Rochefort, there can be little doubt he
would have made his voyage in safety to America.

About this time, Buonaparte amused himself by playing at cards after
breakfast: the game was _vingt-un_, in which all the party joined,
except myself. He proposed that I should play with them, but I told
him I had no money, making it a rule to leave it all with my wife
before I went to sea: on which he laughed, and good-humouredly offered
to lend me some, and trust me until we arrived in England: I, however,
declined his offer, having the numerous duties of the ship to attend
to.

As my despatch of the 14th instant to the Secretary of the Admiralty
had been very short, and written in great haste,--being desirous that
his Majesty's Ministers should be made acquainted with the important
arrangements agreed upon, as early as possible,--I considered it
right to make a more detailed report to the Commander in Chief; and
therefore wrote a despatch to Lord Keith, of which the following are
extracts, intending to send it by the officer who should announce to
him the Bellerophon's arrival in Torbay.


Extract of a Letter From Captain Maitland, Addressed To Admiral
Viscount Keith, G.C.B., Dated on Board H.M. Ship Bellerophon, at Sea,
July 18th, 1815.


"Having received directions from Sir Henry Hotham to forward the
accompanying despatch to your Lordship by an officer, I avail myself
of the opportunity to explain the circumstances under which I was
placed when induced to receive Napoleon Buonaparte into the ship I
command.

"After the first communication was made to me by Count Bertrand (a
copy of which, with my answer, has been forwarded to your Lordship by
Sir Henry Hotham) that Buonaparte was at Isle d'Aix, and actually
embarked on board the frigates for the purpose of proceeding to the
United States of America, my duty became peculiarly harassing and
anxious, owing to the numerous reports, that were daily brought from
all quarters, of his intention to escape in vessels of various
descriptions, and from different situations on the coast, of which the
limited means I possessed, together with the length of time requisite
to communicate with Sir Henry Hotham at Quiberon Bay, rendered the
success at least possible, and even probable. Thus situated, the enemy
having two frigates and a brig, while the force under my command
consisted of the Bellerophon and Slaney (having detached the Myrmidon
to reinforce the Daphne off the Mamusson passage, where the force was
considerably superior to her, and whence one of the reports stated
Buonaparte meant to sail,) another flag of truce was sent out, for the
ostensible reason of enquiring whether I had received an answer to
the former, but I soon ascertained the real one to be a proposal from
Buonaparte to embark for England in this ship.

"Taking into consideration all the circumstances of the probability of
the escape being effected, if the trial was made either in the
frigates, or clandestinely in a small vessel, as, had this ship been
disabled in action, there was no other with me that could produce any
effect on a frigate, and, from the experience I have had in blockading
the ports of the bay, knowing the impossibility of preventing small
vessels from getting to sea, and looking upon it as of the greatest
importance to get possession of the person of Buonaparte; I was
induced, without hesitation, to accede to the proposal, as far as
taking him on board, and proceeding with him to England: but, at the
same time, stating in the most clear and positive terms, that I had no
authority to make any sort of stipulation as to the reception he was
to meet with.

"I am happy to say, that the measures I have adopted have met with the
approbation of Sir Henry Hotham, and will, I trust and hope, receive
that of your Lordship, as well as of his Majesty's Government."

On the 29th, a conversation took place between Madame Bertrand and
myself, about Buonaparte's voyage to Elba. She asked me if I was
acquainted with Captain Usher. On my answering in the negative, she
said, "The Emperor is very fond of him: he gave him his portrait set
with diamonds, and has another which he intends for you." I replied,
"I hope not, as I cannot accept of it. Captain Usher's situation and
mine were very different, and what might be proper in him would not be
so in me." She rejoined, "If you do not accept of it, you will offend
him very much." "If that is the case," I said, "I shall be obliged to
you to take steps to prevent its being offered, as I wish to save him
the mortification, and myself the pain, of a refusal; and I feel it
absolutely impossible, situated as I am, to take a present from him.
In receiving him on board, I had no direct authority from my
Government, and I have yet to learn whether my conduct will be
approved of. Besides, were I to receive a present of such value, it
might possibly be said, that I was actuated by selfish motives;
whereas all the measures I have taken were dictated solely by the
desire of serving my country to the best of my judgment: if,
therefore, I am to receive any reward, it must come from that
quarter."

On the 20th of July, early in the morning, we spoke the Swiftsure, on
her way from England to reinforce me in the blockade of Rochefort.
The astonishment of Captain Webley can scarcely be conceived, when, on
his entering the ship, I said, "Well, I have got him." "Got him! got
whom?" "Why, Buonaparte; the man that has been keeping all Europe in a
ferment these last twenty years." "Is it possible?" said he; "well,
you are a lucky fellow." We had some further conversation; but Captain
Webley was not introduced to Buonaparte, who had not then left his
cabin; and as the Swiftsure was going to the southward, and I was
desirous of getting to England as quickly as possible, we soon parted
company.

During the 21st and 22nd of July, we exchanged signals with two or
three others of our ships, which I took care to explain were on the
look-out for my guest; and he seemed by this time pretty well
convinced that an attempt to elude our cruisers would have been
fruitless. On the latter day, the Prometheus showed her number, while
we were at dinner: when Buonaparte expressed a wish to know whether
the ships at Brest had hoisted the white flag or not. I sent for the
officer of the watch, and desired him to ask the question by
telegraph. In a few minutes he returned, with an answer in the
affirmative. Buonaparte made no remark upon this information; but
asked, with apparent indifference, how the question and answer had
been conveyed; and when I explained it to him, he approved highly of
the usefulness of the invention.

During meals, he always entered very freely and familiarly into
conversation with those about him, addressing himself frequently to
Las Cases and me; asking many questions about the manners, customs,
and laws of the English; often repeating the observation he had made
on first coming on board, that he must gain all the information
possible on those subjects, and conform himself to them, as he should
probably end his life among that people. Monsieur Las Cases, it
appears, had emigrated from France early in the revolution, and
remained in England until the peace of Amiens, when he was allowed to
return to his own country.

Sunday, the 23rd of July, we passed very near to Ushant: the day was
fine, and Buonaparte remained upon deck great part of the morning. He
cast many a melancholy look at the coast of France, but made few
observations on it. He asked several questions about the coast of
England; whether it was safe to approach; its distance, and the part
we were likely to make. About eight in the evening, the high land of
Dartmoor was discovered, when I went into the cabin and told him of
it: I found him in a flannel dressing-gown, nearly undressed, and
preparing to go to bed. He put on his greatcoat, came out upon deck,
and remained some time looking at the land; asking its distance from
Torbay, and the probable time of our arrival there.

At daybreak of the 24th of July, we were close off Dartmouth. Count
Bertrand went into the cabin, and informed Buonaparte of it, who came
upon deck about half-past four, and remained on the poop until the
ship anchored in Torbay. He talked with admiration of the boldness of
the coast; saying, "You have in that respect a great advantage over
France, which is surrounded by rocks and dangers." On opening Torbay,
he was much struck with the beauty of the scenery; and exclaimed,
"What a beautiful country! it very much resembles the bay of Porto
Ferrajo, in Elba."

The ship was scarcely at anchor, when an officer came alongside,
bringing an order from Lord Keith; of which I give an extract.


Extract of an Order from Admiral Viscount Keith, G.C.B., addressed to
Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Ville de Paris,
Hamoaze, 23rd July, 1815.


"Captain Sartorius, of His Majesty's ship Slaney, delivered to me last
night, at eleven o'clock, your despatch of the 14th instant,
acquainting me that Buonaparte had proposed to embark on board the
ship you command; and that you had acceded thereto, with the intention
of proceeding to Torbay, there to wait for further orders. I lost no
time in forwarding your letter by Captain Sartorius to the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, in order that their Lordships might,
through him, be acquainted with every circumstance that had occurred
on an occasion of so much importance; and you may expect orders from
their Lordships for your further guidance. You are to remain in Torbay
until you receive such orders; and in the mean time, in addition to
the directions already in your possession, you are most positively
ordered to prevent every person whatever from coming on board the ship
you command, except the officers and men who compose her crew; nor is
any person whatever, whether in His Majesty's service or not, who does
not belong to the ship, to be suffered to come on board, either for
the purpose of visiting the officers, or on any pretence whatever,
without express permission either from the Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty, or from me. As I understand from Captain Sartorius, that
General Gourgaud refused to deliver the letter with which he was
charged for the Prince Regent, to any person except his Royal
Highness, you are to take him out of the Slaney, into the ship you
command, until you receive directions from the Admiralty on the
subject, and order that ship back to Plymouth Sound, when Captain
Sartorius returns from London."

Along with the above order, I received a letter from Lord Keith, of
which I give some extracts.

"You will perceive by the newspapers, that the intelligence had
reached London before Captain Sartorius, owing to his long passage. I
have a letter from Lord Melville to-day, enforcing in the strongest
manner the former orders,--even that no person, myself or Sir John
Duckworth excepted, shall be suffered to come on board the ship, till
orders are sent from Government; which you will be so good as strictly
to comply with. Let him and his want for nothing; and send to me for
any thing Brixham cannot furnish; I will send it to you by a small
vessel. You may say to Napoleon, that I am under the greatest personal
obligations to him for his attention to my nephew, who was taken and
brought before him at Belle Alliance, and who must have died, if he
had not ordered a surgeon to dress him immediately, and sent him to a
hut. I am glad it fell into your hands at this time, because a
Frenchman had been sent from Paris on the mission, a Monsieur Drigni."

Buonaparte recollected the circumstance alluded to, and seemed much
gratified with Lord Keith's acknowledgments.

Napoleon and all his attendants were very anxious to see as many
newspapers as possible, but particularly the Courier, which they
considered the Ministerial paper, and most likely to contain the
intentions of Government respecting them. They received little
encouragement from any of them, but least of all from those which are
supposed to take the Ministerial side in politics, as they not only
contained a great deal that was personally offensive, but stated, in
very plain terms, that none of the party would be allowed to land in
England, and that St Helena was the probable place of their ultimate
destination. Buonaparte himself always affected to consider this as a
mere newspaper report, though I believe it gave him a good deal of
uneasiness. His followers received it with much irritation and
impatience, frequently endeavouring to convince me that our Government
could have no right to dispose of them in that way, and talking to me,
as if I had been one of his Majesty's Ministers, and had influence in
determining on their future destination. All I could say on the
subject did not prevent them from frequently recurring to it, and
appealing against the injustice of such a measure.

This morning General Gourgaud returned from the Slaney, which we found
lying here, not having been permitted to land, and having refused to
deliver the letter he had been charged with for the Prince Regent to
any person except his Royal Highness himself.

When I was conversing with Madame Bertrand, she said, "Had the Emperor
gained the battle of Waterloo, he would have been firmly seated on the
throne of France." I answered, "It certainly might have protracted his
downfall, but, in all probability, he would have been overthrown at
last, as the Russians were fast advancing, and he never could have
resisted the combined forces of the Allies." To which she replied, "If
your army had been defeated, the Russians never would have acted
against him." "That I cannot believe," I said, "as they were using
every effort to join and support the Allies; and the assertion is
ridiculous." "Ah," said she, "you may laugh at it, and so may other
people, nor will it, perhaps, now be discovered; but remember what I
say, and be assured that at some future period it will be proved,
that it never was Alexander's intention to cross the frontiers of
France, in opposition to him."

In the course of the day I received many applications for admittance
into the ship: among others a note from a lady residing in the
neighbourhood, accompanied by a basket of fruit, requesting a boat
might be sent for her next morning. I returned a civil answer,
informing her that my instructions would not admit of her request
being complied with: no more fruit was sent from that quarter. Lord
Gwydir and Lord Charles Bentinck also applied for admittance, but with
no better success.

No sooner was Buonaparte's arrival known in the neighbourhood, than
the ship was surrounded by a crowd of boats, people being drawn from
all quarters to see this extraordinary man. He came often upon deck,
and showed himself at the gangways and stern windows, apparently for
the purpose of gratifying their curiosity, of which, as he observed to
me, the English appeared to have a very large portion.

In the evening, the officer who had been sent to Plymouth, on the
ship's arrival, with despatches for Lord Keith, returned, bringing
letters, from which I give the following extracts:--


Extract of a Letter from Admiral Viscount Keith, G.C.B., addressed to
Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Ville de Paris,
Hamoaze, July 24, 1815.


"The officer of the ship you command has just delivered to me your
letter of this date, reporting your arrival in Torbay, with the
Bellerophon and Myrmidon, having on board Napoleon Buonaparte and his
suite. I have also received your other letter, explaining the
circumstances under which you were placed, when you were induced to
receive Napoleon on board; and I shall transmit the same to the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, in confident expectation, that his
Majesty's Government will fully approve of your conduct."


Extract of a Letter from Admiral Viscount Keith, G.C.B., addressed to
Captain Maitland, of H.M.S, Bellerophon, dated 24th July, 1815.


"I take the opportunity of your officer's return, to congratulate you
and the nation, and to thank you for the perfect manner in which you
entered into my views on the subject, and for the management of the
blockade, about which I was most anxious. It will not be long ere you
are instructed by the Government: the first express would arrive about
four o'clock this morning, and I attempt a telegraph message, but it
is cloudy. I beg you will send for any thing you may want, to me, and
it shall be sent instantly; and I beg to present my respects to
Napoleon, and if I can render him any civility, I will consider it my
duty, as well as in gratitude for Captain Elphinstone's report of the
attention he received from him on the field of battle."

During the 25th of July, the concourse of people round the ship was
greater than the day before, and the anxiety of the Frenchmen was
considerably augmented by the confidence with which the newspapers
spoke of the intention to remove Buonaparte to St Helena. In the
afternoon, he walked above an hour on deck, frequently stood at the
gangway, or opposite to the quarter-deck ports, for the purpose of
giving the people an opportunity of seeing him, and, whenever he
observed any well-dressed women, pulled his hat off, and bowed to
them.

At dinner he conversed as usual, was inquisitive about the kinds of
fish produced on the coast of England, and ate part of a turbot that
was at table, with much relish. He then spoke of the character of the
fishermen and boatmen on our coast, saying, "They are generally
smugglers as well as fishermen; at one time a great many of them were
in my pay, for the purpose of obtaining intelligence, bringing money
over to France, and assisting prisoners of war to escape. They even
offered, for a large sum of money, to seize the person of Louis, and
deliver him into my hands; but as they could not guarantee the
preservation of his life, I would not give my consent to the measure."

At three in the morning of the 26th of July, Captain Sartorius
returned from London; having carried my despatch announcing
Buonaparte's intention to embark in the Bellerophon, and brought with
him orders for me to proceed to Plymouth Sound. We immediately got
under weigh, accompanied by the Myrmidon and Slaney. While heaving the
anchor up, Las Cases came upon deck, when I told him the ship was
ordered to Plymouth, supposing, if he thought it requisite, he would
acquaint his master. Soon after the ship was at sea, Madame Bertrand
made her appearance, when she attacked me with some warmth for having
neglected to acquaint Buonaparte with the orders I had received, and
told me he was excessively offended. As she had once or twice before,
when every thing did not go exactly as she wished, held the same
language, I determined to ascertain whether Buonaparte had expressed
any dissatisfaction, and, if so, to come to an explanation with him,
as, though I was inclined to treat him with every proper
consideration, it never was my intention to be looked upon as
responsible to him for my movements; I therefore told Las Cases what
she had said, and requested he would ascertain whether Napoleon really
had felt displeased. He immediately went into the cabin, and on his
return assured me that there must have been some mistake, as nothing
of the kind had taken place.

The ship's removal to the westward was by no means an agreeable event
to the suite of my guest: they naturally reasoned, that, had it been
the intention of the British Government to allow him to land in
England, he would not have been removed further from the Metropolis.
He, however, made no observations on the subject himself; still
affecting to consider the reports in the newspapers as the surmises of
the editors.

We had, during the forenoon of the 26th of July, to beat up from the
Start to Plymouth Sound, against a strong northerly wind. Buonaparte
remained upon deck the greater part of the day. When going into the
Sound, I pointed out the Breakwater to him, and described the manner
in which they were forming it. He said, it was a great national
undertaking, and highly honourable to the country; enquired the
estimated expense, and seemed surprised, when I told him it was
expected to be finished for something less than a million sterling. He
added, "I have expended a large sum of money on the port of Cherbourg,
and in forming the Boyart Fort, to protect the anchorage at Isle
d'Aix; but I fear now, those and many other of my improvements will be
neglected, and allowed to go to ruin."

When the ship had anchored, I informed him I was going to wait on the
Commander-in-chief, and requested to know if I could convey any
message from him. He desired me to return his thanks to Lord Keith,
for the kind intentions he had expressed towards him in his letters to
me, and to say he was extremely anxious to see his Lordship, if it
could be done with propriety. On delivering his message to Lord Keith,
he answered, "I would wait upon him with much pleasure, but, to tell
you the truth, I have as yet received no instructions as to the manner
in which he is to be treated; and until I do receive these, I cannot
well visit him." He then gave me some precautionary orders to prevent
his escape, or any attempt to effect it. From which I give the
extracts below.


Extract of an Order from Admiral Viscount Keith, G.C.B., to Captain
Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Hamoaze, July 26, 1815.


"In addition to the orders already received, you are to pay the
strictest regard and attention to the directions contained in the
enclosed extract of a letter from the Secretary of the Admiralty. If
General Gourgaud has not already been taken out of the Slaney, you are
to cause him to be removed immediately into the ship you command. I
enclose, for your information, a copy of a general order that I have
issued, forbidding communication with the ship you command; and it is
my intention to order the Liffey and Eurotas to anchor near you, and
to row guard."


Extract of a Letter from the Secretary of the Admiralty to Admiral
Viscount Keith, G.C.B., dated 24th July, 1815, enclosed in the
foregoing.


"Referring your Lordship to Mr Croker's letter of the 1st instant,
respecting Buonaparte, I am to signify their Lordships' directions to
you, to give the most positive orders to Captain Maitland to prevent
all communication whatever with the shore but through him, and by him
through your Lordship; and on no account to permit any person
whatsoever to go on board the ship, without your Lordship's permission
given in writing for that purpose; which permission, for obvious
reasons, will only be granted in such cases as the public service may
require: and proper measures are to be taken to prevent boats and
small craft from crowding near the Bellerophon.

"Your Lordship will restrict the captains and commanders of your
squadron from communicating, until further orders, with the
Bellerophon."


There was also enclosed the following copy of a Memorandum, addressed
to the respective Captains of H.M. Ships Liffey and Eurotas.


                                          "Ville de Paris, in Hamoaze,
                                                      26th July, 1815.

"MEMO:

"The Liffey and Eurotas are to take up an anchorage on each side of
the Bellerophon, at a convenient distance, and observe the following
directions, as well for the purpose of preventing the escape of
Buonaparte, or any of his suite, from that ship, as for restraining
shore-boats and others from approaching too close to her, either from
curiosity or any other motive.

"A constant watch of an officer, a quarter-watch, and double
sentinels, are to be kept by day, as well as a boat manned and armed
alongside, in constant readiness, as a guard-boat: the same
precaution is to be observed all night, with the exception, that one
of the boats, in charge of a lieutenant, is to row guard, and to be
relieved every hour.

"No shore-boats, or others, are to be suffered, either by night or by
day, to approach nearer the Bellerophon than one cable's length; and
no boats are to be permitted to loiter about the ship, even at that
distance, either from curiosity or any other motive: neither the
captains of the Liffey or Eurotas, nor any other officer belonging to
those or any other ships, are to go on board the Bellerophon, either
to visit, or on any pretence whatever, without permission from me in
writing."

                                               Signed, KEITH, Admiral.

A Copy.

  Keith, Admiral.
  To the respective Captains of the
  Liffey and Eurotas.


When I returned on board, I found the frigates had taken their
positions as directed in the last order, and their boats were
endeavouring as much as possible to keep the shore-boats at the
specified distance from the ship. I stated to Buonaparte what Lord
Keith had said; to which he answered, "I am extremely anxious to see
the Admiral, and therefore beg he will not stand upon ceremony: I
shall be satisfied to be treated as a private person, until the
British Government has determined in what light I am to be
considered." He then complained of the two frigates being placed as
guard-ships over him, "as if," said he, "I were not perfectly secure
on board a British line-of-battle ship;" and added, "The guard-ships'
boats have been firing musquetry all the evening, to keep the
shore-boats at a distance: it disturbs and distresses me, and I shall
be obliged to you to prevent it, if it lies in your power." I
immediately sent to the Captains of the frigates, to put a stop to
the firing.

On the 27th of July, I received a letter from the Secretary of the
Admiralty, of which I give an extract:--


Extract of a Letter from the Secretary of the Admiralty, addressed to
Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated 25th July, 1815.


"I have received and laid before my Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty, your letter of yesterday's date, reporting your arrival in
the Bellerophon in Torbay, accompanied by the Myrmidon, having on
board Napoleon Buonaparte and suite, and transmitting a copy of a
letter you had addressed to Admiral Lord Keith, reporting your
proceedings, under the various circumstances which occurred prior to
his embarkation, of which their Lordships have been pleased to direct
me to signify their approval."

I waited on Lord Keith in the morning, and carried with me
Buonaparte's original letter to the Prince Regent, which General
Gourgaud had refused to deliver to Captain Sartorius: finding that one
of his own officers would not be allowed to proceed with it, he now
consented to its being forwarded through the Admiral. I reported to
his Lordship all the occurrences of the previous day; and that, in
consequence of the frequent repetition in the newspapers of its being
the intention of his Majesty's Government to send Buonaparte to St
Helena, he, as well as the officers of his suite, had expressed much
uneasiness. I also carried a message from him, stating his desire to
see his Lordship, and that he would willingly waive all ceremony, and
be considered as a private person. To which Lord Keith answered, "I
shall now have no difficulty whatever, having received full
instructions as to the manner in which he is to be treated: he is to
be considered as a General Officer, and have the respect due to that
rank paid him, and no more: you may therefore say I shall wait on him
to-morrow forenoon." He then put into my hands the following
additional orders.


Extract of a Letter from Admiral Viscount Keith, G.C.B., addressed to
Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Ville de Paris,
Hamoaze, 27th July, 1815.


"I herewith transmit an extract of an order, containing certain
directions relative to Buonaparte and his suite, and you are forthwith
to carry the same into execution; sending on board the Liffey or
Myrmidon, with directions similar to those that have been addressed to
yourself, such of his suite as are to be withdrawn from the ship you
command."


Extract of an Order from the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, to
Admiral Viscount Keith, G.C.B., dated July 25th, 1815.


"That he should give immediate orders, that, upon the arrival of the
Bellerophon, Napoleon Buonaparte should remain, until the Prince
Regent's further pleasure shall be signified, on board of that, or
such other ship of war as we shall appoint, and shall not be permitted
on any account to come on shore; or to hold communication with the
shore, or with other vessels, either personally, or by writing. Not
more than four or five persons of his suite (exclusive of menial
servants) are to remain on board the same ship with himself: the
remainder of his suite are to be kept under similar restraint, on
board of other vessels of war. Napoleon Buonaparte is to be considered
and addressed as a General Officer."

In consequence of those orders, several of the officers of inferior
rank, and some of the servants, were sent to the frigates appointed to
guard us.

In the afternoon Sir Richard and Lady Strachan, accompanied by Mrs
Maitland, came alongside the ship. Buonaparte was walking the deck,
and, when I told him my wife was in the boat, he went to the gangway,
pulled off his hat, and asked her if she would not come up and visit
him. She shook her head; and I informed him, that my orders were so
positive, I could not even allow her to come on board. He answered,
"C'est dur, ca." "That is very hard." And addressing himself to her,
"Milord Keith est un peu trop severe; n'est-ce pas, Madame?" "Lord
Keith is a little too severe; is he not, Madam?" He then said to me,
"Ma foi, son portrait ne la flatte pas; elle est encore plus jolie que
lui." "I assure you her portrait is not flattering; she is handsomer
than it is." I told him Sir Richard Strachan was in the boat with her,
and that he was second in command of the Channel fleet: he bowed to
him, and said, "He appears a very young man to hold so high a rank."

There were this day a great many boats round the ship, full of people,
among which were a number of well-dressed females. He expressed
himself in strong terms of admiration of the beauty of the English
women, and was desirous of knowing which were the ladies,--"les dames
comme il faut," as he termed it; as they were all so well dressed that
he could not distinguish them.

In the evening a letter was sent to me by Lord Keith, of which I
subjoin an extract:--


Extract of a Letter from Admiral Viscount Keith, G.C.B., addressed to
Captain Maitland of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Ville de Paris, Hamoaze,
27th July, 1815.


"From the representation you have made to me of the dissatisfaction
expressed by Buonaparte, on observing by the newspapers that he was to
be sent to St Helena; it will be necessary that you redouble your
vigilance to prevent his escape; and you are therefore to station
double sentinels, and resort to every other means that may be
necessary for frustrating any such intention."

On the 28th of July, Lord Keith came on board, between eleven and
twelve o'clock, and was shown by me into the cabin, where Count
Bertrand introduced him to Buonaparte. I immediately withdrew, and
cannot therefore state what passed between them; but Lord Keith
afterwards informed me, that Buonaparte had been very anxious to know
whether the Government had come to any determination with regard to
his disposal; of which his Lordship professed total ignorance.

After Lord Keith came out of the cabin, he remained some time with
Buonaparte's suite, who were collected in the state room. Madame
Bertrand drew him aside, and entered into conversation with him,
saying what she had repeated to me a hundred times, that it would be
the height of injustice to send them to St Helena, and endeavouring
to persuade him to interfere in preventing her husband at least from
going, should Napoleon be sent there.

During the whole of the 29th of July it rained incessantly, and
nothing worth relating took place: the Frenchmen were deprived of
their usual amusement of admiring the ladies, and being admired in
return, not a boat having made its appearance. They often remarked,
with the characteristic vivacity of their nation, that they were
placed in the situation of Tantalus,--so many beauties in view,
without the possibility of approaching them.

On Sunday, the 30th of July, the crowd of boats was greater than I
ever remember to have seen at one time. I am certain I speak within
bounds when I state, that upwards of a thousand were collected round
the ship, in each of which, on an average, there were not fewer than
eight people. The crush was so great, as to render it quite impossible
for the guard-boats to keep them off; though a boat belonging to one
of the frigates made use of very violent means to effect it,
frequently running against small boats, containing women, with such
force as nearly to upset them, and alarming the ladies extremely. The
French officers were very indignant at such rude proceedings, saying,
"Is this your English liberty? Were such a thing to happen in France,
the men would rise with one accord and throw that officer and his crew
overboard."

After the ship's arrival in England, Buonaparte seldom left the cabin
earlier than five o'clock in the afternoon; passing his time in
walking up and down the after-cabin, reading a great deal,[8] and
often falling asleep on the sopha, having within these two or three
years become very lethargic.

         [Footnote 8: The books that seemed to occupy his attention,
         when I had an opportunity of observing him, were, a Life of
         Washington, and a translation of Ossian's Poems.]

I this day informed him, that Lord Keith had received an intimation,
that Sir Henry Bunbury, one of the Under Secretaries of State, was to
arrive in the course of the day with the decision of the British
Government as to his future disposal. He asked me many questions, but,
although Lord Keith had acquainted me that Buonaparte was to go to St
Helena, he had at the same time desired me not to communicate this
information, and I was therefore obliged to evade his interrogatories
as I best could.

In the newspapers of this day there appeared the lists of persons
proscribed by the Government of France. Among the first class were the
names of Bertrand, Savary, and Lallemand: the first treated it with
derision, the two others appeared much alarmed, and often asked me if
I thought it possible the British Government would deliver them up to
Louis. I said, "Decidedly not; you have been received on board an
English man of war, and it never can be the intention of the Ministers
to deliver you over to punishment." They were not, however, satisfied
by any means; and a French frigate, bearing the white flag, which lay
in Hamoaze, was an object of much jealousy to them.

When I waited on Lord Keith, the morning of the 31st of July, he
acquainted me that Sir Henry Bunbury had arrived, and was to accompany
him on board at ten o'clock. He also showed me a notification of the
decision of Government respecting Buonaparte, in which he was styled
General throughout. It stated, that he was to be sent to St Helena,
and to be permitted to take with him three of the higher class of
those that had accompanied him from France, and twelve domestics, who
were to be selected by himself, with the exception of Savary and
Lallemand, who were not on any account to be permitted to go with him.
I immediately returned on board, to be in readiness to receive Lord
Keith and Sir Henry Bunbury; and informed Buonaparte, that he might
expect them. He asked me if I knew what they were to communicate; and
having then received his Lordship's sanction for doing so, I told him,
I understood it was determined he was to be sent to St Helena. His
mind had, by this time, been so much prepared by the newspapers for
that event, that he did not show any very strong emotion at receiving
the intimation; though he complained, in strong terms, of the
injustice of such a measure. As, however, the Admiral's barge was seen
approaching, and I was obliged to go upon deck to receive him, I had
very little conversation with him at that time.

Lord Keith and Sir Henry Bunbury arrived about half-past ten in the
forenoon, when I showed them into the cabin, where Buonaparte was
attended by Count Bertrand. I then withdrew, leaving them shut up with
him for about half an hour, when Lord Keith called me into the
fore-cabin, where all the suite were assembled, and I presented each
of them to the Admiral and Sir Henry. They all appeared very much
distressed, but particularly Savary and Lallemand; who were extremely
urgent to know how they were to be disposed of; protesting, most
vehemently, against their being given up to France, as a breach of all
faith and honour. Madame Bertrand again tried to induce Lord Keith to
use his influence with our Government, to prevent Bertrand from
accompanying Buonaparte to St Helena.

As soon as the Admiral had left the ship, Buonaparte sent for me, and
showed me the same paper Lord Keith had communicated to me in the
morning. When I had read it, he complained vehemently of his treatment
in being sent to St Helena, saying, "The idea of it is perfect horror
to me. To be placed for life on an island within the Tropics, at an
immense distance from any land, cut off from all communication with
the world, and every thing that I hold dear in it!--c'est pis que la
cage de fer de Tamerlan. (It is worse than Tamerlane's iron cage.) I
would prefer being delivered up to the Bourbons. Among other insults,"
said he,--"but that is a mere bagatelle, a very secondary
consideration,--they style me General! they can have no right to call
me General; they may as well call me Archbishop, for I was head of the
church, as well as the army. If they do not acknowledge me as Emperor,
they ought as First Consul; they have sent Ambassadors to me as such;
and your King, in his letters, styled me brother. Had they confined
me in the Tower of London, or one of the fortresses in England,
(though not what I had hoped from the generosity of the English
people,) I should not have so much cause of complaint; but to banish
me to an island within the Tropics! They might as well have signed my
death-warrant at once, as it is impossible a man of my habit of body
can live long in such a climate."

He then expressed a desire to write another letter to the Prince
Regent; and I carried it the same afternoon to Lord Keith, by whom it
was immediately forwarded to London.

Generals Savary and Lallemand this day made many appeals to me on the
injustice of our Government delivering them up to France; saying they
had not a doubt it was intended, else why except them from
accompanying the Emperor, as they were both married men, and Savary
the father of a large family:--it was not the wish of either to have
gone to St Helena; but their being expressly excepted, and their names
appearing in the list of proscribed, was but too sure a proof of their
intended fate. Savary added, "Were I to be allowed a fair and
impartial trial, I should have nothing to fear, never having accepted
a situation under Louis; but at present, when faction runs so high, I
should inevitably be sacrificed to the fury of party. Lallemand's case
is quite different: he held a command under the King, and, on
Napoleon's return from Elba, joined him with his troops; therefore,
his situation would at any time be a dangerous one:--but I lived in
the country all the time Louis was in France, and did not come forward
until Buonaparte's arrival in Paris, when he directed me to take the
command of the Gendarmerie."

Lallemand said, "My reason for coming on board the Bellerophon with
Las Cases on the morning of the 14th, was to ascertain whether there
would be a risk of any of the Emperor's followers being delivered up
to the French Government, in the event of their accompanying him to
England; when you assured me there could be no danger of it." I
replied, "My answer to you was, that I was of opinion there could be
no risk of the British Government taking such a step; and I see no
reason now to alter that opinion. As I have received you on board the
Bellerophon, I consider you under the protection of the British flag,
and myself, in a great measure, responsible for your personal safety;
and under that impression I will write on the subject to Lord
Melville, as the Minister under whose immediate control I act, that
your minds may be set at rest, though, I repeat, you run no hazard of
being sent to France." The same evening, before I went to bed, I wrote
the letter which follows:--


                                                  "H.M.S. Bellerophon,
                                      Plymouth Sound, 31st July, 1815.

"MY LORD,

"I am induced to address your Lordship in consequence of having
observed, in the intimation delivered to Napoleon Buonaparte of the
number of persons allowed to accompany him to the Island of St Helena,
that the names of Savary and Lallemand are expressly excepted, which,
together with their being proscribed in the French newspapers, has
created in them a belief that it is the intention of His Majesty's
Government to deliver them up to the King of France. Far be it from me
to assume such an idea; but I hope your Lordship will make allowance
for the feelings of an officer who has nothing so dear to him as his
honour, and who could not bear that a stain should be affixed to a
name he has ever endeavoured to bear unblemished. These two men,
Savary and Lallemand (what their characters or conduct in their own
country may be I know not), threw themselves under the protection of
the British flag; that protection was granted them with the sanction
of my name. It is true, no conditions were stipulated for; but I acted
in the full confidence that their lives would be held sacred, or they
should never have put foot in the ship I command, without being made
acquainted that it was for the purpose of delivering them over to the
laws of their country.

"I again beg leave to repeat to your Lordship, that I am far from
supposing it to be the intention of His Majesty's Government to
deliver these men over to the laws of their country; but, as they are
strongly impressed with that belief, and I look upon myself as the
cause of their being in their present situation, I most earnestly beg
your Lordship's influence may be exerted that two men may not be
brought to the scaffold who claimed and obtained at my hands the
protection of the British flag.

  "I have the honour to be,
                        &c. &c. &c.
                                                  "FRED. L. MAITLAND."

  "The Viscount Melville,
  &c. &c. &c."


I felt convinced that Buonaparte, after the notification he had
received, would be too much depressed in spirits to make his
appearance on deck this day; and sent a boat to some of my friends,
who were waiting in hopes of seeing him, to say there was no chance of
his coming out, as he was much distressed at the communication which
had been made to him. I was, therefore, a good deal surprised, on
turning round, to find him standing at my elbow; and I can only
account for his showing himself as usual, by supposing either that he
was not in fact so much annoyed as I had believed him to be, or that
he was actuated by a desire of creating a feeling of commiseration
among the English people in his behalf.

At dinner he conversed as usual; and, indeed, it was quite astonishing
with what elasticity his spirits regained their usual cheerfulness,
after such trials and disappointments. He never, in my hearing,
threatened to commit suicide; nor do I believe he did on any occasion:
the only expression I ever heard him make use of, that could in any
way be construed into such a threat, was, that he would not go to St
Helena,--"Je n'irai pas a St Helene."

As Buonaparte always retired early to bed, it was the custom for the
French ladies and officers to assemble every evening in the ward-room,
and partake of wine and water, punch, or bishop--a mixture consisting
of Port, Madeira, nutmeg, and other ingredients, well known to
sailors, and much relished by our foreign guests.

I was sitting this evening next Montholon, when Madame Bertrand
entered; I said to her, "Will you not sit down and take something?"
She gave an answer which I took for No; and passed rapidly into the
first lieutenant's cabin, which she had occupied since she came on
board. Montholon, who had observed her with more attention than I had
done, immediately rose and followed her. There was instantly a shriek
from the cabin, and a great uproar; and some one called out 'The
Countess is overboard.' I ran upon deck, that, in the event of its
being so, a boat might be lowered down, or the guard-boats called to
her assistance. On looking over the quarter, and seeing no splash in
the water, I felt satisfied it was a false alarm, and returned to the
ward-room. Madame Bertrand had by this time been placed on her bed,
where she was lying in strong hysterics, at intervals abusing the
English nation and its Government, in the most vehement and unmeasured
terms; sometimes in French and sometimes in English. Lallemand was
walking up and down the ward-room much agitated, joining in the abuse;
saying, among other things, "that it was horrible to bring a set of
people on board the ship for the purpose of butchering them." I turned
to him, and said, "Monsieur Lallemand, what a woman says in the state
of violent irritation that Madame Bertrand at present is, I consider
of little consequence, and am willing to make every allowance for the
situation you are placed in; but I cannot stand by and hear such terms
used of the Government of my country; and if you do not desist, or
make use of more respectful language, I shall be under the necessity
of taking measures that will be very unpleasant both to you and
myself."

This had the effect of silencing him. When the bustle had subsided, I
retired to my cabin, and was employed in writing the foregoing letter
to Lord Melville, in behalf of Messrs Savary and Lallemand; when the
latter, attended by Generals Montholon and Gourgaud, came in. They
immediately entered into conversation with me about the cruelty of
their situation: among many other things, they said, "You may depend
upon it, the Emperor never will go to St Helena; he will sooner put
himself to death; he is a man of determined character, and what he
says he will do." "Has he ever said he will put himself to death?" I
asked. They answered, "No; but he has said he will not go, which
amounts to the same thing; and were he to consent himself, here are
three of us who are determined to prevent him." I told them they had
better consider the consequences well, before they ventured on a
measure of that kind.

The next day, August 1st, 1815, I waited on Lord Keith, and reported
all that had occurred during the preceding day. I also showed him the
letter I had written and meant to send to Lord Melville, respecting
Generals Savary and Lallemand; he read it, and said, "that though he
did not agree with me in opinion as to my honour or character being
implicated, yet that he saw no harm in the letter." He then said, "You
may tell those gentlemen who have threatened to be Buonaparte's
executioners, that the law of England awards death to murderers, and
that the certain consequence of such an act will be finishing their
career on a gallows."

After quitting his Lordship, I had an interview with Sir Henry
Bunbury, previous to his setting out for London, and stated to him my
feelings respecting the cruelty of delivering up to the French
Government, men who had been received under the protection of the
British flag. I said that I had no belief myself that any such
intention existed; but that they were so strongly impressed with the
conviction of it, that I had been induced to write to Lord Melville,
and now begged to state to him, that I should consider myself
dishonoured for ever, if they suffered death through my means. He
listened, but did not speak till I had finished; when he told me he
would repeat what I had said to his Majesty's Ministers.

Madame Bertrand kept her bed the whole of this day, and did not appear
at dinner. When Buonaparte came upon deck, he asked Mr O'Meara, the
surgeon, after her health; and then said, with an incredulous smile,
"Do you really think, Doctor, she meant to drown herself?" I put the
same question to Montholon; who said he had not a doubt of it, for,
when he followed her into the cabin, she was in the act of throwing
herself out of the gallery window; that he rushed forward and caught
hold of her, and that she continued suspended by the bar that goes
across the window, with the greater part of her body hanging out,
until he received assistance to drag her in. The bar above-mentioned
had been placed there for the purpose of preventing people from
falling overboard when the window was open and the ship had much
motion at sea.

On returning on board after being with Lord Keith, I went into Madame
Bertrand's cabin to see how she was, and found her in bed. I asked
her, how she could be so indiscreet as to attempt to destroy herself?
"Oh! I am driven to desperation," she said; "I do not know what I do;
I cannot persuade my husband to remain behind, he being determined to
accompany the Emperor to St Helena." She then ran into a great deal of
abuse of Napoleon, saying, "If his ends are served, he does not care
what becomes of other people. 'Tis true he has always given Bertrand
lucrative and honourable situations, but the expense attending them is
such, that it was impossible to save money; and he has never given him
a grant of land, or any thing that permanently bettered our
fortune."[9] On another occasion, she came into the cabin which I
occupied, when I was writing, and, after exacting a promise of secrecy
towards the remainder of the suite, she entreated I would take
measures to prevent her husband from accompanying Buonaparte, and
begged me to write a letter in her name to Lord Keith, to induce him
to interfere. I told her it would appear extremely officious in me to
write on such a subject, but that any thing she chose to put on paper
I would deliver to his Lordship. She did write, and I carried the
letter; but his Lordship declined interfering, desiring me to say, he
considered it the duty of every good wife to follow the fortunes of
her husband. In the course of the conversation above-mentioned, she
became extremely warm in speaking of Napoleon, saying, "He deserves
nothing at our hands; and, indeed, there is not one of his people who
would not most gladly quit him." Whenever she became animated, she
could not pour out her feelings in the English language fast enough,
(though she spoke it remarkably well, having received her education
partly in England,) when she had always recourse to French; and though
I frequently reminded her that there was nothing but a piece of
canvass between us and the ward-room, where there were generally some
of the French officers, I could by no means keep her within bounds.
The consequence of which was, that all she said was heard and
understood by one of them. When Madame Bertrand had left me, Count
Montholon requested to speak with me in private. He carried me up to
his cabin on the quarter-deck, where I found Generals Gourgaud and
Lallemand, who told me they had been informed of what Madame Bertrand
had said to me; and they had requested to see me, for the purpose of
contradicting her assertion, that they were desirous of quitting
Buonaparte: that, so far from that being the case, there was not one
of them that would not follow him with pleasure wherever he might be
sent, or that would not lay down his life to serve him: they also
required secrecy towards the Countess. I answered, "Why really,
gentlemen, this is very extraordinary; you pretend to know all that
passed in a private conversation I have had with Madame Bertrand, and
then to bind me to secrecy: you may depend upon it, I will enter into
no such engagement, until I know by what means you obtained your
information." They then told me that one of them had been in the
quarter-gallery, and overheard all she said.

         [Footnote 9: [I cannot assent to your leaving out what Madame
         Bertrand said respecting Bonaparte. But if she spoke
         favourably of him in her calmer moments, I think it might be
         mentioned in this place so as to claim some allowance for her
         irritated state of feelings. It is, by-the-by, precisely at
         such moments that real opinions start out which are at other
         times carefully suppressed. What she said in her passion was
         very true: B. was not fond of rendering his favourites
         independent. I really think you cannot leave it out: as well
         omit the threat of Savary &c., to kill B.--SCOTT.]]

Nothing of importance occurred during the 2nd of August. Buonaparte
did not appear upon deck; nor would he consent to nominate the people
who were to accompany him to St Helena; he still seemed to indulge a
hope, that the Government might be induced to reconsider the decision.
I had half an hour's conversation with him in the cabin: it consisted,
on his part, of complaints of the cruelty of sending him to St Helena.
He likewise asked me many questions about that island, as to its
extent, climate, and productions, whether it would be possible to take
exercise on horseback, if there was game of any kind upon it, &c.: to
all of which I could only answer from report, never having visited the
island myself. He conversed very little at dinner, and appeared
unwell. In the evening, General Bertrand informed me that the
sentinel's calling out "All's well!" during the night disturbed him,
and prevented his sleeping; upon which I gave directions they should
not do so while he remained on board.

During the 3rd of August Buonaparte kept his cabin. When I went to the
Admiral, I met him escorting some ladies, in company with Sir William
Lemon, to the Ville de Paris's barge. On being introduced to Sir
William, he told me that a report was in circulation that a boat was
to have been under the Bellerophon's stern the night before, at ten
o'clock, for the purpose of effecting Buonaparte's escape. Although I
gave no credit to the report, I immediately returned on board, and
asked the first lieutenant if Buonaparte had been seen that morning;
he informed me that he had not attended breakfast, and that no person
had seen him but his own people. I then sent to the Eurotas, which lay
astern of the ship, to enquire if he had appeared at the stern
windows; but was answered in the negative: upon which I desired one of
the young gentlemen to go out on the spanker-boom and look into the
cabin windows, to ascertain if he was sitting on the sofa; but he
could not discover him in any part of the cabin. I then became
extremely uneasy, and sent my servant in to bring some paper out, who
on entering found the object of my anxiety stretched out on his bed
with his clothes on, and the curtains drawn close round him, with
every appearance of being unwell. I had before asked Count Bertrand
about him, who said he had passed a bad night, and was too ill to
leave his apartment.

Instead of retiring to his bed this evening between eight and nine
o'clock, as was his usual custom, I heard him and another person (I
believe General Bertrand) pacing up and down the cabin until past
eleven; and in consequence gave directions to the officer of the watch
and the sentries to be particularly vigilant; and ordered one of the
guard-boats to remain under the ship's stern all night. He had still
declined all this day giving a list of those that he wished to attend
him to St Helena.

At three in the morning of the 4th of August, the officer of the watch
brought me a letter from Lord Keith, informing me that a courier had
just arrived from London, and that it was probable the ship would be
required to put to sea at a moment's notice. In consequence of this
order, we unmoored at daylight, bent the top-gallant sails, and made
other preparations for getting under weigh. The Frenchmen were very
watchful of all our motions, appeared much alarmed and annoyed, and
questioned me frequently as to the cause. I told them, what was
literally the fact, that I had received directions to be ready to put
to sea, but had no orders to carry it into effect; and that was all I
knew.

Between seven and eight o'clock, I waited on Lord Keith, who said he
had received information that a habeas corpus had been taken out for
the purpose of bringing Buonaparte on shore, and that a lawyer was on
his way down to serve it; desiring me, therefore, to be ready to put
to sea whenever the signal might be made.

On returning on board, I had an interview with Buonaparte, who was
very urgent to know why the ship was preparing for sea. I told him, by
Lord Keith's directions, that it was the intention of our Government,
his removal should take place at sea; and that we were going out to
meet the Northumberland, the ship which was to convey him to St
Helena.

He begged I would write to Lord Keith, and say he wished very much to
see him; and Count Bertrand told me he was also desirous of having the
newspapers. I accordingly wrote to his Lordship, who was then on board
the Tonnant: who, however, declined visiting him, but sent me a note,
of which the following is an extract.


Extract of a Note from Admiral Viscount Keith, addressed to Captain
Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Tonnant, 4th August.


"I send you the paper, and shall be glad to hear the determination of
the General, whom you may inform that the answer is arrived from
London, and that I have no authority to alter, in any degree, any part
of the former communication; which induces me to wish the selection of
the persons he is inclined should attend him."

I communicated the contents to General Bertrand, who made his report
to Buonaparte. On his coming out of the cabin, I pressed him on the
subject of nominating those that were to go with him to St Helena; but
the only answer he returned was, "L'Empereur n'ira pas a St
Helene;"--the Emperor will not go to St Helena.

Soon after nine o'clock, the Bellerophon's signal was made to prepare
to weigh, and at half-past nine to weigh: we immediately started. As
the light air of wind that blew was right into the Sound, and the
flood-tide against us, the guard-boats were sent ahead to tow; but,
soon observing a suspicious-looking person in a boat approaching the
ship, I ordered one of them to cast off, keep under the ship's stern,
and not allow any shore boat, under any pretext, to come near us. The
person alluded to proved afterwards to have been the lawyer mentioned
by Lord Keith; not with a Habeas Corpus, but a subpoena for
Buonaparte to attend a trial at the Court of King's Bench as a
witness. He was, however, foiled: as Lord Keith avoided him, and got
on board the Prometheus, off the Ramehead, where he remained until
joined by the Tonnant; while the guard-boat prevented him from
approaching near enough to the Bellerophon, to serve his writ on
me.[10]

         [Footnote 10: [The business of the Habeas Corpus is so
         whimsical that Capt. M. should get some legal friend to give
         a brief idea of the nature of the process and the purpose for
         which it was resorted to. The book will certainly be
         instantly translated into French, and such an explanation as
         I have hinted at will be extremely necessary. It should be
         thrown into a note; a few words should be added on the
         absurdity of the attempt. It will be otherwise thought and
         said that Bonaparte was kidnapped out of England contrary to
         the English laws. The real nature of the transaction should
         be distinctly explained.--SCOTT. The following note
         accordingly appears in the original edition:--]

         To prevent erroneous impressions from going abroad, and to
         put this curious circumstance in its true light, I have
         prevailed on a friend, who was educated for the English bar,
         to favour me with the following account of the writs of the
         Habeas Corpus and subpoena; by which it will appear that no
         such process, or any other, as far as I can understand, could
         have had the effect of removing Buonaparte from one of His
         Majesty's ships, and causing him to be landed in England in
         opposition to the commands of the Government of the country.

         "It is a common mistake to suppose that the celebrated Habeas
         Corpus Act made it a matter of right, for every person, under
         any restraint whatever to obtain this writ. That statute
         related to persons committed by legal process for criminal
         offences, and the object of it was to prevent them being
         detained an unnecessary or unreasonable length of time,
         without being brought to trial. Other cases of alleged
         illegal detention were left as at common law: in these the
         granting or refusal of the writ is discretionary in the
         Court, or Judge applied to, and it will only be issued on a
         proper case being laid before them. No such writ, it is
         believed, was ever applied for in Buonaparte's case; nor, if
         applied for, would it have been obtained. Where a foreigner,
         in private life, is brought to England, and detained against
         his will, the Court will grant the writ; but any application
         of Buonaparte, or on his behalf, must have shown him to have
         surrendered, and to have been then detained as a prisoner of
         war. Under that character, he was not entitled to the benefit
         of this writ; the Courts having refused it on the application
         of individuals brought to England as prisoners of war, even
         when applied for by the subject of a neutral power, who swore
         to his having been compelled by force to serve the enemy, and
         to have been captured in the course of that compulsory
         service.

         "The real transaction alluded to, is understood to have been
         this: an individual being under prosecution for a libel on a
         naval officer, censuring his conduct on the West India
         station, when a French squadron was in those seas, pretended
         that it would aid his defence to show that the French ships
         were at that time in an unserviceable condition, and that
         Buonaparte would be able to prove the fact. He accordingly
         obtained a subpoena for him to attend as a witness on the
         trial in the Court of King's Bench, and endeavoured himself,
         and not by a lawyer, as at first supposed, to get on board
         the Bellerophon to deliver it.

         "This transaction probably gave currency to the rumours of a
         Habeas Corpus having been issued, particularly as one
         description of that writ is, the proceeding for bringing a
         prisoner into Court to give evidence, which having given, he
         is remanded to gaol.

         "Had the individual in question succeeded in his attempt to
         get on board the ship, and deliver the subpoena, it would
         have been of no assistance either to himself or Buonaparte,
         if it was at all intended to benefit the latter, as it would
         not have been possible for him to obey it, there not being
         any authority for Captain Maitland, who was answerable for
         his safety as a prisoner, allowing him to do so. It was,
         however, considered the most prudent course, by Lord Keith,
         not to permit the delivery of the process, the exact nature
         of which was at the moment unknown, lest it might involve
         himself or Captain Maitland in any difficulty, by an apparent
         disrespect to the Court, and more particularly as it might
         create erroneous impressions in Buonaparte's mind, that a
         breach of the law was committed in his not being permitted to
         comply with the terms of the document, not aware that it
         contained no power authorising his release from detention as
         a prisoner of war."]

While the ship was working out of the Sound, two well-dressed women in
a boat kept as close to her as the guard-boat would allow, and,
whenever Buonaparte appeared at the stern windows, stood up and waved
their handkerchiefs.

On joining the Prometheus off the Ramehead, where Lord Keith's flag
was then flying, I received the following note from his Lordship.


                       No date; received August 4th, in the Afternoon.

"I have been chased all day by a lawyer with a Habeas Corpus: he is
landed at Cawsand, and may come off in a sailing-boat during the
night; of course, keep all sorts of boats off, as I will do the like
in whatever ship I may be in.

                                                               KEITH."

"Captain Maitland."


Buonaparte wrote another letter this evening to the Prince Regent,
which I carried to Lord Keith, who again told me of his having been
chased all day by a lawyer: who had first started him out of his own
house, then followed him to the Tonnant, where he attempted to get in
at one side, as his Lordship left her on the other; he afterwards
pursued him towards Cawsand, but the Admiral being in a twelve-oared
barge, out-rowed him, and gave him the slip round the Ramehead. It was
on his return from this chase that he attempted to get on board the
Bellerophon.

Buonaparte now confined himself entirely to his cabin, never coming on
deck, or appearing at breakfast or dinner. He was not served from the
table, but what he ate was prepared and carried in to him by Marchand,
his favourite valet de chambre. Messrs Bertrand and Las Cases passed
much time with him; and this evening the protest was prepared, which
will appear in the sequel.

On the morning of the 5th of August, the weather was overcast, with a
strong breeze of wind, and the sea began to rise, much to the
discomposure of my poor French guests. Soon after breakfast, my signal
being made from the Tonnant, where Lord Keith had now hoisted his
flag, I told General Bertrand that I was going to the Admiral, and
would convey anything Buonaparte had to say to him. He requested I
would wait until a letter or paper, then under preparation, was
finished, which was intended for me, but a copy to be presented to
Lord Keith. I waited nearly an hour, when he brought me Buonaparte's
protest. I delivered it to the Admiral, stating at the same time that
I wished to have a copy; and was afterwards furnished with one by his
Lordship's secretary. I insert it here.


_Buonaparte's Protest._

"Je proteste solennellement ici, a la face du Ciel et des hommes,
contre la violence qui m'est faite, contre la violation de mes droits
les plus sacres, en disposant par la force, de ma personne et de ma
liberte.

"Je suis venu librement a bord du Bellerophon; je ne suis point
prisonnier; je suis l'hote de l'Angleterre. J'y suis venu a
l'instigation meme du Capitaine qui a dit avoir des ordres du
Gouvernement de me recevoir, et de me conduire en Angleterre avec ma
suite, si cela m'etoit agreable. Je me suis presente de bonne foi pour
venir me mettre sous la protection des loix d'Angleterre. Aussitot
assis a bord du Bellerophon, je fus sur le foyer du peuple
Britannique. Si le Gouvernement, en donnant des ordres au Capitaine du
Bellerophon, de me recevoir ainsi que ma suite, n'a voulu que tendre
une embuche, il a forfait a l'honneur et fletri son pavillon. Si cet
acte se consommoit, ce seroit en vain que les Anglais voudroient
parler a l'Europe de leur loyaute, de leur loix, et de leur liberte.
La foi Britannique _s'y trouvera perdue dans l'hospitalite du
Bellerophon_. J'en appelle a l'histoire; elle dira qu'un ennemi qui
fit vingt ans la guerre aux peuples Anglois, vint librement, dans son
infortune, chercher un asile sous ses loix. Quelle plus eclatante
preuve pouvait-il lui donner de son estime et de sa confiance? Mais
comment repondit-on en Angleterre a une telle magnanimite?--On feignit
de tendre une main hospitaliere a cet ennemi, et quand il se fut livre
de bonne foi, on l'immola.

                                                    "Signe, NAPOLEON."

  A bord du Bellerophon,
  4 Aout, 1815.


TRANSLATION.

_Buonaparte's Protest._

"I hereby solemnly protest, in the face of Heaven and of men, against
the violence done me, and against the violation of my most sacred
rights, in forcibly disposing of my person and my liberty. I came
voluntarily on board of the Bellerophon; I am not a prisoner, I am
the guest of England. I came on board even at the instigation of the
Captain, who told me he had orders from the Government to receive me
and my suite, and conduct me to England, if agreeable to me. I
presented myself with good faith to put myself under the protection of
the English laws. As soon as I was on board the Bellerophon, I was
under shelter of the British people.

"If the Government, in giving orders to the Captain of the Bellerophon
to receive me as well as my suite, only intended to lay a snare for
me, it has forfeited its honour and disgraced its flag.

"If this act be consummated, the English will in vain boast to Europe
of their integrity, their laws, and their liberty. British good faith
will be lost in the hospitality of the Bellerophon.

"I appeal to History; it will say that an enemy, who for twenty years
waged war against the English people, came voluntarily, in his
misfortunes, to seek an asylum under their laws. What more brilliant
proof could he give of his esteem and his confidence? But what return
did England make for so much magnanimity? They feigned to stretch
forth a friendly hand to that enemy; and when he delivered himself up
in good faith, they sacrificed him.

                                                   "Signed, NAPOLEON."

  "On board the Bellerophon,
  4th August 1815."


On the above I shall only observe, that no snare had been laid, either
on the part of His Majesty's Government or mine. I was placed before
Rochefort for the open purpose of preventing Buonaparte from making
his escape from that port; and the exertions of myself and those under
my command had been so completely successful, that the intention of
forcing past the ships under my orders, as well as every other plan
proposed, of which there appear to have been several, were abandoned
as utterly hopeless. And so far was I from seeking communication with
Napoleon, that all the flags of truce proceeding from him, were
strongly reprobated by me, as improper, except in extraordinary cases,
and were only resorted to when, as appears from Lord Keith's letter of
the 23rd of July, orders had been sent from Paris for his arrest, and
when (as has since been proved) one or more intimations had been given
by the officer commanding in Isle d'Aix, that, if he did not depart,
he would be under the necessity of detaining him. Besides, it is now
perfectly ascertained, that the determination of repairing to England
was adopted at a consultation held by Buonaparte on the night of the
13th of July, when his letter to the Prince Regent was written; and
Messrs Las Cases and Lallemand were sent on the morning of the 14th
to discover if I would receive him on board the Bellerophon, and
convey him to that country.

On the morning of the 6th of August, when walking the deck with
Monsieur Las Cases, he for the first time mentioned, that he
understood me to have assured him that the Emperor would be well
received in England, and allowed to reside there. I replied, "I cannot
conceive how you could so far misunderstand me, as I constantly, in my
communications with you, stated that I could make no promises
whatever: that I thought my orders would bear me out in receiving him
on board, and conveying him to England; but even in doing that, I
acted very much upon my own responsibility. You questioned me
frequently, as to my private opinion; and as I was quite ignorant upon
the subject, I could only say I had no reason to believe he would be
ill received." It did not, however, require my assistance to raise
the hopes of those about Buonaparte, respecting the manner in which he
was to be received in England; as one of his followers, on the passage
home, asked me if I thought the Prince Regent would confer the order
of the Garter upon him. If there was any misunderstanding, (which I
cannot allow to have been the case,) Monsieur Las Cases has himself to
blame. When he came on board of the Bellerophon for the purpose of
treating, he concealed his knowledge of the English language; which,
as I had considerable difficulty in expressing myself in French, could
only be intended for the purpose of throwing me off my guard, that he
might take advantage of any expressions that fell from me, or the
officers I had always present at our meetings. Even after he was on
board with Buonaparte, though he acknowledged he could read English,
and always translated the newspapers for his master, he affected not
to be able to speak it. What his actual knowledge of the language
was, the following extract of a letter, from a friend of mine on board
the Northumberland, dated at sea, August the 22nd, 1815, will show:

"I do not know, whether Las Cases ever let you know he could speak
English; but this I can assure you, that he speaks it very near as
well as Madame Bertrand, and can hold a conversation, or maintain an
argument in it, with as much fluency as she can."

This forenoon, I had a long conversation with Buonaparte. He
complained bitterly of the conduct of the British Government; and
entered, at considerable length, into the state of his affairs when he
determined upon the measure of repairing on board the Bellerophon.
"There still," said he, "was a large party in the South, that wished
me to put myself at its head; the army behind the Loire was also
desirous of my return. At ten o'clock of the night before I embarked,
a deputation from the garrison of Rochelle waited upon me, with an
offer to conduct me to the army; in addition to which, the troops that
were in Rochefort, Bourdeaux, and Isle d'Aix, amounting to twelve
thousand men, were at my disposal. But I saw there was no prospect of
ultimate success, though I might have occasioned a great deal of
trouble and bloodshed, which I did not choose should take place on my
account individually;--while the Empire was at stake, it was another
matter."

In the afternoon, Mr O'Meara, the surgeon, informed me that General
Savary had made a proposal to him to accompany Buonaparte to St Helena
as his medical attendant; Monsieur Maingaut, his surgeon, being a
young man with whom he was little acquainted, having suffered so much
from seasickness in the passage from Rochefort, that he felt averse to
undertaking another sea voyage. He consulted me as to the propriety
of accepting the offer. I told him it must depend very much upon his
own feelings; but if he had no dislike to it, he had better accept the
proposal, on condition that our Government consented, and agreed to
pay his salary; but, in that case, an official communication must
pass, through me, to the Admiral on the subject. This was the first
intimation I received of Buonaparte having made any arrangement
towards complying with the notification he had received from our
Government.

About nine A.M. a large ship was seen to leeward, which, on closing,
proved to be the Northumberland. The whole squadron then stood in, and
anchored to the westward of Berryhead. I went on board the Tonnant,
and reported to Lord Keith that Buonaparte had at last made up his
mind to move from the Bellerophon without force being used; and that
Count Bertrand was desirous of seeing his Lordship, that he might make
the necessary arrangements about the people who were to accompany
him. By the Admiral's directions, I returned to my ship and brought
Monsieur Bertrand to him. Soon after Sir George Cockburn arrived, and
they were shut up together for nearly two hours.

When I first went on board the Tonnant, I received a memorandum from
Lord Keith, from which I give an extract; and at the same time a
verbal intimation, that I should receive an order in writing the next
day, to, remove Buonaparte, and such part of his suite as he might
select, to the Northumberland.


Extract of a Memorandum from Admiral Viscount Keith, G.C.B., addressed
to Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Tonnant, off the
Start, 6th August, 1815.


"All arms of every description are to be taken from the Frenchmen of
all ranks on board the ship you command; and they are to be carefully
packed up and kept in your charge, while they remain on board the
Bellerophon; and afterwards in that of the captain of the ship to
which they may be removed."

While we were at dinner, Generals Bertrand and Montholon were employed
making out lists of what would be required by the French officers and
the ladies, to render them comfortable during their voyage to St
Helena, which were despatched to Plymouth by Sir George Cockburn's
secretary.

In the course of the evening Lord Keith and Sir George Cockburn came
on board the Bellerophon; when the latter was introduced to
Buonaparte.

As soon as General Bertrand was at leisure, I told him I had orders to
remove Napoleon to the Northumberland the following day, and also to
take away the arms from him and his attendants, giving him to
understand that they would be returned on their arrival at their
destination. He seemed much hurt at being deprived of his arms, but
said he would give directions for their being delivered; and I
received them the next morning, with the exception of Buonaparte's
sword, which, by an order I subsequently received from Lord Keith, he
was permitted to wear, when quitting the ship.

About half-past nine in the evening, Mons. Bertrand told me that
Buonaparte was desirous of seeing me. On going into his cabin, he
said, "Bertrand informs me you have received orders to remove me to
the Northumberland; is it so?" I answered in the affirmative. "Have
you any objection," he said, "to writing a letter to Bertrand,
acquainting him of it; that I may have a document to prove that I was
forced to quit the ship, and that my inclinations were not
consulted." I replied, "I can have no objection to write such a
letter, and shall do it this evening." I was then going to retire,
when he requested me to remain, having more to say. "Your Government,"
he continued, "has treated me with much severity, and in a very
different way from what I had hoped and expected, from the opinion I
had formed of the character of your countrymen. It is true I have
always been the enemy of England, but it has ever been an open and
declared one; and I paid it the highest compliment it was possible for
man to do in throwing myself on the generosity of your Prince: I have
not now to learn, however, that it is not fair to judge of the
character of a people by the conduct of their Government." He then
went on, (alluding to the Government,) "They say I made no conditions.
Certainly I made no conditions; how could an individual enter into
terms with a nation? I wanted nothing of them but hospitality, or, as
the ancients would express it, 'air and water.' My only wish was to
purchase a small property in England, and end my life there in peace
and tranquillity. As for you, Capitaine," (the name by which he always
addressed me) "I have no cause of complaint; your conduct to me has
been that of a man of honour; but I cannot help feeling the severity
of my fate, in having the prospect of passing the remainder of my life
on a desert island. But," added he with a strong emphasis, "if your
Government give up Savary and Lallemand to the King of France, they
will inflict a stain upon the British name that no time can efface." I
told him, in that respect, they were under an erroneous impression;
that I was convinced it was not the intention of his Majesty's
Ministers to deliver them up. "Je l'espere," "I hope so;" was his only
reply.--I then took my leave of him for the night.

That I may not break in upon the occurrences of the 7th, I shall here
insert the letter I wrote at Buonaparte's request, and a copy of the
orders under which I acted in removing him from the Bellerophon to the
Northumberland.


                                       "H.M.S. Bellerophon, Start Bay,
                                                     7th August, 1815.

"SIR,

"I beg to acquaint you that I have this day received orders from Lord
Keith, Commander in Chief of the Channel Fleet, to remove General
Buonaparte from the ship I command, to his Majesty's ship
Northumberland; and I have to request you will intimate the above to
the General, that he may prepare for the removal.

"I likewise enclose a copy of an order respecting the arms of General
Buonaparte and the whole of his attendants, and request you will give
directions for their being delivered to me, that they may be disposed
of as the order directs.

  "I have the honour to be,
                     &c. &c. &c.
                                                   FRED. L. MAITLAND."

"Lieut. General Count Bertrand."


Copy of the order alluded to.

                            "By the Right Hon. Viscount Keith, G.C.B.,
                                                           &c. &c. &c.

"You are hereby required and directed to deliver the persons, named
below, into the charge of Rear Admiral Sir George Cockburn.

  "Given on board the Tonnant,
  At anchor under Berryhead,
  7th August, 1815.
                         KEITH, Admiral.

  "By command of the Admiral,
                        "JAMES MEEK, Secretary."

  "To F. L. Maitland, Esq.
  Captain of H.M.S. Bellerophon."
  General Buonaparte.
  Count Bertrand, his Wife, three children, one female servant, and
    her child.
  General Montholon, his Wife, one child, and one female servant.
  General Gourgaud.
  Le Comte de Las Cases, and his son.
  Marchand, Premier Valet de Chambre.
  St Denis, ditto.
  Novarra, ditto.
  Pieron, Chef d'Office.
  Le Page, Cuisinier.
  Archambaud, Premier Valet de Pied.
  Gentilini, Valet de Pied.
  Bernard, domestique du Comte Bertrand.

The four domestics underneath, who had come to England in the
Myrmidon, also accompanied him:--

  Cipriani, Maitre d'Hotel.
  Santini, Huissier.
  Rousseau, Lampiste.
  Archambaud, Valet de Pied.


Extract of a Letter from Admiral Viscount Keith, G.C.B., addressed to
Captain Maitland, of H.M.S. Bellerophon, dated Tonnant, off Berryhead,
7th August, 1815.


"When the General quits the ship, it is not intended to take his sword
from him, but to let him wear it, but not the others. Pistols, guns,
&c. must, _as in all instances_, be removed for the safety of the
ship, but the arms are carefully to be kept, and restored at a proper
occasion."


On the morning of the 7th of August, 1815, Count Las Cases made an
application to me for permission to wait on Lord Keith, having a
communication to make to him. I, in consequence, went to his Lordship,
and obtained leave to send him. When the Admiral came on board the
Bellerophon, in the forenoon, to attend Buonaparte in his removal to
the Northumberland, he informed me that Monsieur Las Cases had
represented to him, that I had promised Buonaparte should be well
received in England, and allowed to remain there; and the same day he
wrote a letter to me containing the above statement, and directing me
to report upon it, which I afterwards did, as will hereafter appear.

Count Bertrand was employed, during the morning, making out a list of
those that were to proceed to St Helena with Buonaparte, in which
General Gourgaud's name was omitted, and Colonel Planat was nominated
his Secretary. This offended Monsieur Gourgaud so much, that he made
use of some very strong language to General Bertrand; and after a good
deal of altercation, it was arranged, I believe by Buonaparte himself,
that Gourgaud should take Planat's place. There was also another cause
of disagreement. The number of domestics allowed to go to St Helena
being only twelve, did not admit of all the officers taking their
personal attendants; General Montholon was obliged to leave a servant
who had been with him many years, and Count Bertrand's was the only
exception.

General Bertrand had been so much employed all the morning making
preparations for their removal, that he did not come to breakfast
until every one had finished; his wife remained at the table, as I did
also, as a mark of attention to him. She soon commenced an attack on
her husband, to induce him to quit Buonaparte and remain in England.
He seemed much distressed, but remained silent. At last, she turned to
me, and begged I would give an opinion, and use my influence in favour
of her proposal. I said, "Madame Bertrand, I have from the beginning
endeavoured to avoid meddling in the very unpleasant discussions that
have been going on for some days; but, as you demand my opinion, and
force me to give it, I must acquaint you that I think, if your
husband quits his master at such a time as the present, he will
forfeit the very high character he now bears in this country." I then
rose from the table and went upon deck.

A short time after, Madame Bertrand came on deck, and, addressing me
with much indignation in her countenance, said, "So, Captain Maitland,
I hear the Emperor is not to have the whole of the after-cabin on
board the Northumberland." I told her, I understood that Sir George
Cockburn had received orders to that effect. "They had better treat
him like a dog at once," said she, "and put him down in the hold." I
had for several days been kept in a state of irritation that cannot be
described, and such as few people have had an opportunity of
experiencing. Madame Bertrand had, it will be readily understood, some
share in causing this; and on her making the above remark, I am sorry
to say, the little self-possession that still remained gave way, and I
answered in these words, "Madam, you talk like a very foolish woman;
and if you cannot speak more to the purpose, or with more respect of
the Government I have the honour to serve, I request you will not
address yourself to me." Just before she went out of the ship,
however, she came up to me in a conciliatory and friendly manner, that
did her the highest honour, and said, "Captain Maitland, you called me
a very foolish woman this morning, but I should be sorry to part with
you on bad terms; have you any objection to shake hands with me? as
God knows if we shall ever meet again." "Very far from it," I
answered; "I should be extremely sorry you left the ship without
receiving my good wishes for your happiness and prosperity; and if, in
the warmth of my temper, and under the harassing circumstances of my
situation, I have said anything unpleasant, I most sincerely beg your
pardon, and hope you will forgive and forget it."

Soon after breakfast, Marchand came and said the Emperor wished to see
me: I went into the cabin. "I have requested to see you, Captain,"
said he, "to return you my thanks for your kindness and attention to
me whilst I have been on board the Bellerophon, and likewise to beg
you will convey them to the officers and ship's company you command.
My reception in England has been very different from what I expected;
but it gives me much satisfaction to assure you, that I feel your
conduct to me throughout has been that of a gentleman and a man of
honour." He then said, he was desirous of having Mr O'Meara, the
surgeon of the Bellerophon, to accompany him; and asked my opinion of
him in his medical capacity, as well as of his principles. I replied,
that I had the highest opinion of him, both for his skill and
attention; that he had given me so much satisfaction while under my
command, that I had procured his removal from two different ships in
which he had served with me previous to my appointment to the
Bellerophon, that he might accompany me; and that I was convinced he
was a man of principle and integrity. After conversing some time
longer with him, during which he spoke in the warmest terms of
affection of General Bertrand, and the obligations he felt to him for
his remaining with him during his adversity, when he knew strong
efforts had been used to induce him to abandon him, I took my leave;
and this was the last time I was ever alone with him.

Soon after, Sir George Cockburn came on board, attended by Mr Byng as
his secretary, for the purpose of examining Buonaparte's baggage: he
had directions to apply to some person of his suite to attend at the
search. The proposal was made to Count Bertrand; but he was so
indignant at the measure, that he positively refused either to be
present himself or to direct any other person to superintend. General
Savary, however, consented, and was present, as well as Marchand. The
covers of the trunks were merely opened, and Mr Byng passed his hand
down the side, but the things were not unpacked. Once or twice, when
the door of the after-cabin was opened, Buonaparte expressed his
obligation to Mr Byng for the delicate manner in which he conducted
the search, by bowing to him. When they came to the boxes containing
the money, of which there were two, Marchand was permitted to take out
such sum as was considered necessary for paying the wages of the
servants that were to be left behind, and for other contingent
expenses. One box, containing four thousand gold Napoleons, was
retained and put under my charge, where it remained until my arrival
in London, when I delivered it to Sir Hudson Lowe to be restored to
its owner, as will be seen by the following order, receipts, &c.


                            "By the Right Hon. Viscount Keith, G.C.B.,
                                                           &c. &c. &c.

"You are hereby required and directed to receive into your custody
such a sum of money belonging to General Buonaparte, as will be
delivered into your charge by Rear-Admiral Sir George Cockburn,
granting proper receipts for the same.

  "Given on board the Tonnant,
  At anchor under Berryhead,
  7th August, 1815,
                  "KEITH, Admiral."

  "To F. L. Maitland, Esq.
  Captain of H.M.S. Bellerophon."


"J'ai laisse le sept d'aout, a bord du Bellerophon, a Monsieur le
Capitaine Maitland, une somme de quatre vingt mille francs, en quatre
mille Napoleons d'or.

                                                       "MARCHAND,
                                            Premier Valet de Chambre."


On the 7th of August, I have left on board the Bellerophon, in charge
of Captain Maitland, the sum of eighty thousand francs, in four
thousand gold Napoleons.

                                                        MARCHAND,
                                                 1st Valet de Chambre.


"I acknowledge to have received a box with four paper packages, _said_
to contain four thousand gold Napoleons, the property of Napoleon
Buonaparte.

                                                    "August 7th, 1815,
                                                  "FRED. L. MAITLAND."

"Approved, George Cockburn."


As I shall not have to revert to the subject of the money, I shall
here subjoin the receipt I obtained on delivering it at the Admiralty
Office, though it is of a date some time posterior.


                                       "Admiralty, September 14, 1815.

"Received from Captain Maitland a box, containing four packages,
marked each 20,000 francs, and said to contain four thousand Napoleons
d'or."

                                             "H. LOWE, Major General."


About eleven A.M., Lord Keith came on board in the Tonnant's barge, to
accompany Buonaparte from the Bellerophon to the Northumberland. Count
Bertrand immediately went into the cabin to inform him of his
Lordship's arrival: it was, however, full two hours before it was
reported that he was ready to attend him. About one o'clock, the barge
of the Admiral was prepared; a Captain's guard turned out, and by Lord
Keith's direction, as Napoleon crossed the quarter-deck to leave the
ship, the guard presented arms, and three ruffles of the drum were
beat, being the salute given to a General Officer.

He walked out of the cabin with a steady, firm step, came up to me,
and, taking off his hat, said, "Captain Maitland, I take this last
opportunity of once more returning you my thanks for the manner in
which you have treated me while on board the Bellerophon, and also to
request you will convey them to the officers and ship's company you
command:" then turning to the Officers, who were standing by me, he
added, "Gentlemen, I have requested your Captain to express my
gratitude to you for your attention to me, and to those who have
followed my fortunes." He then went forward to the gangway; and before
he went down the ship's side, bowed two or three times to the ship's
company, who were collected in the waist and on the forecastle; he
was followed by the ladies and the French Officers, and lastly by Lord
Keith. After the boat had shoved off, and got the distance of about
thirty yards from the ship, he stood up, pulled his hat off, and bowed
first to the Officers, and then to the men; and immediately sat down,
and entered into conversation with Lord Keith, with as much apparent
composure as if he had been only going from one ship to the other to
pay a visit.

About a quarter of an hour before Buonaparte quitted the Bellerophon,
Montholon came to me on the quarter-deck, and said, "I am directed by
the Emperor to return you his thanks for the manner in which you have
conducted yourself throughout the whole of this affair; and he desires
me to say, that the greatest cause of disappointment he feels in not
being admitted to an interview with the Prince Regent is, that he had
intended to ask as a favour from his Royal Highness, that you should
be promoted to the rank of Rear Admiral." I answered, "that although
the request could not have been complied with under any circumstances,
as it was contrary to the regulations of our naval service, yet I do
not the less feel the kindness of the intention." "He meant also," he
said, "to have presented you with a box containing his portrait, but
he understands you are determined not to accept it." I replied, "In
the situation I am placed, it is quite impossible I can receive any
present from him." "He is perfectly aware," said he, "of the delicacy
of your situation, and approves of your conduct." I then said, "I feel
much hurt that Count Las Cases should have stated to Lord Keith, that
I had promised Buonaparte should be well received in England, or
indeed made promises of any sort. I have endeavoured to conduct myself
with integrity and honour throughout the whole of this transaction,
and therefore cannot allow such an assertion to go uncontradicted."
"Oh!" said he, "Las Cases negotiated this business; it has turned out
very differently from what he and all of us expected. He attributes
the Emperor's situation to himself, and is therefore desirous of
giving it the best countenance he can; but I assure you, the Emperor
is convinced your conduct has been most honourable": then taking my
hand, he pressed it, and added, "and that is my opinion also."

In the course of the afternoon, I attended General Savary and
Lallemand on board the Northumberland, where they went for the purpose
of taking a last farewell of their master. I had very little
conversation with him myself, but they remained with him a
considerable time. When I was about to return to my ship, I went into
the cabin to tell them they must accompany me. They approached him in
the after-cabin, where he was standing, when he embraced each of them
most affectionately, after the French manner, putting his arms round
them, and touching their cheeks with his. He was firm and collected;
but, in turning from him, the tears were streaming from their eyes. On
getting on board, all the squadron got under weigh, the Tonnant and
Bellerophon to return to Plymouth, the Northumberland, with two troop
ships in company, to proceed to St Helena. The following day she was
joined by a frigate and several sloops of war from Plymouth, when she
made sail to the westward.

Having now brought my narrative down to the period of Buonaparte's
quitting the ship, it only remains for me to give some account of his
person and character, as far as it fell under my view. In doing so, I
shall endeavour, as far as possible, in the same spirit with which the
foregoing narrative is written, to avoid being biassed, either by
favourable or unfavourable feelings towards him. What he may have been
when at the head of the French Empire, with the destiny of the
greater part of Europe under his control, I have no peculiar means of
knowing; all I can pretend to do is, to describe him as he was on
board the Bellerophon; adding a few anecdotes, which have been omitted
in the course of the narrative, as serving to throw some further light
upon his character.

Napoleon Buonaparte, when he came on board the Bellerophon, on the
15th of July, 1815, wanted exactly one month of completing his
forty-sixth year, being born the 15th of August, 1769. He was then a
remarkably strong, well-built man, about five feet seven inches high,
his limbs particularly well-formed, with a fine ancle and very small
foot, of which he seemed rather vain, as he always wore, while on
board the ship, silk stockings and shoes. His hands were also very
small, and had the plumpness of a woman's rather than the robustness
of a man's. His eyes light grey, teeth good; and when he smiled, the
expression of his countenance was highly pleasing; when under the
influence of disappointment, however, it assumed a dark gloomy cast.
His hair was of a very dark brown, nearly approaching to black, and,
though a little thin on the top and front, had not a grey hair amongst
it. His complexion was a very uncommon one, being of a light sallow
colour, differing from almost any other I ever met with. From his
having become corpulent, he had lost much of his personal activity,
and, if we are to give credit to those who attended him, a very
considerable portion of his mental energy was also gone. It is certain
his habits were very lethargic while he was on board the Bellerophon;
for though he went to bed between eight and nine o'clock in the
evening, and did not rise till about the same hour in the morning, he
frequently fell asleep on the sofa in the cabin in the course of the
day. His general appearance was that of a man rather older than he
then was. His manners were extremely pleasing and affable: he joined
in every conversation, related numerous anecdotes, and endeavoured, in
every way, to promote good humour: he even admitted his attendants to
great familiarity; and I saw one or two instances of their
contradicting him in the most direct terms, though they generally
treated him with much respect. He possessed, to a wonderful degree, a
facility in making a favourable impression upon those with whom he
entered into conversation: this appeared to me to be accomplished by
turning the subject to matters he supposed the person he was
addressing was well acquainted with, and on which he could show
himself to advantage. This had the effect of putting him in good
humour with himself; after which it was not a very difficult matter to
transfer a part of that feeling to the person who had occasioned it.
Lord Keith appears to have formed a very high opinion of the
fascination of his conversation, and expressed it very emphatically
to me, after he had seen him: speaking of his wish for an interview
with the Prince Regent, "D----n the fellow," he said, "if he had
obtained an interview with his Royal Highness, in half an hour they
would have been the best friends in England."[11] He appeared to have
great command of temper; for, though no man could have had greater
trials than fell to his lot during the time he remained on board the
Bellerophon, he never, in my presence, or as far as I know, allowed a
fretful or captious expression to escape him: even the day he received
the notification from Sir Henry Bunbury, that it was determined to
send him to St Helena, he chatted and conversed with the same
cheerfulness as usual. It has been asserted that he was acting a part
all the time he was on board the ship; but still, even allowing that
to be the case, nothing but great command of temper could have enabled
him to have sustained such a part for so many days, in his situation.

         [Footnote 11: [I do entreat and conjure that the natural and
         sailor-like speech of Lord Keith be not tampered with. It is
         really a sin to knock the spirit out of a work by such
         over-delicacy.--SCOTT.]]

I shall here relate a circumstance that occurred during the passage to
England, which will show in a strong point of view the freedom that
subsisted between him and those of his attendants in whom he had
confidence. A conversation took place respecting the relative state of
cultivation in France and in England. My opinion being asked, I said,
that though the climate of France was much superior to that of
England, I believed that agriculture had arrived at a greater state of
perfection with us than in France. Most of the Frenchmen treated the
idea with ridicule; upon which I said, let us refer to Monsieur Las
Cases, who has lived several years in England. "You are right," said
he; "there can be no doubt, that agriculture has arrived to much
greater perfection in England than in France; but what I admire most
in England, are the country-seats of your noblemen and gentlemen;
there you surpass France very much." General Bertrand then took up the
conversation, and said, that he was assured, that thirty thousand
pounds sterling was annually expended on the park and grounds of
Blenheim. Buonaparte immediately reduced that sum into livres; and
observed, "The thing is impossible: the English people are not fools;
they know the value of money, and no individual either could or would
expend such a sum for such a purpose." He then spoke of the expense of
keeping up Malmaison, one of the country palaces in France; stating
the sum it cost annually, which did not exceed five thousand pounds.
Bertrand still persisted in his statement, and made a reference to me.
I, however, could give no information further than saying, that from
what I had heard of the Duke of Marlborough's finances, he could not
possibly lay out any such sum on Blenheim. Monsieur Bertrand would not
give up the point, but repeated his assertion. On which Buonaparte
said, with quickness, "Bah! c'est impossible." "Oh!" said Bertrand,
much offended, "if you are to reply in that manner, there is an end of
all argument;" and for some time would not converse with him.
Buonaparte, so far from taking umbrage, did all he could to soothe him
and restore him to good-humour, which was not very difficult to
effect.

One morning he began to talk of his wife and child, and desired
Marchand to bring two or three miniature pictures to show me: he spoke
of them with much feeling and affection. "I feel," said he, "the
conduct of the allied sovereigns to be more cruel and unjustifiable
towards me in that respect than in any other. Why should they deprive
me of the comforts of domestic society, and take from me what must be
the dearest objects of affection to every man--my child, and the
mother of that child?" On his expressing himself as above, I looked
him steadily in the face, to observe whether he showed any emotion:
the tears were standing in his eyes, and the whole of his countenance
appeared evidently under the influence of a strong feeling of grief.

There were two pictures of young Napoleon: one in the dress of a
Polish lancer, and the other with long curly flowing ringlets: they
both represented a fair, strong, chubby boy, with features very much
resembling those of his father. That of his mother, a very fair woman,
with good features, but by no means handsome.

From the observations I was enabled to make, I very much doubt
Monsieur Savary's statement, that the passion of ambition was so
completely overcome in his bosom, "that had it been proposed to him
again to ascend the throne of France, he would have declined it"; and
I do think, that if he had succeeded in eluding the British cruisers
and arrived in America, he would always have looked forward to
returning to France. In all his conversations, he spoke of ambition as
a quality absolutely necessary to form the character of a soldier. On
one occasion, Savary spoke of Kleber, (who was left by Napoleon in
command of the army when he quitted Egypt,) in terms of high encomium;
this brought on a discussion upon the respective merits of that
officer and Dessaix, whose aid-de-camp Savary had been during the
negotiation of the convention of El Arish. Buonaparte, speaking of
Kleber, bestowed upon him great praise as an officer; but he added,
"He was deficient in one of the most necessary qualifications of a
soldier,--ambition. He was indolent, and required constant spurring.
Dessaix, on the contrary, had all his abilities, which were kept in
constant activity by a mind whose ambition there was no satisfying;
and, had they both lived to the present period, he would have been
much the greater man of the two."

It does not appear from the statement of Buonaparte's attendants, that
he had made any very considerable provision for the future, in the
event of a reverse of fortune. They often regretted his poverty; and
Madame Bertrand assured me that he was not possessed of more than a
million of francs--forty-two thousand pounds of our money[12]; which,
if correct, is certainly not a very large sum for a man who had had so
many millions at his disposal. "The Emperor has always declared," she
said, "that he would rise or fall with the country, and never would
enrich himself out of the public property." He also upon one occasion,
when there was some intention of leaving Madame Bertrand with her
children in England, after stating Bertrand's poverty as an objection
to that arrangement, said to me, "My finances are not such as to
enable me to give him much assistance."

         [Footnote 12: Since this narrative was written in the year
         1815, it has been proved by Buonaparte's will, that either
         his attendants were misinformed, or that they, as well as
         himself, misrepresented the state of his finances, as he left
         in the hands of Lafitte, the banker, in Paris, a sum of money
         amounting to nearly four hundred thousand pounds sterling,
         besides a very considerable sum said to be vested in the
         American funds.]

Buonaparte's carriage, which was taken at the battle of Waterloo by
the Prussian cavalry, contained many articles of great value. In it
was a necessaire, in which all the instruments, bason, &c. were
composed of gold; a sword set with diamonds, and a diamond necklace,
estimated at a very large sum of money, which one of his sisters (I
think, the Princess of Borghese) put round his neck the night he took
leave of her at Paris, on his setting out to join the army previous to
the battle of Waterloo, and which he had taken off and deposited in a
secret place in the carriage; Marchand, his valet de chambre, being so
nearly taken by the Prussian hussars, that he quitted the carriage
without having time to secure it. But I have since learned from Las
Cases's Memoirs, that the necklace alluded to was saved, and that Las
Cases had it concealed about his person all the time he was on board
the Bellerophon.

It has been stated in many of the public prints, that had not the
Marquis of Anglesea received a wound when he was leading on a charge,
Buonaparte must have fallen into his hands. In consequence of
observing this assertion, I asked Generals Bertrand and Gourgaud
whether they knew if any such occurrence had taken place: both of whom
replied, "Certainly not; the Emperor was frequently in the midst of
the British troops (pele-mele avec les troupes Angloises); but at no
time during the battle was he in danger of being captured by a charge
of cavalry."

The midshipmen of the Bellerophon were in the habit of occasionally
performing plays, to amuse themselves and the officers during the
tedious operations of a blockade. Buonaparte being told of it by
Savary, requested that they would oblige him by acting one for his
amusement. During the performance, Madame Bertrand sat next to him,
and interpreted. He appeared much amused, and laughed very heartily at
our ladies, who were personated by great strapping fellows dressed in
women's clothes, and not in the most tidy fashion. He had the patience
to remain to the end of the third act, though, when attending the
Opera at Paris, he had always retired at the end of the first.

I heard several of the French officers discussing the merits of the
British troops. One of them said, "The cavalry is superb." I
observed, "In England we have a higher opinion of our infantry." "You
are right," said he; "there is none such in the world: there is no
making an impression on them: you may as well attempt to charge
through a wall: and their fire is tremendous." Another of them
observed: "A great fault in your cavalry is their not having their
horses sufficiently under command: there must be something wrong in
the bit, as on one or two occasions in a charge, they could not stop
their horses: our troops opened to the right and left, let them pass
through, and then closed their ranks again, when they were either
killed or taken prisoners."

I never heard Buonaparte speak of the battle of Waterloo, or give an
opinion of the Duke of Wellington; but I asked General Bertrand what
Napoleon thought of him. "Why," replied he, "I will give you his
opinion nearly in the words he delivered it to me. 'The Duke of
Wellington, in the management of an army, is fully equal to myself,
with the advantage of possessing more prudence.'"

During the time that Buonaparte was on board the Bellerophon, we
always lived expressly for his accommodation--entirely in the French
manner; that is to say, a hot meal was served at ten o'clock in the
morning, and another at six in the evening; and so nearly did they
resemble each other in all respects, that a stranger might have found
difficulty, in coming into the cabin, to distinguish breakfast from
dinner. His maitre d'hotel took the joints off the table, cut them up
in portions, and then handed them round. Buonaparte ate a great deal,
and generally of strong solid food: in drinking he was extremely
abstemious, confining himself almost entirely to claret, and seldom
taking more than half-a-pint at a meal. Immediately after dinner,
strong coffee was handed round, and then some cordial; after which he
rose from table, the whole meal seldom lasting more than twenty or
twenty-five minutes: and I was told, that during the time he was at
the head of the French Government, he never allowed more than fifteen
minutes for that purpose.

After he had quitted the ship, being desirous to know the feeling of
the ship's company towards him, I asked my servant what the people
said of him. "Why, Sir," he answered, "I heard several of them
conversing together about him this morning; when one of them observed,
'Well, they may abuse that man as much as they please; but if the
people of England knew him as well as we do, they would not hurt a
hair of his head;' in which the others agreed." This was the more
extraordinary, as he never went through the ship's company but once,
immediately after his coming on board, when I attended him, and he did
not speak to any of the men; merely returning their salute by pulling
off his hat; and in consequence of his presence, they suffered many
privations, such as not being allowed to see their wives and friends,
or to go on shore, having to keep watch in port, &c.; and when he left
the ship, the only money he distributed was twenty Napoleons to my
steward, fifteen to one of the under-servants, and ten to the cook.

It may, perhaps, be interesting to give a slight sketch of the
principal persons who accompanied Buonaparte to the Bellerophon;
premising, that I do not pretend to be minutely correct in the view I
took of them: the trying circumstances in which these unfortunate men
were placed, being such as required more than common temper; and I
think it very doubtful, whether, in the same situation, Englishmen
would have maintained equal forbearance.

Count Bertrand was a man of about forty-four years of age, five feet
ten inches in height, of a slight make and prepossessing appearance:
his manners extremely placid and gentle, though evidently of a warm
temper; and showed himself rather hasty in his conduct to Sir George
Cockburn, about searching the baggage; as Sir George was not acting
upon his own authority, but by the directions of his superiors, and
was inclined to conduct himself with as much consideration as his
orders would admit. He was an affectionate attentive husband, and much
attached to his children.

The Countess Bertrand was then of a tall, slight figure. Her maiden
name was Dillon; her father was an Irishman in the French service, who
lost his life during the revolution, and was related to Lord Dillon.
Though, perhaps, a little warm, she has undoubtedly many excellent
qualities: she showed herself to be a kind mother and affectionate
wife; and if she easily took offence, she as easily forgot it; and any
little dispute that occurred between her and me, was amply atoned for
by the frank and affectionate manner in which she took leave when we
were about to part, perhaps for ever.[13] They had, at the time I
speak of, three fine children,--two boys and a girl; the eldest boy
about five years of age, who seemed to have a natural turn for the
profession of his father: his constant amusement, in which the young
lady and little Montholon joined, was forming lines and squares, and
other military evolutions, on the quarter-deck.

         [Footnote 13: [I think the handsome and gentlemanlike account
         of Madame Bertrand is a complete _amende honorable_ for
         anything said of her in the course of the journal, and forms
         a complete refutation to the objections made in the sense of
         delicacy towards that lady for mentioning some part of the
         conversation when in warmer moments. If you were to mention
         your having afterwards met her in France, I think it would be
         interesting.--SCOTT.]]

General Savary, Duc de Rovigo, was a tall handsome man, then about
forty-six years of age, of a cheerful disposition; and notwithstanding
the alarm he was in lest he should be given up to the French
Government, he never forgot himself so far as to make use of a rude
expression in my presence. He was Minister of Police after Fouche. As
a great deal had been said about Captain Wright's death, I spoke to
him one day upon the subject, and told him it was generally believed
in England that he had been murdered: he said, "I took much pains in
investigating that matter, and in ascertaining the cause of his death;
and I have not a doubt that he cut his own throat in a fit of
delirium." Neither Savary nor Lallemand were allowed to accompany
Buonaparte to St Helena; but on the Bellerophon's return to Plymouth,
after transferring Napoleon to the Northumberland, both of them,
together with Planat and the other officers with the exception of
three, were, by an order from the Admiralty, sent on board the Eurotas
frigate, which conveyed them to Malta, from whence, after remaining
some time as prisoners in Fort St Angelo, they were allowed to proceed
to Smyrna.

General Lallemand[14] was about forty-two years of age, of a thick
strong make; his manners not pleasing, and his appearance by no means
prepossessing. During the whole time he was in the Bellerophon, he was
morose and abstracted, and seemed much alarmed lest he should be given
up to the French Government; and there can be little doubt, had he
fallen into its power, he would have shared the fate of Ney, as he
had, with the troops under his command, joined Napoleon on his return
from Elba. He had formerly been, for several years, one of
Buonaparte's aide-de-camps, and during the time he was in the
Bellerophon always did that duty in rotation with Montholon and
Gourgaud; one of them sleeping in his clothes on a mattress every
night outside of the door of the cabin he slept in. The other two
aide-de-camps, Generals Montholon and Gourgaud, were young men about
thirty-two years of age, the former an officer in the cavalry, and the
other in the artillery: they were both of good families; but their
attachment to Buonaparte induced them to give up their country and
property to follow him.

         [Footnote 14: [Lallemand, if I recollect right, had begun the
         counter-revolution in Bonaparte's favour in the north-east of
         France, and anticipated the moment of success, so that his
         scheme had failed. I have some reason to think (being at
         Paris at the time and much with those who knew something of
         what was going on) that he would have been condemned to death
         along with Ney had he fallen into the hands of the restored
         Government. His person should be described.--SCOTT.]]

Madame Montholon was a quiet unassuming woman, gave no trouble, and
seemed perfectly satisfied, provided she were allowed to accompany
her husband. She had with her one fine little boy, about four years
old, and I believe left another child at nurse in France.

Count Las Cases, though he bore the title of Counsellor of State, held
no official situation with Buonaparte; nor did I perfectly understand
how he came to accompany him on his departure from France, as he was
not with him in Elba: but the intimacy appeared to have been formed
since his return from that island. Napoleon was fond of his
conversation. He was of small stature, being little more than five
feet high, and slightly made. He always spoke of his master in terms
of enthusiasm, and resisted every application from his wife and family
to remain behind, being determined to follow wherever Buonaparte might
be sent. He took with him his eldest son, a quick intelligent boy of
thirteen.

Monsieur Maingaut, the surgeon, with all the domestics beyond the
twelve who went to St Helena, were conveyed in the Bellerophon to
Portsmouth, and from thence sent to Cherbourg, and landed there.
Monsieur Saint Catharine, a lad about sixteen, nephew to the Empress
Josephine, and a native of Martinique, was provided with a passage to
that island in one of our sloops of war.

Captain Prontowski, a Pole, was allowed to proceed to St Helena, some
time after the Northumberland sailed. Why this indulgence was granted
to him, I never clearly understood; but it was said to be in
consequence of the representations he made to the British Government,
of the very strong attachment he entertained to his fallen master,--a
feeling, as far as I could judge, which prevailed with equal force in
the breasts of all those who accompanied him from France, without
excepting Madame Bertrand, who, when not influenced by the horror she
entertained of being banished to St Helena, always spoke of him not
only with affection, but in the language of respect and enthusiasm.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sir Walter Scott adds at the end of his notes:--

     I declare against abridgement. You are publishing a great and
     interesting national document, in which accuracy is everything,
     and abridgement takes greatly from its authenticity. Anything
     that can be pointed out as what might be personally injurious to
     these individuals whose attachment to a fallen master renders
     them objects of interest ought of course to be retrenched. But on
     no other account would I in Capt. M.'s place consent to alter a
     word of a narrative written down at the time; and this you may
     depend upon, that the more minute the narrative is the more it
     will be interesting to the public. Minuteness is in itself the
     voucher for authenticity. I presume to press this general remark.

     The whole narrative is as fine, manly, and explicit an account as
     ever was given of so interesting a transaction. It is one in
     which Captain Maitland not only vindicates his own character, but
     guarantees that of the British nation. I really, since an
     opportunity is given me by Capt. Maitland's confidence, protest
     against its being snipped and clipped like the feet of the
     ladies who wished to qualify themselves for the glass slipper.

     The corrections in point of mere style are generally for the
     better, and, I think, ought to be adopted. But let an idea get
     abroad that your narrative has been altered and modified to suit
     existing times, and the public suspicion will greatly outrun the
     fact and suppose that material cancels or alterations have been
     made.]




APPENDIX.


So many erroneous statements have gone abroad, as to the terms of
Buonaparte's reception on board the Bellerophon, that I conceive it
right to give the following correspondence, although at the expense of
some repetition; in order to its being distinctly seen, that the good
faith of the British nation was not compromised on that occasion, but
that His Majesty's Government were at perfect liberty, as far as those
terms were concerned, to act as they thought best.


                                  "Tonnant, at anchor under Berryhead,
                                                     7th August, 1815.

"SIR,

"Count Las Cases having this morning stated to me that he understood
from you, when he was on board the Bellerophon in Basque Roads, on a
mission from General Buonaparte, that you were authorized to receive
the General and his suite on board the ship you command, for
conveyance to England; and that you assured him, at the same time,
that both the General and his suite would be well received there; you
are to report for my information, such observations as you may
consider it necessary to make upon these assertions.

  "I am, Sir,
           Your most obedient,
                            humble servant,
                                         KEITH, Admiral."

  "Captain Maitland,
  Bellerophon."


                                                  "H.M.S. Bellerophon,
                                     Plymouth Sound, 8th August, 1815.

"MY LORD,

"I have to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship's letter of
yesterday's date, informing me that Count Las Cases had stated to you,
that he had understood from me when he was on board the Bellerophon in
Basque Roads, on a mission from General Buonaparte, that I was
authorized to receive the General and his suite on board the ship I
command, for a conveyance to England, and that I assured him at the
same time, that both the General and his suite would be well received
there; and directing me to report for your Lordship's information such
observations as I may consider it necessary to make upon these
assertions. I shall, in consequence, state, to the best of my
recollection, the whole of the transaction that took place between
Count Las Cases and me, on the 14th of July, respecting the
embarkation of Napoleon Buonaparte, for the veracity of which I beg to
refer your Lordship to Captain Sartorius as to what was said in the
morning, and to that officer and Captain Gambier (the Myrmidon having
joined me in the afternoon) as to what passed in the evening.

"Your Lordship being informed already of the flag of truce that came
out to me on the 10th of July, as well as of every thing that occurred
on that occasion, I shall confine myself to the transactions of the
14th of the same month.

"Early in the morning of that day, the officer of the watch informed
me, a schooner, bearing a flag of truce, was approaching: on her
joining the ship, about seven A.M. the Count Las Cases and General
Lallemand came on board, when, on being shown into the cabin, Las
Cases asked me if any answer had been returned to the letter sent by
me to Sir Henry Hotham respecting Napoleon Buonaparte being allowed to
pass for America, either in the frigates or in a neutral vessel. I
informed him no answer had been returned, though I hourly expected, in
consequence of those despatches, Sir Henry Hotham would arrive; and,
as I had told Monsieur Las Cases, when last on board, that I should
send my boat in when the answer came, it was quite unnecessary to have
sent out a flag of truce on that account:--there, for the time, the
conversation terminated. On their coming on board, I had made the
signal for the Captain of the Slaney, being desirous of having a
witness to all that might pass.

"After breakfast (during which Captain Sartorius came on board) we
retired to the after-cabin, when Monsieur Las Cases began on the same
subject, and said, 'The Emperor was so anxious to stop the further
effusion of blood, that he would go to America in any way the English
Government would sanction, either in a neutral, a disarmed frigate, or
an English ship of war.' To which I replied, 'I have no authority to
permit any of those measures; but if he chooses to come on board the
ship I command, I think, under the orders I am acting with, I may
venture to receive him and carry him to England; but, if I do so, I
can in no way be answerable for the reception he may meet with (this I
repeated several times); when Las Cases said, 'I have little doubt,
under those circumstances, that you will see the Emperor on board the
Bellerophon.' After some more general conversation, and the above
being frequently repeated, Monsieur Las Cases and General Lallemand
took their leave: and I assure your Lordship that I never, in any way,
entered into conditions with respect to the reception General
Buonaparte was to meet with; nor was it, at that time, finally
arranged that he was to come on board the Bellerophon. In the course
of conversation, Las Cases asked me whether I thought Buonaparte would
be well received in England; to which I gave the only answer I could
do in my situation--'That I did not at all know what was the intention
of the British Government; but I had no reason to suppose he would not
be well received.' It is here worthy of remark, that when Las Cases
came on board, he assured me that Buonaparte was then at Rochefort,
and that it would be necessary for him to go there to report the
conversation that had passed between us (this I can prove by the
testimony of Captain Sartorius, and the first Lieutenant of this ship,
to whom I spoke of it at the time), which statement was not fact;
Buonaparte never having quitted Isle d'Aix, or the frigates, after the
3rd.

"I was, therefore, much surprised at seeing Monsieur Las Cases on
board again before seven o'clock the same evening; and one of the
first questions I put to him was, whether he had been at Rochefort. He
answered, that on returning to Isle d'Aix, he found that Buonaparte
had arrived there.

"Monsieur Las Cases then presented to me the letter Count Bertrand
wrote concerning Buonaparte's intention to come on board the ship (a
copy of which has been transmitted to your Lordship by Sir Henry
Hotham); and it was not till then agreed upon that I should receive
him; when either Monsieur Las Cases, or General Gourgaud (I am not
positive which, as I was employed writing my own despatches), wrote to
Bertrand to inform him of it. While paper was preparing to write the
letter, I said again to Monsieur Las Cases, 'You will recollect I have
no authority for making conditions of any sort.' Nor has Monsieur Las
Cases ever started such an idea till the day before yesterday. That it
was not the feeling of Buonaparte, or the rest of his people, I will
give strong proof, drawn from the conversations they have held with
me.

"As I never heard the subject mentioned till two days ago, I shall not
detail every conversation that has passed, but confine myself to that
period.

"The night that the squadron anchored at the back of Berryhead,
Buonaparte sent for me about 10 P.M. and said he was informed by
Bertrand, that I had received orders to remove him to the
Northumberland, and wished to know if that was the case; on being told
that it was, he requested I would write a letter to Bertrand, stating
I had such orders, that it might not appear that he went of his own
accord, but that he had been forced to do so. I told him, I could have
no objection, and wrote a letter to that effect (a copy of which is
here annexed), which your Lordship afterwards sanctioned, and desired
me, if he required it, to give him a copy of the order.

"After having arranged that matter, I was going to withdraw, when he
requested me to remain, as he had something more to say: he then began
complaining of his treatment in being forced to go to St Helena: among
other things, he observed, 'They say I made no conditions: certainly,
I made no conditions: how could a private man (_un particulier_) make
conditions with a nation? I wanted nothing from them but hospitality,
or (as the ancients would express it) air and water. I threw myself on
the generosity of the English nation; I claimed a place _sur leurs
foyers_, and my only wish was to purchase a small estate and end my
life in tranquillity.' After more of the same sort of conversation I
left him for the night.

"On the morning he removed from the Bellerophon to the Northumberland,
he sent for me again, and said, 'I have sent for you to express my
gratitude for your conduct to me, while I have been on board the ship
you command. My reception in England has been very different from what
I expected; but you throughout have behaved like a man of honour; and
I request you will accept my thanks, as well as convey them to the
officers, and ship's company of the Bellerophon.'

"Soon afterwards Montholon came to me from Buonaparte; but, to
understand what passed between him and me, I must revert to a
conversation that I had with Madame Bertrand on the passage from
Rochefort.

"It is not necessary to state how the conversation commenced, as it
does not apply to the present transaction; but she informed me, that
it was Buonaparte's intention to present me with a box containing his
picture set with diamonds. I answered, 'I hope not, for I cannot
receive it.' 'Then you will offend him very much,' she said. 'If that
is the case,' I replied, 'I request you will take measures to prevent
its being offered, as it is absolutely impossible I can accept of it;
and I wish to spare him the mortification, and myself the pain, of a
refusal.' There the matter dropt, and I heard no more of it, till
about half an hour before Buonaparte quitted the Bellerophon, when
Montholon came to me, and said he was desired by Buonaparte to express
the high sense he entertained of my conduct throughout the whole of
the transaction: that it had been his intention to present me with a
box containing his portrait, but that he understood I was determined
not to accept it. I said, 'Placed as I was, I felt it impossible to
receive a present from him, though I was highly flattered at the
testimony he had borne to the uprightness of my conduct throughout.'
Montholon then added, 'One of the greatest causes of chagrin he feels
in not being admitted to an interview with the Prince Regent, is, that
he had determined to ask as a favour, your being promoted to the rank
of Rear-Admiral.' To which I replied, 'That would have been quite
impossible, but I do not the less feel the kindness of the intention.'
I then said, 'I am hurt that Las Cases should say I held forth any
assurances as to the reception Buonaparte was to meet with in
England.' 'Oh!' said he, 'Las Cases is disappointed in his
expectations; and as he negotiated the affair, he attributes the
Emperor's situation to himself: but I can assure you, that he
(Buonaparte) feels convinced you have acted like a man of honour
throughout.'

"As your Lordship overheard part of a conversation which took place
between Las Cases and me on the quarter-deck of the Bellerophon, I
shall not detail it; but on that occasion, I positively denied having
promised anything as to the reception of Buonaparte and his suite; and
I believe your Lordship was of opinion he could not make out the
statement to you.

"It is extremely unpleasant for me to be under the necessity of
entering into a detail of this sort; but the unhandsome representation
Monsieur Las Cases has made to your Lordship of my conduct, has
obliged me to produce proofs of the light in which the transaction was
viewed by Buonaparte as well as his attendants.

"I again repeat, that Captains Gambier and Sartorius can verify the
principal part of what I have stated, as far as concerns the charge
made against me by Count Las Cases.

  "I have the honour to be,
                      Your Lordship's
                             Most obedient humble servant,
                                               FREDERICK L. MAITLAND."

  "To the Right Hon.
  Viscount Keith, G.C.B.
  &c. &c. &c."


                                           "Slaney, in Plymouth Sound,
                                                    15th August, 1815.

"MY LORD,

"I have read Captain Maitland's letter to your Lordship, of the 8th
instant, containing his observations upon the assertions made on the
preceding day by Count Las Cases; and I most fully attest the
correctness of the statement he has made, so far as relates to the
conversations that took place in my presence.

  "I have the honour to be,
                     Your Lordship's
                                Most obedient humble servant,
                                                      G. R. SARTORIUS,
                                              Capt. of H.M.S. Slaney."

  "To the Right Hon.
  Viscount Keith, G.C.B.
  &c. &c. &c."


A letter to the same effect as the foregoing was written to Lord
Keith, by Captain Gambier, of the Myrmidon, and forwarded by his
Lordship to the Admiralty, with my report; of which, by some accident,
the Admiral's secretary did not furnish me with a copy.




ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.


I.

LIST OF OFFICERS borne on the Books of H.M.S. Bellerophon in July
1815.

  Captain Fred. L. Maitland.
  Lieutenant Andrew Mott.[15]
    "        William Walford.
    "        John Bowerbank.
    "        Gabriel Christie.
    "        Edward William Ramsay.
  Captain of Marines, George Marshall.
  Lieutenant of Marines, J. W. Simpson.
    "                    Henry Smith.
  Master, Stephen Vale.
  Surgeon, Barry O'Meara.
  Assistant-Surgeon, A. Milne.
    "                E. Graebke.
  Chaplain, J. W. Wynne.
  Purser, George Jackson.

         [Footnote 15: "Our new first lieutenant, Mr Andrew Mott, was
         the best officer I ever saw in charge of a quarter-deck. I
         often wondered when that man slept, eat, or dressed himself,
         for he was hardly ever missed from deck, was always fresh and
         vigorous, and his dress and appearance would, at any time,
         have done honour to the queen's drawing-room. Maitland was,
         withal, rather a little easy-going, and it occurred to me
         that, knowing his defect in this way, he contrived always to
         get a tolerable tartar of a first lieutenant, so that between
         the captain's good nature and the lieutenant's severity,
         which he occasionally checked and tempered when he thought
         the lieutenant was likely to exceed bounds, the ship was kept
         in capital discipline."--Home's _Memoirs_, p. 209.]


II.

Letter from EPHRAIM GRAEBKE, assistant-surgeon on board H.M.S.
Bellerophon, to his mother, giving an account of Napoleon's surrender
(British Museum, Additional MSS. 34,710, f. 81).


                                   H.M.S. Bellerophon, Plymouth Sound,
                                               Tuesday, July 30, 1815.

MY DEAR MOTHER,

You will be surprised at not hearing from me, and knowing the
Bellerophon's arrival in England, but when I tell you no private
letters were allowed to leave the ship before to-day, that will cease.
It's unnecessary to say that we have got Buonaparte and suite on
board, as it was known in England previous to our arrival, which took
place on the 24th instant in Torbay. The circumstances which led to
his surrender were his defeats in all points, and was it not for the
strict blockade we kept up would [_sic_] have escaped to America. We
heard of his being on board the French frigate Saale off Rochfort,
from which moment we watched his movements if possible more closely
than before. On the morning of the 14th instant, observing a schooner
bearing a flag of truce on board standing towards us, we hove to for
her, when Count Lascazas and General Lallemande came on board with
proposals from Buonaparte, in consequence of which we came to anchor
in the evening in the roads off Rochelle. Next morning, 15th instant,
at 4 A.M. observed a man-of-war brig standing out and beating towards
us, we immediately dispatched all our boats. Lieut. Mott in the barge
brought Buonaparte on board at 7, the boats were busily employed in
bringing his retinue and baggage, and I never saw men exert themselves
so much as ours did that day, lest Admiral Hotham should take him, as
he was off the harbour in the Superb, and saw him coming on board
here, and did all in his power to get in, but did not come to anchor
before 11 in the forenoon. Buonaparte is a fine-looking man, inclined
to corpulency, is five feet six inches in height, his hair turning
grey, and a little bald on the crown of the head, no whiskers,
complexion French yellow, eyes grey, Roman nose, good mouth and chin,
neck short, big belly, arms stout, small white hands, and shews a good
leg. He wears a cocked hat somewhat like our old-fashioned three
cornered ones, with the tri-coloured cockade in it, plain green coat,
cape red, and cuffs the same, plain gold epaulets, and a large star on
the left breast, white waistcoat and breeches and white silk
stockings, thin shoes and buckles. Eats but two meals in the day,
breakfast and dinner, and these are sumptuous, fish, flesh, and fowl,
wines, fruit, various French dishes &c. &c. He breakfasts about eleven
and dines at six, is about half an hour at each, when he generally
comes on deck or goes into the after-cabin to study. We do not know
what's to be done with him yet, he remains on board until we hear from
the allies. In his suite are Marshal Bertrand, Duc de Rovigo [Savary]
once the French minister of police, Counts Lascazas and Montholon,
Generals Lallemande and Gourgou, several Lieut.-Colonels and Captains,
to enumerate them would be tedious. We have 33 on board, 17 were sent
on board the Myrmidon, Captn. Gambier. There are two Countesses on
board, but not to be compared even to our English ladies. Their
children are handsome.... We performed the comedy of the "Poor
Gentleman" before Buonaparte and suite. I acted the part of Corporal
Foss. It went off very well, our scenery was excellent. The female
dresses were badly suited for Midshipmen. I long to hear from you and
will expect to hear all the news.... I wish you were all here to see
Buonaparte, the curiosity of all ranks to see him is excessive. There
are Admiralty orders not to allow any person whatever on board, but
they crowd in boats round the ship, and he very condescendingly stands
looking at them through a spyglass. There are two frigates, one on
each side of us, the Eurotas and Liffey, and their boats are
constantly rowing about the ship to keep off the boats. We prisoners
have no other amusement than to look at them contending for places. I
hope we will soon be allowed to go ashore, as I want to see Captain
Sandys. You must be tired reading this long epistle. We took some
prizes, one ship laden with Buonaparte's soldiers, one chasse maree
laden with resin, and the Cephulus man-of-war brig sent in a West
Indiaman laden with sugar, coffee, &c. from Martinique bound to
France, and for which we will share by mutual agreements. Give my
affectionate love to Ally, Anne, Wilhelmina, Sophia and Jane. I know
the want of not being near them as my shirts are going to pieces, as
soon as I can afford the sum I will get some new ones. I have the old
number the same as when I left you and bought none since.... I remain,
my dear mother, your affectionate son,

                                                      EPHRAIM GRAEBKE.

_P.S._--I think myself very lucky to belong to the old Bellerophon at
this important time. Lose no time in answering this letter.

  Mrs GRAEBKE,
  MIDLETON, CO. CORK.


III.

Extracts from _Memoirs of an Aristocrat, and Reminiscences of the
Emperor Napoleon, by a Midshipman of the Bellerophon_ [George Home].
London, Whittaker & Co., and Bell & Bradfute, Edinburgh, 1838.


About six in the morning, the look-out man at the mast-head announced
a large ship of war standing direct in for the roadstead, which
Captain Maitland, suspecting to be the Superb, bearing the flag of
Admiral Sir Henry Hotham, he gave immediate orders to hoist out the
barge, and dispatched her, under the command of the first lieutenant,
to the French brig, being apprehensive that if the Admiral arrived
before the brig got out, that Napoleon would deliver himself up to the
Admiral instead of us, and thus have lost us so much honour.

As our barge approached, the brig hove to, and from the moment she
came alongside, we watched every motion with deep anxiety. Like all
Napoleon's movements, he was not slow even in this, his last free act.
The barge had not remained ten minutes alongside, before we saw the
rigging of the brig crowded with men, persons stepping down the side
into the boat, and the next moment she shoved off, and gave way for
the ship; while the waving of the men's hats in the rigging, and the
cheering which we heard faintly in the distance, left no doubt that
the expected guest was approaching. A general's guard of marines was
ordered aft on the quarter-deck, and the boatswain stood, whistle in
hand, ready to do the honours of the side. The lieutenants stood
grouped first on the quarter-deck, and we more humble middies behind
them, while the captain, evidently in much anxiety, kept trudging
backwards and forwards between the gangway and his own cabin,
sometimes peeping out at one of the quarter-deck ports, to see if the
barge was drawing near.

It is a sin to mix up any trifling story with so great an event; but a
circumstance occurred so laughable of itself, rendered more so from
the solemnity of the occasion, that I cannot resist mentioning it.
While in this state of eager expectation, a young midshipman, one of
the Bruces of Kennet, I think, walked very demurely up to Manning, the
boatswain, who was standing all importance at the gangway, and after
comically eyeing his squat figure and bronzed countenance, Bruce
gently laid hold of one of his whiskers, to which the boatswain
good-naturedly submitted, as the youngster was a great favourite with
him.

"Manning," says he, most sentimentally, "this is the proudest day of
your life; you are this day to do the honours of the side to the
greatest man the world ever produced or ever will produce."

Here the boatswain eyed him with proud delight.

"And along with the great Napoleon, the name of Manning, the
boatswain of the Bellerophon, will go down to the latest posterity;
and, as a relic of that great man, permit me, my dear Manning, to
preserve a lock of your hair."

Here he made an infernal tug at the boatswain's immense whisker, and
fairly carried away a part of it, making his way through the crowd,
and down below with the speed of an arrow. The infuriated boatswain,
finding he had passed so rapidly from the sublime to the ridiculous,
through the instrumentality of this imp of a youngster, could vent his
rage in no way but by making his glazed hat spin full force after his
tantalizer, with a "G--d d----n your young eyes and limbs." The hat,
however, fell far short of young Bruce, and the noise and half burst
of laughter the trick occasioned drew the attention of the Captain,
who, coming up, with a "What, what's all this?" the poor boatswain was
glad to draw to his hat and resume his position.

The barge approached, and ranged alongside. The first lieutenant came
up the side, and to Maitland's eager and blunt question, "Have you got
him?" he answered in the affirmative. After the lieutenant came
Savary, followed by Marshal Bertrand, who bowed and fell back a pace
on the gangway to await the ascent of their master. And now came the
little great man himself, wrapped up in his gray greatcoat buttoned to
the chin, three-cocked hat and Hussar boots, without any sword, I
suppose as emblematical of his changed condition. Maitland received
him with every mark of respect, as far as look and deportment could
indicate; but he was _not_ received with the respect due to a crowned
head, which was afterwards insidiously thrown out against Maitland. So
far from that, the captain, on Napoleon's addressing him, only moved
his hat, as to a general officer, and remained covered while the
Emperor spoke to him. His expressions were brief, I believe only
reiterating what he had stated the day previous in his letter to the
Prince Regent, "That he placed himself under the protection of the
British nation, and under that of the British commander as the
representative of his sovereign." The captain again moved his hat, and
turned to conduct the Emperor to the cabin. As he passed through the
officers assembled on the quarter-deck, he repeatedly bowed slightly
to us, and smiled. What an ineffable beauty there was in that smile,
his teeth were finely set, and as white as ivory, and his mouth had a
charm about it that I have never seen in any other human countenance.
I marked his fine robust figure as he followed Captain Maitland into
the cabin, and, boy as I was, I said to myself, "Now have I a tale for
futurity."

       *       *       *       *       *

I shall never forget that morning we made Ushant. I had come on deck
at four in the morning to take the morning watch, and the washing of
decks had just begun, when, to my astonishment, I saw the Emperor come
out of the cabin at that early hour, and make for the poop-ladder. Had
I known what human misery is as well as I do now, when I have myself
experienced the most cruel injustice and persecution on a lesser
scale, the restlessness of Napoleon, or his being unable to close an
eye, would have in no way surprised me. If a petty care can break our
sleep, what must have been _his_ feeling who had lost the fairest
empire on the face of the globe; nay, who had lost a world? From the
wetness of the decks, he was in danger of falling at every step, and I
immediately stepped up to him, hat in hand, and tendered him my arm,
which he laid hold of at once, smiling, and pointing to the poop,
saying in broken English, "the poop, the poop"; he ascended the
poop-ladder leaning on my arm; and having gained the deck, he quitted
his hold and mounted upon a gun-slide, nodding and smiling thanks, for
my attention, and pointing to the land he said, "Ushant, Cape Ushant."
I replied, "Yes, sire," and withdrew. He then took out a pocket-glass
and applied it to his eye, looking eagerly at the land. In this
position, he remained from five in the morning to nearly mid-day,
without paying any attention to what was passing around him, or
speaking to one of his suite, who had been standing behind him for
several hours.

No wonder he thus gazed, it was the last look of the land of his
glory, and I am convinced he felt it such. What must have been his
feelings in those few hours, how painful the retrospect, and how awful
the look forward!--_there_ still lay before him that land which he had
made so famous, where his proud name had risen until it "o'ershadowed
the earth with his fame"; there had he been worshipped almost as a
god, and bowed to by every servile knee, that now, in the hour of
bitter adversity, had basely deserted and betrayed him. Never man was
read such a lesson as must have passed before him in that brief space,
unless, really, that the greatness of the change, the suddenness of
the fall had benumbed all feeling, and left him only a mass of
contending passions which combated and stilled each other by the very
violence of their working. But this was not the case with Napoleon,
his emotion was visible, he hung upon the land until it looked only a
speck in the distance, and then, turning, stepped from the gun-slide
into the arms of his faithful Bertrand, who stood ready to receive his
fallen master. He uttered not a word as he tottered down the
poop-ladder, his head hung heavily forward, so as to render his
countenance scarcely visible, and in this way he was conducted to his
cabin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Amongst other plans for killing the time, and lightening the tedium of
a sea passage to the refugees, we bethought us of getting up a play.
This was managed by one of the lieutenants of marines, a fellow of
great taste, and some one or two of the midshipmen, who pretended to
skill in the Shakespearian art. What the piece was I do not recollect,
but when it was announced to the Emperor, by Captain Maitland, and the
immortal honour of his imperial presence begged, for a few minutes, he
laughed very heartily, consented instantly; and turning to Lady
Bertrand, told her that she must stand his interpreter. The stage was
fitted up between decks, more, I am afraid, in ship-shape than
theatrical style; and, sure enough, Napoleon and his whole suite
attended. He was much amused with those who took the female parts,
which, by the way, was the most smooth-chinned of our young gentlemen,
remarking that they were rather a little Dutch built for fine ladies;
and, after good-naturedly sitting for nearly twenty minutes, he rose,
smiled to the actors, and retired. I mention these circumstances, by
way of showing the last glimpses of sunshine that enlivened the
exile's closing scene.

On the 23rd, we made the land; and, on the 24th, at seven P.M., we
came to an anchor in Torbay, when the first lieutenant was immediately
put on shore, with orders to proceed by land to Plymouth, with
dispatches for Lord Keith, at that time admiral on the Plymouth
station.

I happened to be midshipman of the boat, which conveyed the first
lieutenant on shore; and no sooner had we got clear of him, than I was
taken prisoner by some twenty young ladies, marched off to a fine
house in the little town, regaled with tea and clouted cream, and
bored with five thousand questions about Napoleon, the ridiculousness
of which I have often laughed at since. "What like was he--was he
really a man? Were his hands and clothes all over blood when he came
on board? Was it true that he had killed three horses in riding from
Waterloo to the Bellerophon? Were we not all frightened for him? Was
his voice like thunder? Could I possibly get them a sight of the
monster, just that they might be able to say they had seen him?" etc.
etc. I assured those inquisitive nymphs, that the reports they had
heard were all nonsense; that the Emperor was not only a man, but a
very handsome man too; young withal, had no more blood upon his hands
or clothes than was now upon their pure white dresses; that if by
chance they got a look of him at the gangway, they would fall in love
with him directly; that so far from his hands being red with blood,
they were as small, white, and soft as their own charming fingers, and
his voice, instead of resembling thunder, was as sweet and musical as
their own. This account of the Emperor's beauty perfectly astonished
the recluses of Torbay; some misbelieved altogether, while the
curiosity of others was excited beyond all bounds. A general
proposition was now made, that I should bundle them, like live cattle,
into my little cutter, and take them all on board to gratify their
curiosity at once. This was quite contrary to orders. Not a soul was
allowed to come on board the ship, and I had to plead a thousand
excuses for my want of gallantry, in not complying with the very
natural wish of my young companions. As far as I was concerned,
resistance was vain; I was again seized, hurried down to the boat, and
had the pleasure of seeing it filled to cramming with the charmers of
Torbay. This was a devil of a mess;--I might as well have gone into
the mouth of a cannon, as have carried such a cargo alongside the
ship,--the thing was impossible. So I had nothing for it, but to call
aside the boat's crew, and whisper to them to use gentle violence with
my young boarders, and set them down on shore. This was glorious fun
to Jack;--to work they fell, and in the midst of screams, laughter,
and a few d----n my eyes, ma'am, don't kick so hard, on the part of
the Bellerophons, we had our nymphs safely deposited on terra firma,
and were off in a trice, enjoying the general discomfiture of the poor
ladies, who were equally laughed at by the lookers-on, on shore.... We
left Torbay, on the 26th July at 4 A.M., and at 4 in the evening came
to an anchor in Plymouth Sound, just within the breakwater, then only
beginning to shew its head above water at low tide. It has since, I am
told, been made a splendid affair; but it then only afforded footing
for a few gazers from the shore, who perched themselves upon it to
watch the cabin-windows of the Bellerophon, in hopes of getting a
glimpse of the Emperor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The signal for the Emperor's being on deck was the officers
uncovering. No sooner was this ceremony noticed, than the rush from
without took place, and the screaming and swearing commenced, which
was very considerably heightened upon one occasion by a plan of some
of our wise-headed young gentlemen. Being in want of amusement, they
bethought them of priming the fire engine, which happened to be
standing on the poop, and after clapping a relay of hands ready to ply
it to advantage, we uncovered, and waited the approach of the boats.
No sooner were they within reach, than off went the water-spout, which
fell "alike on the just and the unjust," for both the dockyard men and
the spectators who came within its compass got a good ducking. This
prank created an infernal confusion, and our trick having been twigged
by the first lieutenant, the chief actors in this notable exploit were
ordered up to the mast-head to enjoy their frolic for a few hours,
which evidently much gratified the unfortunate sufferers from the
effects of the operation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Maitland, knowing how he stood with "the powers that be," was
determined not to commit himself by accepting of any present of value
from Napoleon, as he knew it would be directly made a handle of to
injure his character as a British officer. He, therefore, I believe,
refused to accept of a gold snuff-box tendered him by the Emperor as a
mark of his esteem, but he did not refuse the offer of a few dozens of
French wine, as a present to Mrs Maitland, who had been personally
introduced to Napoleon, as far as introduction was possible, that is,
she had been permitted to come within a foot or two of the ship, and
Napoleon most condescendingly stepped to the gangway, smiled and bowed
to her. Mrs Maitland was a charming little woman in those
days,--alas! we are all getting old now,--a daughter of green Erin,
and Napoleon seemed greatly pleased with her appearance, hence the
offer of this trifling present as a token of respect. The captain took
it on shore in the gig, and no sooner had she struck the beach than
the custom-house officers jumped on board, and made a seizure of it,
hauled the boat up upon the beach, and clapped his Majesty's broad
arrow upon her, that fatal mark indicative of being in "the hands of
the Philistines" of the revenue. I shall never forget Maitland's
countenance when he came on board after this ridiculous and provoking
affair. Being deprived of his own boat by "the land-sharks," he was
obliged to hire a shore boat to bring off himself and his boat's crew,
and she was nearly alongside before the first lieutenant discovered
that there was a naval officer in her, and on taking a look with his
glass, he exclaimed, "Good God! there is the captain coming off in a
shore boat." The side was manned, and when Maitland stepped on board,
he turned to Mott with a most rueful countenance, remarking, "they
have seized the wine." This was petty work, and to make the thing more
provoking, they had poor Maitland stuck up next day in the Plymothian
journals as having been detected in the act of conveying wine and
other presents on shore, received from Napoleon. What was the fate of
the wine, I do not know, but the gig, of course, was restored
immediately, and I should suppose the wine also, considering the
shameful nature of the seizure.

On the 4th of August we left Plymouth Sound in company with the
Tonnant, bearing the flag of Admiral Lord Keith, and on the 6th we
came to an anchor off Berryhead, there to wait the arrival of the
Northumberland, which was hourly expected. She made her appearance in
the course of the day, and after due salutes from both admiral's
ships, in which noisy greeting we of course joined, for we are very
polite at sea, in our own thundering way, she took up her station
close by us.

Towards evening Lord Keith came on board of us, and had a long
personal interview with Napoleon in the cabin, which we may judge was
not of the pleasantest nature. From some intemperate threat of Savary,
I believe, who had declared that he would not allow his master to
leave the Bellerophon alive, to go into such wretched captivity, it
was judged proper to deprive the refugees of their arms. A good many
swords, and several brace of pistols, marked with a large silver N. at
the butt end, were brought down to the gun-room, where they remained
for some hours. Three of the swords belonged to Napoleon, and two of
them were pointed out to us as those he wore at Marengo and
Austerlitz.

I never in my life felt such a strong inclination to lay my hands on
what was not my own. A sword I durst not think of, but could I have
got a brace of pistols, or even one solitary pistol, belonging to
Napoleon, I would have thought myself the happiest man alive; but it
would not do, detection was certain, and with bitter vexation I saw
them carried out of the gun-room. Now, reader, do you think this
would have been a pardonable theft? Their value was nothing in my
eyes; it was a relic of the great man I wanted, and I cared not what
it was, or how I came by it; therefore, had I been able to secure a
pistol, my conscience would never have smote me with having done
wrong; and I am sure, could the Emperor have known with what a pure
spirit of devotion I meant to commit the theft, he would have ordered
me a brace instantly.

It was this night settled that our surgeon, Barry O'Meara, who
afterwards became so conspicuous for his spirited defence of his
patient against the tyranny of Sir Hudson Lowe (I hate to write that
man's name,) should follow Napoleon to St Helena in the character of
surgeon, his own, who looked a poor creature, and was continually
sea-sick while on board, having declined, I believe, to accompany him
farther, and the 7th was appointed for Napoleon leaving the ship.

The 7th came; it was a dull cloudy sunless day, and every countenance
was overcast with gloom. We had not seen the Emperor for a week, and
we were all anxious to observe the change that the horrible tidings of
his destination had made upon him. Lord Keith, Admiral Cockburn, and
Captain Ross, came on board about eleven o'clock; and it was intimated
to Napoleon, that they were ready to conduct him on board the
Northumberland. A general's guard of marines was drawn up on the
quarter-deck, to receive him as he came out of the cabin; while part
of his suite, and we officers, were ranged about, anxiously waiting
the appearance of the future exile of St Helena.

Napoleon was long of attending to the intimation of the Admiral's; and
upon Cockburn's becoming impatient, and remarking to old Lord Keith
that he should be put in mind, Keith replied, "No, no, much greater
men than either you or I have waited longer for him before now; let
him take his time, let him take his time." This was nobly said of the
fine old Scotchman; and although Cockburn and I are blood relations,
and I have a particular penchant for my lineage, I cannot help
remarking that his manner denoted a great want of feeling. I suppose
he was pitched upon by Castlereagh as a proper tool to execute his
harsh commands.

At length Napoleon appeared, but oh, how sadly changed from the time
we had last seen him on deck. Though quite plain, he was scrupulously
cleanly in his person and dress, but that had been forgot, his clothes
were ill put on, his beard unshaved, and his countenance pale and
haggard. There was a want of firmness in his gait; his brow was
overcast, and his whole visage bespoke the deepest melancholy; and it
needed but a glance to convince the most careless observer that
Napoleon considered himself a doomed man. In this trying hour,
however, he lost not his courtesy or presence of mind; instinctively
he raised his hat to the guard of marines, when they presented arms as
he passed, slightly inclined his head, and even smiled to us officers
as he passed through us, returned the salute of the admirals with calm
dignity, and, walking up to Captain Maitland, addressed him with great
eagerness for nearly ten minutes.

How distinct is every feature, every trait, every line of that
majestic countenance in my mind's eye at this moment, now that
two-and-twenty years have passed away; but who could witness such a
scene and ever forget it? The Romans said that a "great man struggling
with adversity was a sight that the gods looked on with pleasure."
Here, indeed, was adversity, and here was true greatness struggling
against it; but to a mere mortal it was a heart-rending sight. The
ship's deck looked like a place of execution, and we only wanted the
headsman, his block, and his axe, to complete the scene.

The purport of his speech to Captain Maitland, was thanking _him_, his
officers, and ship's company, for the polite attention he had received
while on board of the Bellerophon, which he should ever hold in kind
remembrance. Something more he would have said after the first pause,
and a feeling of deep emotion laboured in his face, and swelled his
breast, he looked earnestly in Maitland's face for a moment, as if he
was about to renew his speech, but utterance seemed denied; and,
slightly moving his hat in salutation, he turned to Savary and
L'Allemand, who were not allowed to accompany him to St Helena, and
spoke to them for a few minutes.

What a horrid gloom overhung the ship: had his execution been about
to take place there could not have prevailed a more dead silence, so
much so, that had a pin fallen from one of the tops on the deck, I am
convinced it would have been heard; and to any one who has known the
general buzz of one of our seventy-fours, even at the quietest hour,
it is a proof how deeply the attention of every man on board must have
been riveted. Before leaving the ship he turned to us on the
quarter-deck, once more waved his hand in token of adieu, took hold of
the man-ropes, and walked down the side, taking his seat in the
Northumberland's barge between Lord Keith and Admiral Cockburn.

Even in this hour of hopeless misery, he lost not sight of that
indescribable charm by which he won the hearts of men. On looking back
to the ship he saw every head, that could get stuck out of a port,
gazing after him; even the rough countenances of the men bespoke a
sympathy for his cruel fate, and, apparently conscious of their
feelings, the exiled chief again lifted his hat, and inclined his head
to the gazing ship's company.


THE END.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Surrender of Napoleon, by
Sir Frederick Lewis Maitland

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SURRENDER OF NAPOLEON ***

***** This file should be named 28934.txt or 28934.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/9/3/28934/

Produced by StevenGibbs, Christine P. Travers and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
