Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, June 1, 1880, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Harper's Young People, June 1, 1880
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: May 26, 2009 [EBook #28975]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, JUNE 1, 1880 ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S

YOUNG PEOPLE

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.--NO. 31. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, June 1, 1880. Copyright, 1880, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50 per
Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: THE MORAL PIRATES EXAMINE THEIR CRAFT.]

THE MORAL PIRATES.

BY WM. L. ALDEN.


CHAPTER I.

"The truth is, John," said Mr. Wilson to his brother, "I am troubled
about my boy. Here it is the first of July, and he can't go back to
school until the middle of September. He will be idle all that time, and
I'm afraid he'll get into mischief. Now the other day I found him
reading a wretched story about pirates. Why should a son of mine care to
read about pirates?"

"Because he's a boy. All boys like piratical stories. I know, when I was
a boy, I thought that if I could be either a pirate or a stage-driver I
should be perfectly happy. Of course you don't want Harry to read
rubbish; but it doesn't follow, because a boy reads stories about
piracy, that he wants to commit murder and robbery. I didn't want to
kill anybody: I wanted to be a moral and benevolent pirate. But here
comes Harry across the lawn. What will you give me if I will find
something for him to do this summer that will make him forget all about
piracy?"

"I only wish you would. Tell me what your plan is."

"Come here a minute, Harry," said Uncle John. "Now own up: do you like
books about pirates?"

"Well, yes, uncle, I do."

"So did I when I was your age. I thought it would be the best fun in the
world to be a Red Revenger of the Seas."

"Wouldn't it, though!" exclaimed Harry. "I don't mean it would be fun
to kill people, and to steal watches, but to have a schooner of your
own, and go cruising everywhere, and have storms and--and--hurricanes,
you know."

"Why shouldn't you do it this summer?" asked Uncle John. "If you want to
cruise in a craft of your own, you shall do it; that is, if your father
doesn't object. A schooner would be a little too big for a boy of
thirteen, but you and two or three other fellows might make a splendid
cruise in a row-boat. You could have a mast and sail, and you could take
provisions and things, and cruise from Harlem all the way up into the
lakes in the Northern woods. It would be all the same as piracy, except
that you would not be committing crimes, and making innocent people
wretched."

"Uncle John, it would be just gorgeous! We'd have a gun, and a lot of
fishing-lines, and we could live on fish and bears. There's bears in the
woods, you know."

"You won't find many bears, I'm afraid; but you would have to take a
gun, and you might possibly find a wild-cat or two. Who is there that
would go with you?"

"Oh, there's Tom Schuyler, and Joe and Jim Sharpe; and there's Sam
McGrath--though he'd be quarrelling all the time. Maybe Charley Smith's
father would let him go. He is a first-rate fellow. You'd ought to see
him play base-ball once!"

"Three boys besides yourself would be enough. If you have too many,
there will be too much risk of quarrelling. There is one thing you must
be sure of--no boy must go who can't swim."

"Oh, all the fellows can swim, except Bill Town. He was pretty near
drowned last summer. He'd been bragging about what a stunning swimmer he
was, and the boys believed him; so one day one of the fellows shoved him
off the float, where we go in swimming at our school, and he thought he
was dead for sure. The water was only up to his neck, but he couldn't
swim a stroke."

"Well, if you can get three good fellows to go with you--boys that you
know are not young scamps, but are the kind of boys that your father
would be willing to have you associate with--I'll give you a boat and a
tent, and you shall have a better cruise than any pirate ever had; for
no real pirate ever found any fun in being a thief and a murderer. You
go and see Tom and the Sharpe boys, and tell them about it. I'll see
about the boat as soon as you have chosen your crew."

"You are quite sure that your plan is a good one?" asked Mr. Wilson, as
the boy vanished, with sparkling eyes, to search for his comrades.
"Isn't it very risky to let the boys go off by themselves in a boat?
Won't they get drowned?"

"There is always more or less danger in boating," replied Uncle John;
"but the boys can swim; and they can not learn prudence and
self-reliance without running some risks. Yes, it is a good plan, I am
sure. It will give them plenty of exercise in the open air, and will
teach them to like manly, honest sports. You see that the reason Harry
likes piratical stories is his natural love of adventure. I venture to
predict that if their cruise turns out well, those four boys will think
stories of pirates are stupid as well as silly."

So the matter was decided. Harry found that Tom Schuyler and the Sharpe
boys were delighted with the plan, and Uncle John soon obtained the
consent of Mr. Schuyler and Mr. Sharpe. The boys immediately began to
make preparations for the cruise; and Uncle John bought a row-boat, and
employed a boat-builder to make such alterations as were necessary to
fit it for service.

The boat was what is called a Whitehall row-boat. She was seventeen feet
long, and rowed very easily, and she carried a small mast with a
spritsail. By Uncle John's orders an air-tight box, made of tin, was
fitted into each end of the boat, so that, even if she were to be filled
with water, the air in the tin boxes would float her. She was painted
white outside, with a narrow blue streak, and dark brown inside. Harry
named her the _Whitewing_; and his mother made a beautiful silk signal
for her, which was to be carried at the sprit when under sail, and on a
small staff at the bow of the boat at other times. For oars there were
two pairs of light seven-foot sculls, and a pair of ten-foot oars, each
of which was to be pulled by a single boy. The rudder was fitted with a
yoke and a pair of lines, and the sail was of new and very light canvas.
On one side of the boat was a little locker, made to hold a gun; and on
the other side were places for fishing-rods and fishing-tackle. When she
was brought around to Harlem, and Harry saw her for the first time, he
was so overjoyed that he turned two or three hand-springs, bringing up
during the last one against a post--an exploit which nearly broke his
shin, and induced his uncle to remark that he would never rise to
distinction as a Moral Pirate unless he could give up turning
hand-springs while on duty.

Harry could row very fairly, for he belonged to a boat club at school.
It was not very much of a club; but then the club boat was not very much
of a boat, being a small, flat-bottomed skiff, which leaked so badly
that she could not be kept afloat unless one boy kept constantly at work
bailing. However, Harry learned to row in her, and he now found this
knowledge very useful. He was anxious to start on the cruise
immediately, but his uncle insisted that the crew must first be trained.
"I must teach you to sail, and you must teach your crew to row," said
Uncle John. "The Department will never consent to let a boat go on a
cruise unless her commander and her crew know their duty."

"What's the Department?" asked Harry.

"The Navy Department in the United States service has the whole charge
of the navy, and sends vessels where it pleases. Now I consider that I
represent a Department of Moral Piracy, and I therefore superintend the
fitting out of the _Whitewing_. You can't expect moral piracy to
flourish unless you respect the Department, and obey its orders."

"All right, uncle," replied Harry. "Of course the Department furnishes
stores and everything else for a cruise, doesn't it?"

"I suppose it must," said his uncle, laughing. "I didn't think of that
when I proposed to become a Department."

The boys met every day at Harlem, and practiced rowing. Uncle John
taught them how to sail the boat, by letting them take her out under
sail when there was very little breeze, while he kept close alongside in
another boat very much like the _Whitewing_. Harry sat in the
stern-sheets, holding the yoke lines. Tom Schuyler, who was fourteen
years old, and a boy of more than usual prudence, sat on the nearest
thwart, and held the sheet, which passed under a cleat without being
made fast to it, in his hand. Next came Jim Sharpe, whose business it
was to unship the mast when the captain should order sail to be taken
in; and on the forward thwart sat Joe Sharpe, who was not quite twelve,
and who kept the boat-hook within reach, so as to use it on coming to
shore. The boys kept the same positions when rowing, Tom Schuyler being
the stroke. Uncle John told them that if every one always had the same
seat, and had a particular duty assigned to him, it would prevent
confusion and dispute, and greatly increase the safety of the vessel and
crew.

It was not long before Harry could sail the boat nicely, and the others,
by attending closely to Uncle John's lessons, learned almost as much as
their young captain. So far as boat-sailing can be taught in fair
weather, Harry was carefully and thoroughly taught in six or seven
lessons, and could handle the _Whitewing_ beautifully; but the ability
to judge of the weather, to tell when it is going to blow, and how the
wind will probably shift, can, of course, be learned only by actual
experience.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




KENSINGTON CLOVER.

BY MARCIA D. BRADBURY.


  Such a hubbub in the meadow!
    Such a rustling in the grass!
  "I feel injured," sighed the daisy,
    "Things have come to such a pass.
  To be worked in colored worsted,
    Ev'ry shade and line complete,
  Isn't very compliment'ry
    To a stylish marguerite."

  "One might call it," said the poppy,
    In a tone of sleepy fun,
  "Flowers raised by _crewel_ culture--
    Only, please, excuse the pun."
  "Oh, don't joke on such a subject,"
    Said an innocent, rather low,
  While from sev'ral other quarters
    Came a disapproving "No."

  "Really," laughed a sweet red clover,
    "I flushed up quite nervously
  When I saw a head on canvas
    So exceedingly like me.
  If the honey-bee had been there,
    He'd have buzzed about that leaf.
  Ah! I only wish he had been;
    'Twould have served him right--the thief!"

  Suddenly through all this chatter
    Came a voice, like music's flow,
  From a little yellow violet
    Growing in the marsh below.
  All the flowers nodded silence
    As she said--a little pause--
  "What a foolish fuss, my field-mates,
    You have made with no real cause!

  "Are they fragrant? Can you smell them?
    Though they are so bright and fair,
  Do the breezes, when they touch them,
    Carry incense on the air?
  When they fade, will hidden blossoms
    Take the places of those dead?
  Shooting stems and growing leaflets
    Crown the drooping plant instead?"
  And the others, well contented,
    When the violet's song was o'er,
  Tossed their pretty heads and said they
    Wouldn't worry any more.




A TREE ALBUM.


Many of our boys and girls, we venture to say, would like to know how to
make a collection of specimens illustrating the trees of their own
neighborhood and of other parts of the country. We hardly need remind
them that the only way to get a complete knowledge and to enjoy the
beauty of natural objects is to examine them closely, and find out all
their little peculiarities. We may take long walks through the groves
and woods, and spend a great deal of time there, and yet when we get
home we may know very little about them. We might remember that we had
seen a great many trees, but not be able to tell of what kinds they
were, how their branches and leaves were shaped, how tall they were, or
anything about them.

Now such knowledge is very pleasant to have, and will afford a great
deal of pure enjoyment. The more we know about the beautiful trees, the
more we will value them, and find entertainment in admiring them.

It is a good plan to bring home from our rambles small portions of them,
so that we can examine them minutely at our leisure. The bark, the
leaves, and the blossoms are the most important; they are what we look
at to recognize a tree, and we should have specimens of each. The first
necessary step is to find some way of arranging and preserving them. A
good method is to get some pasteboard or stout paper, and cut it into
sheets of convenient size--say eight inches long and five wide. Then a
box will be needed to keep them in, so that they will not get lost or
soiled. Give one sheet to each tree, and upon it paste a piece of the
bark, a leaf, and a blossom. The bark should not be taken from the tree
where it is too coarse and clumsy, but where it is nearly smooth and
perfect, and gives the best idea of the tree; nor should too thin a
piece be taken, as when it gets dry it may wrinkle up and crumble to
pieces. It may be well to take off with the bark a thin layer of the
wood to stiffen it and keep it smooth. A piece of bark about three
inches long and two wide would be of a good size.

The blossoms will have to be pressed and dried before they are attached
to the sheet. Take care to lay them so as to show the face and the
inside parts as plainly as possible. It may be well in some cases to
press two or more blossoms, laying them in different positions, so that
every part can be seen.

The leaves will be easy, as they are mostly flat. If they are small,
several may be taken, or a little twig. If the under side of the leaf is
very different from the upper, or is remarkable for its hairs, or for
any reason, one leaf should be placed with the under side upward. Care
should be taken to do the pasting neatly, so that the sheet will look
pretty, and the parts can be readily examined by the eye alone, or with
a magnifying-glass or microscope, which reveals many interesting facts
that can not be discovered by the eye unassisted.

In this way the trees can be studied at any time, even in winter, when
the world outside is bare and dreary, and the evenings are long, and
afford fine opportunity for such amusement. And what is more important
still, the sheets prepared as we have shown can be sent through the mail
to distant parts of the land, where the trees displayed on them do not
grow, and are wholly unknown.

Thus our young readers, scattered over the United States and Canada and
elsewhere, can supply each other with specimens, so that each may make
up a collection from the trees growing over a very wide area.

Most trees are very long lived, and some are still living that are known
to be hundreds of years old. Certain kinds of wood, too, seem almost
incapable of decay if protected from the weather.

Probably the oldest timber in the world which has been used by man is
that found in the ancient temples of Egypt, in connection with the
stone-work, which is known to be at least four thousand years old. This,
the only wood used in the construction of the temple, is in the form of
ties, holding the end of one stone to another. When two blocks were laid
in place, an excavation about an inch deep was made in each block, into
which a tie shaped like an hour-glass was driven.

The ties appear to have been of the tamarisk or shittim wood, of which
the ark was constructed--a sacred tree in ancient Egypt, and now very
rarely found in the valley of the Nile. The dovetailed ties are just as
sound now as on the day of their insertion. Although fuel is extremely
scarce in the country, these bits of wood are not large enough to make
it an object with the Arabs to heave off layer after layer to obtain
them. Had they been of bronze, half the old temples would have been
destroyed years ago.

If those among our young friends who are alive to the charms of nature
will arrange some specimens of trees on the plan we have explained, and
label the sheets with the common names of the trees, and the scientific
names also, if they can find them out from their parents, we will be
glad to hear from them, and will publish their letters in the
Post-office Box, so that they can make exchanges with each other.

Very little folks, who may find it too hard to get the bark and the
blossoms, can begin by making collections simply of the leaves. Be
careful to cut the sheets exactly of the size we have mentioned, so
that when laid together they will make a nice even pile like a book.
And, remember, don't send them to us; only write, and let the
Post-office Box know when you have them ready for exchange. We will
publish the fact in the YOUNG PEOPLE, so that you can send the specimens
to each other, and make up the collections among yourselves.




[Begun in No. 19 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, March 9.]

ACROSS THE OCEAN; OR, A BOY'S FIRST VOYAGE.

A True Story.

BY J. O. DAVIDSON.


CHAPTER XIII.

FRANK GETS PROMOTED.

[Illustration: A CLIPPER-SHIP LOADING WITH TEA AT HONG-KONG.]

Frank Austin's duties as supercargo were soon over, and he decided to go
ashore and look about him. The moment he was seen looking over the side,
a clamor arose from the Chinese boats around the steamer, which reminded
him of the chorus of monkeys and parrots at Gibraltar.

"Good boatee, my--no upset!"

"Fast sampan--no can catchee!"

"He good, my better!"

"Come see--here allee best sampan!"

Frank was confounded by the uproar, and not less so by observing that
all the boatmen, and boat-women too (for there were plenty of the
latter), seemed to be exactly alike, so that if he picked one, and
happened to lose him, it would be no joke to find him again. As he stood
hesitating, a good-looking Chinese girl hailed him from a neat little
boat with a staring red eye painted on side of its bow.

"Hi! say! My namee Whampoa Sam; washee, keepee state-loom, row boat, can
do all for two bob [fifty cents]. Come tly!"

Such a list of accomplishments was not to be resisted, and Austin at
once took his seat under the stern awning. The young woman spread her
sail, and turned the boat shoreward, steering it with an immense oar.

Away they went, past huge high-pooped junks that looked like monster
rocking-chairs; past stately English steamers, beside which the little
painted sampans seemed mere toys; past big clumsy rice barges, and trim
gigs pulled by sturdy Western sailors. While threading her way through
this maze of shipping as dexterously as any seaman, the girl found time
to answer Frank's eager questions upon all that he saw, down to the
staring eyes on the bow of her boat, which, as she explained, were meant
to "help boatee see go straight, allee same man's eye." The mystery of
her masculine name, which had puzzled Austin not a little, was also
cleared up.

"My Whampoa Sam _wife_; Sam up Canton side now--can catchee more piecee
dollar there. My row boatee till come back. Work boatee, my, allee same
man. Choy! you no b'lieve? Bime-by pickaninny Sam row boatee too, muchee
ploper. Look see!"

[Illustration: LITTLE WHAMPOA STEERS THE BOAT TO SHORE.]

She pushed aside a plank, and hauled out of a box underneath it a little
round-faced "four-year-old," so like a big doll that Frank almost took
him for one, till he saw the child grasp the steering oar in his little
pudgy hands, and actually steer the boat to shore.

"Well," thought our hero, "the Chinese may well be good boatmen, if they
begin as early as that."

But he afterward learned that on the great Chinese rivers thousands of
families live altogether in boats, each of which has an allotted place
of its own. In Canton alone these floating streets have a population of
300,000, and it is common to see two-year-old children toddling about
with small wooden buoys on their backs, fixed there by their careful
mothers in case they should fall overboard, which they do, on an
average, three or four times a day.

For several hundred feet around the great stone quay extended a perfect
army of Chinese boats, clustering together like bees; but Mrs. Sam soon
made her way through them, and Austin leaped ashore. He had hardly done
so when a crowd of sturdy natives surrounded him, with ear-piercing
screams, asking if he wished to "ride in chair." This being a new idea,
he accepted at once, and presently found himself being carried off in a
sedan-chair by four sinewy fellows, who went at a long swinging trot,
like the "palanquin hamals" of British India.

[Illustration: STREET OF STAIRS, HONG-KONG.]

Six more runners were speedily added, for the way now led up a street
made entirely of stairs, like the "Hundred-and-one Steps" at
Constantinople. Then out into the open country, and away toward the
summit of Victoria Peak. Up, up, they went, poor Frank getting so bumped
about that he was sorely tempted to get out and walk; but he reached the
top at last, and saw the whole town, the harbor, and miles upon miles of
the inland country out-spread below him like a map. The trip, when paid
for, proved wonderfully cheap, though the reason given for this made
Frank feel rather "cheap" himself:

"Large piecee man, two bob; small piecee man, _like you_, one bob. All
right--chin-chin!"

During his rambles through the town Austin saw many curious sights. He
was shown through a native bank, where three Chinese "tellers" were
standing ankle-deep in gold, and counting so rapidly that the ring of
the coins sounded like one continuous chime. In another place a house
was being built _from the roof downward_, and he was told that "rain
come, walls muchee hurt, so put up roof first!"

Having now reached the farthest point of his voyage, Frank began to
think about getting home again, and finding that all who had shipped on
the _Arizona_ were entitled, by the terms of their agreement, to a free
passage in the next homeward-bound steamer, he went down to the
company's office to get his ticket.

As he passed the open window a familiar voice from within caught his
ear. It was that of his Captain, who was having a talk with the
company's agent.

"I really don't know whom to send with this cargo," said the agent. "It
_must_ go in a day or two, and none of my clerks can be spared. Do _you_
know of anybody, Gray?"

"Well, there's a young fellow who came out with me, that might do. He's
rather young, certainly, but I put him in charge at Singapore, and he
did very well. Hello! there he is. Austin!"

Frank entered, cap in hand.

"My lad," said the Captain, "we're sending a cargo of tin and opium to
Canton, and you might take it up, unless you'd rather go home."

"I _was_ thinking of going, sir," said Austin; "but if you have anything
for me to do till I can get letters from home, I shall be very glad to
do it."

"All right, my boy. Just look in here to-morrow morning, and we'll
arrange it."

The next morning, sure enough, Frank received his appointment, and set
sail up the river for Canton a few days later, with a handful of the
_Arizona's_ picked men for his crew, and old Herrick as his second in
command--the latter remarking, with a grin, that "'twarn't a bad start
for a youngster to begin his first v'y'ge as coal-heaver, and end it as
Cap'n."

       *       *       *       *       *

Our hero's farther adventures in China--how he succeeded so well with
his first cargo as to be at once intrusted with a second--how he
received letters from home, reporting all well--how he studied the ins
and outs of the "up-country" trade, and the ways of the Chinese, finding
both very different from what he had imagined--and how he soon got a
good appointment in the office, which he held for several years--would
make too long a story to be told here. But he always bore in mind the
last words of old Herrick, which were:

"Frank, my son, next time you meet a young feller wantin' to run away to
sea, jist you tell him you've tried it yourself, and 'tain't so nice as
it looks. If a lad goes to sea 'cause he's fit for it, and ain't 'fraid
o' _hard work_, well and good; but if he goes 'cause he's quarrelled
with his bread and butter, all along o' stuffin' his head with dime
novels and sich like rubbish, I guess he'll end where you began--in the
coal-hole. Now don't you forget them words o' mine." And Frank never
did.

THE END.




SETTING THE BROOK TO WORK.

BY WILLIAM O. STODDARD.


The brook had never done a stroke of work in its life. So long, at
least, as Mart Benson could remember, it had gurgled across the foot of
his father's garden, tumbling heels over head down the little fall in
the middle, as if it knew it had got into some place that didn't belong
to it, and was in a desperate hurry to get out.

Then it made a dive under the fence, into Squire Spencer's orchard, and
then under another fence, and through a low stone archway across the
river road.

That was the end of the brook, for the river let it right in without so
much as saying, "How do you do?"

"It isn't more'n two feet across anywhere," said Mart to himself. "It
isn't so much as that just above the fall, and it's a foot and a half
below the top of the bank. I could make a dam there, and a flume."

Mart was a great whittler.

Mr. Jellicombe, the carpenter, used to say of him that when he wasn't
whittling, it was because he had had to stop to sharpen his knife.

"Well," said Mart, in reply to that, "what's the fun of whittling with a
dull knife? If you want a knife to cut straight and smooth, you've got
to have an edge on it."

So there was always a pretty good edge on his, and it was curious what
things he managed to carve out with it.

He had made a wooden chain out of a long square stick that Mr.
Jellicombe brought to the house to mend a door frame with. He had made
kites, walking-sticks, bats, wooden spoons and forks, a little wagon,
and any number of other things, of which about all that could be said
was that they gave him plenty of good whittling.

But Mart had been to the mill the day before, and had waited there two
hours while his father was having a grist of corn ground. All those two
hours had been spent by Mart with a shingle in one hand and his knife in
the other, but at the end of them there was hardly a notch in the
shingle, and Mart shut up his knife, and put it back in his pocket.

He had been watching the great water-wheel and the flume that brought
the water to it from the pond. He had studied the dam, too, and had been
thinking of the brook in his father's garden.

The more he looked at it now, the clearer he saw that it was high time
for that brook to be doing something.

It was easy enough to gather flat stones and pile them in at the narrow
place at the top of the fall. That was little more than a foot high, to
be sure, but the dam would more than double it.

Then he begged a couple of old raisin boxes at the store where his
father traded, and when the ends were knocked out of them, and they were
firmly set in the top of the little dam, one behind the other, they made
a good enough flume. The end of the foremost one stuck out beyond the
stones, and the water came pouring from it beautifully.

It took all the rest of that day for Mart to get the brook penned in and
compelled to run through the raisin boxes, for he had to keep on putting
stones and sods and dirt behind the dam to strengthen it, as the water
rose higher and higher. It would not do to make a pond of the garden,
but so long as the brook did not overflow its banks it would do no harm.
Sometimes it had run over in the spring, or after very heavy
rain-storms.

The next day Mart hardly went near his new dam, and he was a very
serious and busy boy indeed, considering that he was only thirteen.

A piece of wood had to be found first two and a half inches square, and
about a foot and a half long. It took a great deal of work to shave down
the four corners of that piece of wood till it had eight smooth sides
all just alike. Then Mart was compelled to go over to Jellicombe's
carpenter shop and put his piece of wood in a vise, so it would be held
steady, while he took a saw and sawed a long groove, more than half an
inch deep, in the middle of each one of those eight faces. Jellicombe
told him he had done that job very well.

"Looks like a hub for something. Going to make a wheel this time?"

"I'll show you. May I take your inch auger and bore a hole in each end?"

"Go ahead. If you ain't kerful, you'll split yer timber."

Mart was careful then, but he had trouble before him. He had picked out
a number of very straight shingles, and he was whittling away on these
now as if he was being paid for it. He cut them down to six inches long,
and shaved them at the sides, so that two pieces laid together were just
a foot wide. With a little more whittling after that he fitted them all,
one by one, into the eight grooves in his "hub," and his "water-wheel"
was done. A proud boy was Mart, but he ought to have kept on being
"careful."

"Look out!" said Mr. Jellicombe, as Mart rapped hard on one of the
shingle pieces, to drive it in more firmly; but it was too late.

"Crack!" the hub was split from end to end.

"Got to go to work and make a new one," said Mart, ruefully.

"Guess I wouldn't. Just take a couple of two-inch screws, and screw that
together again. It'll be stronger'n it was before."

That was a capital idea, and it only took a few minutes; to carry it
into effect.

"Make your end pins of hard wood," said Mr. Jellicombe; "and shave 'em
smooth. Then they'll run easy."'

That was easy enough, but one of those "endpins" was made of an old
broom handle, and was more than a foot long.

"I see what you're up to," said the carpenter, with a grin. "You've made
a right down good job of it, too. Grease your journals before you let
'em get wet."

Mart's "journals" for his end pins to run in were two holes he bored in
a couple of boards. When these were stuck up on each side of the lower
end of his flume, and the water-wheel was set in its place, Mart took
off his hat and shouted,

"Hurrah! the brook's at work!"

So it was, for it was rushing fiercely through the two old raisin boxes,
and down upon the wide "paddles" of Mart's wheel, and this was spinning
around at a tremendous rate.

"You've done it!"

"Is that you, Mr. Jellicombe? I didn't know you'd come."

"You've done it. Now what?"

"Why, I'm going to put another wheel on this long end pin, and set
another one above it, and put a strap over both of them."

"Oh, that's it. Going to make a pulley and band. All right. It'll run.
There's plenty of water-power. But what then? Going to build a mill?"

"Guess not. All I care for is, I've set the brook to work."

"Why don't you make it do something, then, now you've found out how?"

"Don't know of anything small enough for a brook like that."

"I'll tell you, then. There's your mother's big churn, that goes with a
crank. You whittle out a wheel twice as large as that, and set it a
little stronger, and raise your dam a few inches, and you can run that
churn."

"Hurrah! I'll do it!"

There was a good deal of busy whittling before Mart finished that second
job, but before two weeks were over there was butter on Mrs. Benson's
dinner table which had actually been churned by the brook at the bottom
of the garden.




HOW THE SECRET WAS STOLEN.


Benjamin Huntsman, a native of Lincolnshire, England, was the inventor
of cast steel. The discovery was kept a great secret, and as the success
it obtained was very great, many efforts were made to find out how it
was prepared.

One cold winter's night, while the snow was falling in heavy flakes, and
Huntsman's manufactory threw its red glare of light over the
neighborhood, a person of the most abject appearance presented himself
at the entrance, praying for permission to share the warmth and shelter
which it afforded. The humane workmen found the appeal irresistible, and
the apparent beggar was permitted to take up his quarters in a warm
corner of the building.

A careful scrutiny would have discovered little real sleep in the
drowsiness that seemed to overtake the stranger; for he eagerly watched
every movement of the workmen while they went through the operations of
the newly discovered process.

He observed, first of all, that bars of blistered steel were broken into
small pieces, two or three inches in length, and placed in crucibles of
fire-clay. When nearly full, a little green glass, broken into small
fragments, was spread over the top, and the whole covered with a closely
fitting cover. The crucibles were then placed in a furnace, and after a
lapse of from three to four hours, during which the crucibles were
examined from time to time, to see that the metal was thoroughly melted,
the workmen lifted the crucible from its place on the furnace by means
of tongs, and its molten contents, blazing, sparkling, and spurting,
were poured into a mould of cast iron. When cool, the mould was
unscrewed, and a bar of cast steel was presented.

The uninvited spectator of these operations effected his escape without
detection, and before many months had passed the Huntsman manufactory
was not the only one where cast steel was produced.




A JOLLY DAY IN THE PARK.

BY F. E. FRYATT.


"Hip, hip, hurrah! to-morrow's my birthday, Miss Eleanor," shouted Harry
Lewis, bursting into my garden like a young hurricane. "Cousin Jack's
coming over from New York, Nell's got a holiday, and father says if
you'll decide and go with us, we may have a jollification somewhere."

"How delightful! Of course I'll go, with the greatest pleasure. Suppose
we choose Prospect Park?"

"Capital! Miss Eleanor, good-by; excuse haste. I'm off to tell Nell, and
hurry mother with the birthday cake and the fixin's."

Old Prob predicted fair weather, and he was as good as his word, for the
sun shone in the bluest of skies, and the morning was fresh and breezy,
when Nell and I stepped into an open car, followed by Harry, Jack, and
the family lunch basket.

Every one looked happy, and even the car horses trotted briskly along
the broad avenue to the Plaza as if they knew we were anxious to be
there.

Arrived at the Park, the two boys put their wise heads together, and
gallantly agreed that I should be captain of the party, a decision they
shortly after announced in an important manner.

"Follow your leader, then," said I, helping Nell into one of the large
phaetons standing near the entrance.

"All right," responded Harry, as the whip cracked, and away dashed the
horses in fine style.

Now we swept past velvety fields and wood-crowned hills; now we rolled
softly under arches of tremulous green; then through miniature valleys
between blossoming heights; now through shadowy forests, and away again
beside open meadows.

"How lovely!" cried Nell, rapturously, as one moment we caught the
glitter of a distant lake, the next the twinkle of a reedy pool overhung
with hazel and alder bushes.

Even the boys were stirred to delight, when, crossing a rustic bridge,
they could look down and see a dashing cascade tumble and foam over
mossy precipices, till it reached a stony basin below, where it lay
golden and clear as a topaz.

On and on we sped, past new wonders of blossoming groves and ferny
hollows, to the end of our ride.

Which way to turn, after we left our basket at the Lodge, we knew not.
Labyrinthine walks met us in every direction, leading to bowers and
dells and wildernesses innumerable.

"Let us take the nearest," said I; and away we went, tripping it gayly,
till the path ended unexpectedly at the loveliest bower imaginable, all
hidden with clambering vines and shrubbery, from which peeped out a
thatched roof, with two odd little peaks, surrounded by bird-houses.

Past its pretty arches, as we sat on the rustic seats, we could look
upon acres of velvety meadow, dotted with wild flowers, and gay with
groups of pleasure-seekers.

Near by, Madam Nurse trundled Miss Baby; yonder, a company of girls
played at "bean bags"; further on, the croquet-players were busy with
mallets and balls; while passing to and fro were troops of
school-children making the most of their weekly holiday.

"Listen!" cried Nell, suddenly, as sounds of music were borne to us on
the breeze.

"It's 'Nancy Lee'; go for it!" shouted Harry, leaping over the railing,
and darting across the meadow.

"Come on; follow the sound, girls," cried Jack, bounding after him.

Nell and I take the path sedately, "hastening slowly," for we can not
help stopping to listen to the soft twitter of the birds, to admire the
golden laburnums; we even wait to let a sparrow hop leisurely down the
walk before us.

We have had time to spare, for when we arrive in sight of the
"merry-go-round" in its pretty pavilion, the musical history of Nancy
Lee is still being repeated.

But a pretty vision greets us. Whirl, whirl, whirl, flies a magic ring
of boys and girls, with their fluttering ribbons, bright eyes, and
tossing curls.

Click, click, clash a score of shining blades, as the eager riders, with
parted lips, lean forward and try to pick off the rings from a
projecting bar.

Now the music begins to die away; the circle moves slower, and slower,
and slower.

"Count your rings!" shouts the man in charge. "The biggest number wins
the free ride."

"Sixteen, eighteen, twenty," calls out Harry, triumphantly, adding, as
he spies Nellie, "There's my sister; give her a ride."

Nothing loath, Nell is strapped on a gray pony, and waits impatiently
for the music. The seats fill, the organ sounds forth, "I'm called
Little Buttercup," and away they float as light as feathers.

"It is well they're so merry," groans the poor horse beneath them in the
cellar, as he treads his weary beat; "they'd find it a sad-go-round if
we changed places."

The noon hour strikes; the merry-go-round man is mortal, and wants his
dinner, which reminds us that it is time to send for the lunch basket.

Choosing a lovely spot under a spreading elm in the meadow, we lay the
cloth, set out our luncheon, brew a pitcher of fine lemonade, and sit
down, the merriest of merry parties.

In the midst of our entertainment four uninvited but welcome visitors
make their appearance. Guess who they are.

A toad came first, and sat blinking at us with the funniest airs
imaginable. Then a robin-redbreast and two sparrows edged their way up
to our table with great caution, winked at us with bright eyes,
concluded we were trustworthy, and ventured to peck at the crumbs we
scattered for them.

[Illustration: PROSPECT PARK, BROOKLYN.--DRAWN BY L. W. ATWATER.]

Gathering up the remnants of our feast, we wended our way to a pretty
summer-house overlooking a small lake, in which sported a multitude of
gold-fish, a pair of swans, some geese, and a bevy of ducks with lovely
rings of red, purple, and gold-green feathers about their necks.

Here Nell and the boys found fine sport throwing crackers into the
water, and watching the ducks and fishes rush for them, but came away in
high disgust because one old drake gave the ducks and fishes hardly any
chance at all, but darted and dived and bobbed about so fast that he
grabbed a dozen pieces to their one.

"Good-by, old greedy; hope you'll never come up again!" cried Jack,
moving away, as the nimble fellow dove head-first till nothing but his
funny tail flirted above the water.

A peep at the deer, pony-rides for the boys, and a drive in the
goat-carriage for Nell, varied our ramble to the Aerial Skating Rink,
which we found on the other side of the Park.

As we came in sight of the elevated square of asphalt pavement, with its
gay cavalcade of skaters flitting to and fro inside the railings, the
boys hurrahed with delight.

"It's perfectly glorious; let's try it," shouted Harry, bounding down
the hill-side, followed closely by Jack.

"I could do that too," said Nell, imitating the movements of the
skaters.

"You shall try," replied I; and a minute later we were inside the
square, bargaining for a lesson on the odd three-wheeled triangular
arrangement, with its horse's head and handled reins.

"Plant your feet firmly on this brace," said the instructor, showing
Nell the iron bar; "hold the reins well in hand, bend your right knee,
and strike out with your foot as if skating; now your left; and away you
go."

Sure enough, off shot Nell, managing to keep up a tolerable speed, then
slacking, then increasing, then coming to a dead halt, as Jack,
shouting, "Clear the track!" bore down on her car, almost upsetting it.

"A miss is as good as a mile," screams Harry, flying by on the other
side, with flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes.

"Strike out, little girl!" cries a lad, giving Nell's car a push, and
sending her speeding along. In and out, around and about, they fly, like
mimic charioteers, until, fairly exhausted, they are willing to stop,
and go over to the Rotary Yacht, whose snow-white wings are visible from
the hill-top.

A pleasant walk across the sloping meadow and along by the side of a
small lake brings us to this novel boat, which is merely a great hollow
ring of seats, with oars and rowlocks for calm, and sails for breezy,
weather.

We step in and sit down; the wind, coming in soft puffs from the south,
sends us floating around and around with a dreamy, restful motion that
our tired little charioteers thoroughly appreciate as they lean back and
trail their hands idly through the cool water.

"Come, come," said I at last, "wake up for our row on the lake,
sleepers, and then heigho for home and supper!"

"I was only fooling, Miss Eleanor; I'm fresh as a lark," cried Harry,
leaping nimbly out on the platform.

"So am I," said Jack, lending a hand to Nellie.

"The Rotary Yacht will do for a rest, but this is what I call life,"
exclaimed Harry, as later he and Jack, with even sweep of the oars, sent
our pretty boat skimming over the waters of the lake.

Now we sped around curving shores, and past grassy capes; now we skirted
fairy islands and reedy shallows; then under hollow bridges, that gave
back jolly echoes to Nell's laughter and the dip of the oars.

"Quick, quick--quick, quick," screamed a bevy of ducks, hurrying to
shore, as we rounded a woody bend in the lake, and came upon them with a
rush that sent the water in diamond showers over their backs.

"Tirra-la, tirra-la," whistled a wood-thrush in the grove; "tirra-la,
tirra-la," answered another.

"Ah! that's a warning, children; he sings at sunset. See the light
shooting gold green through the trees; that means that our happy day is
over. And there's another sign; look over your right shoulder--the new
moon."

"Tu-whit, tu-whoo, good-night to you," hooted an owl, as we turned our
boat homeward.

"Don't be alarmed; we are going," sighed Harry, half sad that the jolly
day at Prospect Park was ended.




A BATTLE ON THE BUFFALO RANGE.


Between the half-breeds who form a large portion of the population of
the settlements of the Northwest, along the Red River of the North, and
their neighbors, the Sioux, exists a bitter enmity. Peace is seldom
declared between them, and when parties of Sioux and half-breeds meet,
bloody battles are the result.

Although the half-breeds are more civilized than the Indians, and live
in villages, generally near the forts or trading posts, they depend
largely upon buffalo-meat for their winter food, and upon buffalo-robes,
for which the traders give them guns, powder, shot, blankets, tea,
coffee, sugar, and other necessaries and luxuries of their life. To
obtain this meat and these robes they organize grand buffalo hunts every
summer and fall, each of which lasts for several months, and in which
hundreds of men engage. The hunters travel from their homes to the
distant hunting grounds on horseback; but they take with them long
trains of very curious-looking ox-carts, in which the women and
children, who go with their husbands and fathers on these long trips,
ride, and in which the buffalo-meat and hides are carried home.

The ox-carts, or "Pembina buggies," as they are often called, are very
strong and clumsy, and are made entirely of wood, generally by their
owners. The wooden wheels, turning on the ungreased wooden axles, make
the most horrible creaking and groaning; and when, as is often the case,
several hundred or a thousand of these carts are in one train, the noise
they make can be heard for miles.

Each cart is drawn by a single ox, attached to the rude shafts by a
simple and home-made harness of rawhide, with the aid of which the
patient beast draws a load of a thousand pounds for hundreds of miles,
at the rate of twenty or thirty miles a day.

As they approach the buffalo range, where they expect to find their
game, the hunters know that at any moment they may run across hunting
parties of the Sioux, and for them they keep a sharp look-out night and
day.

Some years ago a brave hunter by the name of Jean Bedell, whose home was
in Pembina, joined one of these great hunting parties, taking with him
his wife and their little child, a baby of but a few months old. The
party to which Jean belonged was so large that they had but little fear
of Indians, and did not guard against being surprised by them as
carefully as usual.

One morning as the brigade broke camp, and the long line of carts moved
slowly away toward Devil's Lake, which could be seen gleaming in the
distance, and near which the hunters felt sure they would find buffalo,
Jean Bedell found that a portion of his harness had given out, and he
must stay behind and mend it. He had just finished his task, and started
on after the carts, the groaning and screeching of which could still be
heard in the distance, when other and more terrible sounds, borne
clearly to his ear, caused him to come to a sudden halt.

The sounds that so startled him were quick shots, almost as steady as
volleys of musketry, and the terrible yell with which the Sioux charges
upon his enemy. Far down the valley the hunter could see sharp flashes
of fire pierce the cloud of dust that hung over the train of ox-carts,
and the dark mass of Sioux warriors charging down the hill-side, lashing
their ponies, firing and yelling as they went.

[Illustration: CUT OFF.--DRAWN BY W. M. CARY.]

Alone, and cut off from his companions, with his wife and baby to
protect, Jean Bedell had nothing to do but lie down, with his trusty
rifle in hand, powder and bullets by his side, and wait, determined to
sell his life as dearly as possible if worst came to worst.

For hours the hunter watched the fight, while his wife crouched in the
bottom of the cart, with her baby in her arms. He could see that the
carts had been formed in a semicircle, and from behind them his comrades
withstood charge after charge of the Indians, who would dash up to the
barrier of heavy carts, pour in a volley, and sweep away beyond rifle
range, until their own guns were reloaded.

At last, late in the afternoon, the battle came to an end. The Indians,
finding it impossible to drive the hunters from behind their barrier,
suddenly withdrew, and taking their dead with them, disappeared over the
hill down which they had dashed in the morning. They might make another
attack, but for the present all was safe, and Jean Bedell might rejoin
his friends. When he reached them, he found that though they were
rejoiced to have driven off the hated Sioux, their joy was mingled with
much sorrow, for there were many dead to be buried, and many wounded to
be cared for. Among the dead were several of the little children, to
whom stray bullets had found their way; and when Jean Bedell and his
wife saw the poor little bodies, they were very thankful that, on
account of a broken harness, their own darling baby had been kept at a
safe distance from the terrible battle.




[Begun in HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 24, April 13.]

THE STORY OF GEORGE WASHINGTON.

BY EDWARD CARY.


CHAPTER VIII.

I have said that the work which President Washington had to do was quite
new to the country. The people had been used to having all their affairs
attended to in their own States. None of the States was very large. Some
of them were very small, compared with what the States are now, so that
the public men in each were known by a greater part of the people than
they now are. Then distance seemed greater than it does now. It took
nearly as long to go from Boston to New York as it now does to go from
Boston to California; there was no telegraph any more than there were
railways and steam-boats, and news travelled as slowly as men did
themselves. You can see that it was harder for people in Georgia or New
Hampshire to know what was going on in New York than it is now for
people in Oregon or Florida to know what is being done in Washington.
Where there is ignorance there is always more distrust and doubt. Men
found it not easy to give up public business to a Congress, far away,
that they did not know much about. Washington set himself earnestly at
work to try and have things done so carefully, so honestly, and so
wisely, that the people would learn to trust the national government,
and live happily under it.

The national government had been meant especially to do three things:
First, to raise money and pay the debts of all the States; second, to
see that the country was rightly dealt with by other countries, and that
other countries were justly treated by our own; and third, in a general
way to do for the common good what no one State could do by itself.

The government has now for nearly a hundred years done this work very
well, and that fact is largely due to the way George Washington began
it. He was President for eight years.

It would not be easy to tell all the things he did in that time which
have had a good effect ever since, but it will be well to remember a few
of the principal ones. He always insisted on the full and honest payment
of the public debt, that is, of money borrowed by the government to
carry on the war, and so forth. He believed that a nation must keep its
word as much as a man must, if it expects other people to deal fairly
with it.

In order that the government might pay its debts, it was necessary for
it to get money from the people by taxes, and President Washington
showed very early that no man or set of men were to be allowed to refuse
to pay a fair share of these taxes, as fixed by law.

The people chose the Congress, and the Congress decided how the taxes
should be paid. When that was done, there must be no further dispute
about paying. If the people did not like the laws Congress made, they
could elect men to Congress who would change the laws, but until the
laws were changed in this way, they must be obeyed.

A large number of persons in the State of Pennsylvania refused to pay a
tax ordered by Congress, called an excise tax, which was a certain sum
on every barrel of whiskey made in the country. When Washington learned
of this, he sent word to these people that if they did not obey the
laws, he should have to compel them to; and as they took no notice of
this warning, he got together an army of 16,000 men, and sent it into
the State. This soon settled the trouble, and there has never been any
attempt, on a large scale, to resist a tax law in the United States
since then.

It is easy to see that Washington knew better than to do such a thing by
halves. He sent so large an army that to fight against it was hopeless,
and so there was no fighting.

It would have been well for the country if this wise example had always
been followed.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




THE CHILD SINGER.

BY LAURA FITCH.


In a narrow dirty street in the most miserable part of the great city of
London, a group of children were playing beside the gutter. They were
all dirty and ragged, and the faces of many were old and worldly-wise.
One little girl, however, though her dress was as torn and soiled as
that of any of the other dwellers in the filthy street, had a pretty
childish face. She was a bright-looking little one, with matted brown
hair hanging in tangled curls that had never known a brush, and a pair
of sweet dark eyes looking out trustfully into the uninviting world
around her. She stood a little apart from the others, leaning against
the doorway of a rickety tenement-house, humming softly to herself.

A rough-looking boy in the group by the gutter, hearing her low tones,
called out, "Louder, Nell; sing something."

The child obeyed; with her hands clasped, and her eyes fastened on the
speck of blue sky to be seen between the roofs of the tall, smoky
houses, she burst into a song. No wonder that the other children stopped
their noisy play, and listened. It was not their ignorance of music that
made the singing seem beautiful to those little street vagabonds. There
was in the clear voice of the child singer a strange, wistful tone, of
which she herself was unconscious, but which held the listener
spell-bound.

Nell had been born and bred in those low surroundings. She had never
seen the inside of a church, or heard other music than the whining tones
of a street organ, yet there was in her the very soul of music. She
lived in a wretched garret, with a dirty, slouchy woman whom she called
aunt, and loved as only a child or a woman can love one from whom she
receives no sign of affection. Miserable as such a life was, it might
have been worse.

One day Nell's aunt was brought home on a shutter; she had been run over
by a carriage, and instantly killed.

Now Nell was indeed destitute; no money, and no friends but her rough
neighbors. But these, though rough, were not hard-hearted; they would
have given her money, but they had none themselves, except what they
earned or stole each day. So they told her, if she wanted her aunt
buried properly, she must go out at night and sing, in which way she
would very likely earn enough, as people would pity so young a child.

So that night poor little Nell set out on her work of love. She walked
till she reached the broad streets and handsome houses that form the
London which the world knows. Here she sang. In the clear silent night
the childish voice rang out, and the hour and the stillness made its
wistful tones sound wild and weird. Up one street and down another the
little figure went singing, while its heart seemed breaking. A strange
excitement bore her up, and she felt no fatigue.

Her pathetic appeal was not in vain; it seemed to touch the hearts, and,
what is more difficult, the pockets, of all who heard her. When midnight
came, she thought of stopping only because most of the houses had closed
for the night, and there was little more to be obtained. So she took her
last stand in front of a fine old house in Kensington Square, in whose
windows lights were still burning. It was the home of Barech, the great
musician. As the tones of Nell's voice broke on the stillness of the
night, he paused in the work he was doing, and after a moment rose and
threw open the window. With amazement he saw the little childish figure
standing in the light of the street lamp, and while his artist's ear
drank in the wonderful tones with delight, his fatherly heart filled
with pity for the desolate child. When Nell ceased, he called to her,
and descending, opened the door and took her in.

From that moment Nell was no longer destitute, no longer friendless. In
Barech she had found a friend who never deserted her. Captivated by her
voice, he took the little waif into his heart and home, and thenceforth
she was protected, cared for, and educated. And he was amply rewarded
when, in after-years, the fame of Helen Barech spread over England. No
one then ever dreamed that the great singer began her career years ago,
one dark night, under the stars, a little outcast singing for money to
bury her dead.




"HE'S MY FRIEND."--A TRUE STORY.

BY AUNT FANNY.


Charley was the son of a young, rich, and beautiful widow, who lived in
one of the splendid up-town hotels of New York city. His mother was a
very busy woman, for she was a manager of the "Children's Retreat," the
"Children's Relief," the "Old Ladies' Mitigation Society," and ever so
many other charities, and these took up so much of her time that her own
poor little half-orphaned Charley was left pretty much to himself; for
Lizzie, his nurse, spent most of her time laughing and talking with the
other servants.

So Charley amused himself running up and down the stairs, and taking
trips with the elevator man, who was very fond of the bright little
fellow.

One day Charley wandered down the wide stairs, and along a corridor or
hall. He was throwing up a little ball and catching it as he went. At
the end of the hall he saw through an open door another flight of
stairs, very narrow, and rather dark. It was the stairs for the
servants' use.

"Hallo!" cried Charley, "here are some more stairs," and like the
learned monkey that let nothing escape him on his travels, down the
stairs went the boy on a voyage of discovery.

When he came to the bottom, which was far below the level of the street
outside, he walked along to an open door, and saw something which
dimpled his face all over with smiles; for, standing like a heron on one
leg, leaning against the wall opposite the door, was _another boy_. He
was twirling a little paper windmill fastened to a stick; his great
black eyes were dancing with glee, and as he laughed he showed two rows
of snow-white even teeth. At a stationary wash-tub was a big woman
washing clothes, and singing softly to herself, "'Way down in ole
Virginny."

Neither of them saw Charley, so, by way of introducing himself, he said,
"Hallo, boy."

The woman turned quickly round, and exclaimed, "Why, honey, whar did yer
come from?"

"I came down stairs; may I come in?" asked Charley, adding, quickly, "I
want to play with that boy."

"Course you can; come right in," said the black woman, for she was
nearly as black as ink, but there was a sweet, honest expression in her
broad face, and a welcoming tone in her voice, which brought Charley
quickly in, with a little laugh, to the side of the other boy.

And he--oh, how black he was! but as clean and neatly dressed as soap
and water and nice clothes could make him, for Juliet, his mother, loved
her little son, and she took good care that his manners were as nice as
his clothes. He held out his hand to Charley, and, making a queer little
bow, said, "How do you do, sir? I hope you are very well." Then he
twisted one leg tighter than ever round the other, and gave a vigorous
twirl to his paper windmill.

"Hey! I like that," said Charley. "Let _me_ try to do it."

"Oh yes," said the other, "but this is the best way--to hold it straight
out, and run fast."

So Charley took the windmill, and both boys went scampering and
galloping round the room, the windmill flying round famously, until the
boys were quite out of breath.

"What's your name?" asked Charley, as they were resting together in a
large old rocking-chair.

"George Washington Johnson. What's _your_ name?"' asked the black boy,
in return, rocking the chair as hard as he could.

"My name is Charley Lee. I like you. Will you be my friend?"

"Oh yes; will you be mine?"

"Yes, and we'll play together every single day."

Just then Juliet went away with a great basket of clothes, to hang them
up in a room where they were quickly dried by steam; and Charley, taking
George's hand, said, "Come up stairs with me, and take a ride in the
elevator."

What a blissful invitation for George! They tumbled up stairs in their
delightful hurry, ran through the door into the broad hall, to the
elevator, and the moment it appeared, Charley cried out,

"Oh, Mike, open the door; George wants to ride up and down with me;
_he's my friend_."

"Oh, he's your friend, is he?" said Mike, puckering up his eyes at
George Washington; "and a very pretty color he is, too. Well, step in,
Snowball."

"His name isn't Snowball; it's George Washington," said Charley.

The elevator man laughed, and the two boys got closer together in a
corner, pretending that it was a balloon, and they were sailing up and
down in the air; and there they sat, in a state of perfect happiness.

The two boys never quarrelled. George had a sweet disposition, and was
ready to do anything Charley proposed. They loved each other dearly, and
many were the slices of bread and butter, spread thickly over with
molasses, to which the two friends were treated by the good-natured
washer-woman. They never sat down to eat them; oh no! they capered, and
danced, and burst out laughing when they tumbled over a broomstick or a
bench, and seemed to grow rosier and fatter every day. That is, Charley
grew rosier, and George's smooth black skin grew shinier, which was the
same thing--for him.

The little black boy was often permitted by his mother to go out toward
Fourth Avenue, and run over one of the high arched bridges which covers
the Fourth Avenue Railroad, and he did not think he was doing wrong when
one day he asked Charley to go too.

"Oh yes, I will," he cried, in a great state of delight.

As soon as they arrived at the bridge, they began chasing each other
over it; and then Charley said:

"Oh, George, let's play that we are travellers, hunting for a whale. I
heard my mamma talking about one that was on ex-ex-exedition down by
the river. She said that it was 'most a mile long."

"Goody!" cried George. "What a mons'ous whale!"

So the boys ran down the street toward the East River a long, long way,
and presently they got to some rocks, upon the top of which were a
number of miserable wooden houses called shanties.

Geese, pigs, chickens, and a forlorn, starved-looking dog were poking
about for something to eat. Near by was a great heap of coal ashes. Some
bad-looking boys were raking the ashes up into a sort of mound on top of
the heap; but a moment after, they ran away to see an organ-grinder and
a monkey which had come upon the rocks. Charley and George would have
run too, had not their ears caught the sound of a stifled piteous
mewing, which seemed to issue out of the very middle of the ash heap.

"What's that?" asked both boys at once.

"Mew! me--ew!" came again from the ashes.

"It's a cat!" exclaimed Charley; "and it is inside of those ashes. I do
believe those boys thought it was dead, and buried it. Let's hurry and
dig it out."

Charley and George worked hard, but they had nothing but their hands to
work with, and they threw the ashes all over their clothes; but the
piteous mewing came quicker and louder, and in a few moments the gray
head of a live kitten popped out of the ashes; then two gray paws, and
soon the whole kitten was liberated.

"Oh, you poor little thing!" said Charley, trying with soft pats to get
the ashes out of its fur, while George took out of his pocket a queer
little pocket-handkerchief, six inches square, with A B C all round the
edge, and a portrait of his great namesake in the middle, and said, in a
tender tone, "Here, poor kitty, let me wipe your nose; don't cry any
more;" and he wiped it so softly that it really seemed to comfort the
afflicted little creature.

"Let's run home with it," said Charley.

"And give it some milk," said George.

"And wash it clean," said Charley.

"And dry it in the steam-room," said George.

No sooner said than done. Charley carried the kitten one block, and then
George the next, and so on in turn, until at last they got back to the
hotel, and rushed down into the laundry, where Juliet was beginning to
feel worried at their long absence.

"La sakes!" she cried, when she saw the plight they were in, "whar have
you ben gone? Why, you look jes like ole Bobby de ash-man. Whar you get
dat ar cat? Why, George Washington! you's a disgrace to your raisin'!
How you spec' I'se gwine' to make you look genteel if you cum home dat
ar way?"

"Oh," said George, rolling his eyes at his mother--"oh, we've had such
s'prising 'wenters; we went to see a whale."

"Whale! is dat what you call a whale?" said Juliet, pointing to the poor
little kitten, which he was hugging tight to his breast.

Then Charley spoke up, and when Juliet had heard of the "surprising
adventures," she was sorry she had been the least bit cross with the
kind-hearted little fellows. To make up for it, she gave the kitten a
saucer of warm milk, and taking off the soiled clothes of the boys, and
washing their faces and hands, she put two funny little night-gowns upon
them, and popped them into her bed, which was in a little room next to
the laundry. Then she caught up their clothes--for there was no time to
be lost--and popped _them_ into a tub of hot water, with plenty of soap,
and in ten minutes they were just as clean as soap, water, and hard
rubbing could make them.

Then she wrung them out with a will, shook them out with a flourish, and
running into the steam-room, hung them upon a horse--a clothes-horse, of
course. In ten minutes more they were dry enough to iron, and she
polished them with the hot and heavy irons at such a rate that they
fairly shone, and she shone too.

When the boys were called, and Juliet put on their clothes again, they
looked cleaner, brighter, and happier than ever.

The kitten was adopted as a friend too, and had soon shook and licked
itself clean, and it lived a very comfortable life down in the laundry.

One day, for a wonder, Charley's mother staid at home. She was expecting
a call from her lawyer, Judge Spencer, upon some business. When he came
he had a long talk with Charley.

Presently Charley said: "I want to tell you something. I've a friend;
his name is George."

"Only one friend?" asked the Judge, laughing.

"But he's my 'tic'lar friend," explained Charley. "May I bring him to
see you? He's real nice."

"Does he live in the hotel?" asked Charley's mother, who had never heard
of him.

"Oh yes," replied Charley, "and he and I have a _love-aly_ kitten--we
take care of it."

"Well, bring him in--the kitten too," said the good Judge; "that is, if
your mother consents."

"Oh, certainly," said Mrs. Lee.

So Charley rushed down the narrow stairs, and found George playing with
the kitten, and looking as neat and clean as a new pin.

"Come, George, come up with me to mamma's parlor. Judge Spencer is
there; he wants to see you, and the kitten too."

They went up stairs, and softly opening the door of the parlor, and
holding George's hand tightly, Charley walked quickly up to the Judge
and said, "Here's my friend; he can't help being black!"

For one moment astonishment kept Charley's mamma and the Judge silent.
Then the good man held out his hand to the black boy, and taking Charley
on his knee kissed him tenderly. That warm, loving kiss told Charley
that the Judge understood it all. His face grew radiant, his eyes rested
affectionately on his friend, and then he leaned toward George, and put
the beloved kitten in his arms. "You hold it now," he said.

With a cautionary wave of his hand, the Judge prevented Mrs. Lee from
reproving Charley for his choice of a friend; then he sent them into the
next room, and had a long talk with the widow, the result of which was
that, after inquiring about George, and finding how good his "raisin'"
was, as Juliet called it, Charley was still permitted to play with him.
And to this very day (for all this has happened within a few months) if
you ask Charley Lee who George Washington Johnson is, he will answer at
once, "_He's my friend._"




[Illustration: THE LITTLE GOSSIPS.--DRAWN BY H. P. WOLCOTT.]




[Illustration: SUSPENSE.-DRAWN BY J. E. KELLY.]




THE SOLEMN OLD LADY.

BY W. L. PETERS.


      There was once a wee boy
        With an excellent face.
      Who was seen every Sunday
        At church in his place;
  And there this wee boy was accustomed to stare
  At a solemn old lady with lavender hair,
      Who used to sit opposite to him.

      But when the long service
        Was over at last,
      He would wait at the
        Vestibule door till she passed;
  And then she would stop on her way from the pew,
  And propound a conundrum, which he never knew,
      For she asked him the "drift of the sermon."

      By-and-by, when the little boy's
        Manhood came round,
      The whole world an unanswered
        Conundrum he found.
  And he can no more answer it now, I declare,
  Than he could the old lady with lavender hair,
      Who used to sit opposite to him.

[Illustration: THE WEE BOY IN CHURCH.--DRAWN BY C. A. NORTHAM.]




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.]


  SMITH'S HILL, CALIFORNIA.

     I live on the east branch of Feather River, in California. I go to
     school in a school-house made of logs. The scholars are all
     Germans and Indians. Swallows generally come here in February, but
     this year we did not see any till the 9th of March. I saw a
     picture of the snow-flower in YOUNG PEOPLE No. 7. It grows on the
     hills near my home, and blooms in June. Lupin and larkspur and
     many other flowers also grow here. I am seven years old.

  LOU R. K.

       *       *       *       *       *

  DOWNIEVILLE, CALIFORNIA.

     I am twelve years old, and I live in the Sierra Nevada Mountains,
     about four thousand feet above the sea-level, with my aunt and
     uncle. The snow is two feet and a half deep (April 11), and I can
     not look for willow "pussies" myself, but this afternoon my uncle
     was out over the snow, and he found some, which I send you. These
     are the first I have ever seen. A few days ago there was a flock
     of robins in our back yard, and they went skipping and hopping
     about quite happy. I have a pigeon, and his name is Bob. When I
     hold out my hand to him with wheat in it, he will come and eat,
     and when he has eaten all the wheat, he will turn around and fight
     me. Can you tell me why the 1st of April is called All-fools' Day?

  MARY A. R.

The origin of April-fools' Day is unknown. If you have YOUNG PEOPLE No.
18, read the answer to Zella T., in the Post-office Box.

       *       *       *       *       *

  COLFAX, CALIFORNIA.

     My uncle subscribed to YOUNG PEOPLE for a New-Year's present to
     me, and I do not believe he could have found a paper I would have
     liked better if he had hunted all over the United States. But I
     can not enjoy it alone, so when I get all through reading it, I
     send it to a little friend. I only moved to California eight
     months ago. I have twenty-two real dolls, and every one has a
     change of under-clothing and several dresses. I have one hundred
     and ten paper dolls. They all have names, and a history, which I
     know by heart. I send you some pressed California flowers and
     fern. I am twelve years old.

  JEANNIE K. P.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WOBURN, MASSACHUSETTS.

     I am ten years old. I have no pets now, but I had a Newfoundland
     dog named Nero, and a pussy named Major. On the 14th of April I
     was in the woods, and I found two buttercups. They were the first
     wild flowers I have seen this year.

  CLARENCE E. L.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I live in Upper Sandusky, Ohio, on the banks of the Sandusky
     River. This is a very historical country. It was named after a
     tribe of Indians called the Wyandottes, who burned Colonel
     Crawford at the stake on the 11th of June, 1782. In the southern
     part of this town is a tree called the "Big Sycamore." It is
     sixteen feet in diameter, and about one hundred and fifty feet
     high. It has several limbs that are from five to eight feet in
     diameter. I have some pet ducks I think a great deal of, and a
     sheep named Dick, that follows me everywhere.

  WILLIE B. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SYRACUSE, NEW YORK.

     We have three little canary-birds. They can feed themselves, and
     mamma has put them in another cage. Their names are Yellowtop,
     Sport, and Baby. The mother bird has made a new nest, and this
     morning she has two eggs in it. If Daisy Balch will softly stroke
     her bird through the wires of the cage every evening at dusk, he
     will soon allow her to put her finger inside the cage, and will
     peck at a little sugar on the end of her finger, and will no doubt
     perch on it. All this will need patience. I like the "Tar Baby"
     story so much, and "Mother Goose's May Party."

  ETHEL.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NIAGARA FALLS, NEW YORK.

     I live on the Niagara River, three miles and a half above the
     falls. I go to school at Niagara Falls village, and have walked
     nearly all winter in all kinds of weather, although it is nearly
     four miles. I have a little wild rabbit--black, white, and brown.
     I had two, but the other ran away. We have a white cat and kitten.
     The cat came to us nine years ago, when it was a little bit of a
     thing. It stands on its hind-legs when it wants something to eat,
     and never scratches. We have a water-spaniel named Music. He does
     not like to hear any one play the piano in a minor key.

  F. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NORWICH, CONNECTICUT.

     I am ten years old. I like to read YOUNG PEOPLE. The Post-office
     Box letters are nice. Katie R. P. says she collects insects. So
     does my papa. He puts lumps of cyanide of potassium, bought at the
     druggist's, in a bottle, and mixes plaster of Paris with water
     until it is like dough, and then pours it over the potassium. When
     it dries, the bottle is ready for use. Five cents' worth lasts a
     season, and is cheaper than ether, papa says, and works better.
     When the butterflies are dead, he spreads them on a board to dry,
     spreading their wings carefully and evenly, and holding them in
     place with pins. Papa has butterflies all the way from China. He
     has as many as five hundred kinds. He raises them just as people
     do chickens, right from the egg. He calls the worms his
     pets--great green ones. I get food for them. They eat lots. He
     calls worms larvae, which he says means baby butterflies.

     That butterfly Bessie F. had was the Danais, papa thinks.
     Butterflies are all foreigners, and have queer names I don't
     understand. The worm of the Danais is found on milkweed, papa
     tells me. It does not spin a cocoon, but forms a chrysalis--a
     handsome green sack that looks like an ear-drop, with gold and
     black spots on it.

  WALTER H. P.

It is scarcely safe to recommend the handling of cyanide of potassium,
in any form whatever, to our young readers, as it is one of the most
terrible of poisons, and works much mischief and suffering by merely
coming in contact with a slight cut on the finger.

       *       *       *       *       *

  GREENSBURG, KENTUCKY.

    I live on the top of a cliff almost two hundred feet high. The
    scenery is beautiful. You can see for a distance of twenty miles in
    almost every direction. There is an old field on our farm in which
    papa thinks the Indians fought a battle, because there are so many
    flint arrow-heads there. My brother and I are saving them, because
    we like to have them in our room.

    I caught seven woodchucks with my dog. I am fourteen years old, and
    own a horse of my own. I bought her about two years ago. I have a
    goat that I work in a wagon I made myself. In autumn and winter I
    go to school, and in spring and summer I work on the farm, which I
    like pretty well. There are several caves on our farm. In one of
    them I have been in over a hundred yards. I like to read all of the
    letters in YOUNG PEOPLE'S Post-office Department.


  JOHN H. B.

       *       *       *       *       *

  JERSEY CITY, NEW JERSEY.

     I have been intending to write to the Post-office Box ever since I
     began to take YOUNG PEOPLE, which papa gave me for a Christmas
     present. I have a pet cat, which I call Fluff, after the kitty I
     read about in the Christmas number. My Fluff is very much like
     that kitty, only she never went to church in her owner's muff.

  MATTIE J.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PONTOTOC, MISSISSIPPI.

     I see most of your little correspondents live in the far North and
     West, and I thought you might like to hear from a little Southern
     girl, who likes YOUNG PEOPLE very much. I am nine years old. I
     have no sister, and but one brother. My papa is a doctor, and is
     often from home; so when Buddie and I are at school, mamma is
     alone. I love to go to school. I have two cats--Muldrow and
     Dumpie. I will write about our beautiful birds next time.

  D. R. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  RIDLEY PARK, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I am trying to collect a cabinet of curiosities, and have quite a
     lot of things already. I have pieces of celebrated foreign
     buildings, English street-car tickets, Lake George diamonds, the
     rattle of a rattle-snake, and other things.

     I think the "Letter from a Land Turtle" is very interesting. I had
     a young water turtle that I could cover with a two-cent piece. I
     saw a very funny ants' bed the other day. It was an oyster shell,
     with the edges all covered with sand, except on one place, where
     the ants went in. I think it must have been a very cozy house.
     Will you please tell me something about the habits of ants?

  C. B. F.

       *       *       *       *       *

  AUBURN, NEW YORK.

     I have no pets, but we have a nice flower garden. One of the boy
     correspondents of YOUNG PEOPLE asked if we had ever seen a
     tarantula, or California spider. We have one five or six inches
     long, preserved in alcohol. My uncle sent it to us from Nevada. He
     says the webs are so strong that people use them for thread.

  BERTIE S.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange pressed wild flowers with some little
     girl living in the East. I would like some small bouquets for a
     scrap-book. We have a great variety of beautiful wild flowers
     here. I have one sister and two brothers. My pet is a sheep. She
     will leave the herd to come to me. She eats bread, and tobacco
     too, when the shepherd gives it to her. Her name is Susie.

  MABEL SHARP,
  Buchanan, Fresno County, California.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEW YORK CITY.

     I am a great admirer of Shakspeare. I have just finished reading
     _Macbeth_. I have seen Edwin Booth play Hamlet. My mother has read
     aloud to me _King Richard III_. and many others of these plays. I
     am also very fond of history. I first read _Peter Parley's
     Universal History_, next Dickens's _Child's History of England_,
     and since many other books of historical tales. I am now reading
     Guizot's _Popular History of France_. There are six large volumes,
     and I have finished the third volume to-day.

     I think you will be interested to hear about my Bible. It is the
     elegant "Illuminated Bible" which was "published by Harper &
     Brothers, 82 Cliff Street," just before the fire, which destroyed
     all the plates of "sixteen hundred historical engravings." I read
     in it every Sunday, and almost every morning. I have read the Old
     Testament in course to the end of Chronicles, and I am pretty
     familiar with the rest of the Bible.

     I was paralyzed when I was sixteen months old, and have not the
     use of my right hand. As yet I can not write well with my left. I
     am twelve years old.

  S. CASSIUS E.

       *       *       *       *       *

  JERSEY CITY, NEW JERSEY.

     My sister Gertie and I had each a small turtle. They were kept in
     a glass globe in the house all winter, and about a week ago we put
     them out in the yard in a large pan. To-day, when I went out to
     see them, mine was dead. Can anyone tell me what was the matter
     with it? They both had plenty of raw meat and earth-worms. The
     water was changed every day, and there were large stones for them
     to crawl up upon. We put the other turtle back in the glass globe
     in the house.

  MAMIE E.

Turtles prefer to bury themselves in the mud, and sleep all winter.
Perhaps had you allowed your turtle to follow its natural instincts, it
would not have died.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PROVINCETOWN, MASSACHUSETTS.

     I am seven years old. I want to tell all the boys who read YOUNG
     PEOPLE that I live where they catch those big whales. My uncle
     goes in a vessel after them. He has killed nine this spring. The
     largest one was over sixty feet long, and made fifty barrels of
     oil. They shoot the whales with a bomb-lance.

  FREDDIE R. A.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BENTON, ILLINOIS.

     I take YOUNG PEOPLE, and I think it is a very interesting paper. I
     am living in Benton now, and very soon I will have a little dog, a
     lamb, and a pig. Some of you that live up North will think a pig
     is a very strange pet; and yet when you think that the pig is
     white and clean, then perhaps you would like him better. Perhaps I
     shall have a canary-bird and a kitten, but I am not sure.
     To-morrow I am going to see somebody weave a carpet. I have to
     study history and French every day except Saturday and Sunday. I
     like to study them when they are easy enough.

  LILIAN MCD.

       *       *       *       *       *

  JANESVILLE, WISCONSIN.

     I found hepaticas on the 7th of April, and anemones a little
     later. Violets, shooting-stars, Solomon's-seal, wild geranium, and
     jack-in-the-pulpit are in blossom now (May 14), as well as other
     wild flowers. I have seen woodpeckers, orioles, lots of robins and
     blue jays, brown thrushes, and bluebirds. When I was going out in
     the yard this morning I saw several chipmunks.

  ALICE C. L.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PROSPERITY, SOUTH CAROLINA.

     I live down in "Dear old South Carolina." We have a nice flower
     garden, and there are plenty of flowers in blossom already. It has
     been very warm this winter. I did not start to wearing shoes till
     nearly Christmas, and I pulled them off again on my birthday,
     which was the 4th of March.

     My father is an editor, and we get a great many papers to read. I
     am very much interested in "Across the Ocean." I used to live up
     in the snow, on the banks of the Potomac.

  J. W. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BALTIMORE, MARYLAND.

     I live in the city, but I have got some chickens, and am very much
     interested in them. I have raised some; but there is an old cat
     that has eaten eleven of them, and I can not kill her. I have
     pigeons too, and have raised a good many. I read a letter in YOUNG
     PEOPLE No. 13 from a little boy who hatched a chicken by putting
     the egg in ashes. I wish he would tell me how he kept the egg
     warm.

  HENRY W.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.

     I have tried Nellie H.'s recipe for sugar candy, and I found it
     very nice indeed. I intend to try Puss Hunter's recipe for cake,
     and I will let her know my success.

  CHRISTABEL V.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ELMIRA, NEW YORK.

     Here is a recipe for chocolate caramels for the cooking club: One
     cup and a half of sugar; one cup of grated chocolate; one cup of
     milk; one cup of molasses; a piece of butter the size of an egg;
     one tea-spoonful of vanilla. Let the mixture boil twenty minutes,
     and then pour it in buttered tins to cool.

  FANNY S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FORT UNION, NEW MEXICO.

     I am nine years old. I do not go to school, but I study at home,
     and I can write pretty well. I tried the recipe that Nellie H.
     sent, and it was very nice. I tried it several times. I had a
     canary once, but it died, and papa buried it under a tree.

  MARGARET R. MACN.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fannie A. Hartwell and Bertha C. M. send recipes for doll's cup-cake for
Puss Hunter's cooking club, but as they are almost the same as the one
from Bessie L. S., printed in Post-office Box No. 28, we do not repeat
them. The domestic inclinations of these little housekeepers of the
future are very pleasing, and we hope other little girls will send
recipes for the cooking club, which should certainly be encouraged.

       *       *       *       *       *

  GENEVA LAKE, WISCONSIN.

     I will be ten years old in July. I take YOUNG PEOPLE, and I think
     there never was such a nice little paper. We have live
     cherry-trees, and they are all in bloom (May 7). We live near the
     lake, and my little brother and I play on the shore almost every
     day. They are launching two large steamers to-day. Papa, mamma,
     and I went out fishing not long ago; we did not catch even one
     fish, but we enjoyed the sail very much. I am going to the woods
     to-morrow, and will send "Wee Tot" some wild flowers. I have a pet
     kitty and a little Skye terrier, and every one likes to see them
     play together.

  FRANKIE P.

     I am eleven years old. I take HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, and I like
     the Post-office Box best of all. I have two pet pigeons. They are
     very tame, and fly to me when I go out; I never feed them except
     out of my hands. I would like to exchange pressed flowers with any
     little girl.

  FANNY LAWRENCE,
  Dedham, Massachusetts.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have about five hundred specimens and curiosities of different
     kinds which I would like to exchange with any correspondents of
     YOUNG PEOPLE. I myself have a cabinet of about one thousand
     specimens. Letters or packages may be addressed to

  FRANKLIN J. KAUFMAN,
  40 Butternut Street, Syracuse, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BUCHANAN, CALIFORNIA.

     I am ten years old. My father takes YOUNG PEOPLE for me, and I
     enjoy it very much. I save all my money to buy Du Chaillu's books.
     I have three now, and mean to get them all. Will you please tell
     me if Du Chaillu is alive yet? I hope he is, and is making some
     more books for us boys. I have a pet horned owl. He snaps his bill
     and hisses at me.

  EUGENE S.

Mr. Du Chaillu is alive, and in excellent health. You will be pleased to
know, also, that he is hard at work on new books, which promise to be of
even greater interest than those already published.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. H. ELLARD.--See answer to B., Post-office Box No. 23.

       *       *       *       *       *

S. A. S.--Rabbits eat cabbage, clover, cracker and milk, and almost all
kinds of vegetables, herbage, or grain. Do not give them parsley, as it
is said to be poisonous to them.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

ENIGMA.

  My first is in bloom, but not in fade.
  My second is in shadow, but not in shade.
  My third is in gloomy, but not in grave.
  My fourth is in valiant, but not in brave.
  My fifth is in anvil, but not in forge.
  My sixth is in chasm, but not in gorge.
  My seventh is in tares, but not in weeds.
  My whole was a man of noble deeds.

  LOTTIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

GEOGRAPHICAL HOUR-GLASS PUZZLE.

A city in Spain. A city in France. A sea of the Eastern Continent
traversed by many ships. In Russia. A famous mountain of Asia Minor. A
city in Belgium. A city in Spain. Centrals read downward spell the name
of a city in Germany.

  C. P. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

DIAMOND PUZZLE.

In combine. A boy's name. Jovial. Barren. In gipsy.

  JOHNNY R. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

WORD SQUARE.

First, endure. Second, imagination. Third, precious. Fourth, a title.

  PIERRE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5.

ENIGMA.

  My first is in rat, but not in mouse.
  My second is in pheasant, but not in grouse.
  My third is in limp, but not in stiff.
  My fourth is in smoke, but not in whiff.
  My fifth is in waistcoat, but not in vest.
  My sixth is in eager, but not in zest.
  My seventh is in high, but not in low.
  My whole was a courtier of long ago,
  An author who travelled in foreign lands,
  And died at last by cruel hands.

  NORTH STAR.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 6.

DOUBLE ACROSTIC.

Silent. A man's name. A beloved relative. An empire. An ancient Greek
author. Answer--Two celebrated authors.

  HARRY M.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN NO. 28.

No. 1.

      L
    R I P
  L I L A C
    P A D
      C

No. 2.

  N  ante  S
  O czako  W
  R   om   E
  W exfor  D
  A licant E
  Y ucata  N

Norway, Sweden.

No. 3.

Cabbage-rose.

No. 4.

Make hay while the sun shines.

No. 5.

Mayflower.

No. 6.

Noon.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Personation, on page 392--Shakspeare.

       *       *       *       *       *

Favors are acknowledged from Samuel H. Manning, Grace N. Whiting, H. E.
Stout, C. W. Lisk, C. Bingham, Adella Titus, Lottie Noble, N. E.
Portlock, Howard E. Meiller, W. T. Sears, Dotty Seaman, Josie L. Moore,
G. C. Meyer, Charlie Stewart, Lena B.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles are received from Charles Spier, Cora Frost,
Paul Beardsley, J. R. Blake, William and Mary Tiddy, Edward May, Willie
Draper, John McClintock, Bennie Lynch, Eva L. Pearson, George W.
Hambridge, J. S. Peabody, Willie F. Dix, Eddie A. Leet, Mattie Jameson,
C. Steele, Hattie Norris, Bert J., Mary E. DeWitt, "A School-Boy,"
Minnie H. Ingham, Louisa Gates, George Schilling, S. Cassius Ensworth,
G. Dudley Kyte, Rebecca Hedges, Bessie Eaton, Violet, Fanny S., S. A.
Hibbs, Ada B. Voute, Leon M. Fobes, Alice Dudley, George H. Radley,
H. G. B., C. D. P., Jimmie B. Tallman, Helen W. Dean, Louisa J. Gray,
Albert E. Seibert.




ADVERTISEMENTS.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be issued every Tuesday, and may be had at
the following rates--_payable in advance, postage free_:

  SINGLE COPIES                     $0.04
  ONE SUBSCRIPTION, _one year_       1.50
  FIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS, _one year_     7.00

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY ORDER or DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

ADVERTISING.

The extent and character of the circulation of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
will render it a first-class medium for advertising. A limited number of
approved advertisements will be inserted on two inside pages at 75 cents
per line.

  Address
  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




FISHING OUTFITS.

CATALOGUE FREE.

R. SIMPSON, 132 Nassau Street, N. Y.




OUR CHILDREN'S SONGS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Children's Songs. Illustrated. 8vo, Ornamental Cover, $1.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

Songs for the nursery, songs for childhood, for girlhood, boyhood,
and sacred songs--the whole melody of childhood and youth bound in
one cover. Full of lovely pictures; sweet mother and baby faces;
charming bits of scenery, and the dear old Bible story-telling
pictures.--_Churchman_, N. Y.

The best compilation of songs for the children that we have ever
seen.--_New Bedford Mercury._

This is a large collection of songs for the nursery, for childhood, for
boys and for girls, and sacred songs for all. The range of subjects is a
wide one, and the book is handsomely illustrated.--_Philadelphia
Ledger._

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

HARPER & BROTHERS _will send the above work by mail, postage prepaid, to
any part of the United States, on receipt of the price_.




CHILDREN'S

PICTURE-BOOKS.

     Square 4to, about 800 pages each, beautifully printed on Tinted
     Paper, embellished with many Illustrations, bound in Cloth, $1.50
     per volume.

The Children's Picture-Book of Sagacity of Animals.

     With Sixty Illustrations by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Bible Picture-Book.

     With Eighty Illustrations, from Designs by STEINLE, OVERBECK,
     VEIT, SCHNORR, &c.

The Children's Picture Fable-Book.

     Containing One Hundred and Sixty Fables. With Sixty Illustrations
     by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Picture-Book of Birds.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

The Children's Picture-Book of Quadrupeds and other Mammalia.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




Old Books for Young Readers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arabian Nights' Entertainments.

     The Thousand and One Nights; or, The Arabian Nights'
     Entertainments. Translated and Arranged for Family Reading, with
     Explanatory Notes, by E. W. LANE. 600 Illustrations by Harvey. 2
     vols., 12mo, Cloth, $3.50.

Robinson Crusoe.

     The Life and Surprising Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, of York,
     Mariner. By DANIEL DEFOE. With a Biographical Account of Defoe.
     Illustrated by Adams. Complete Edition. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

The Swiss Family Robinson.

     The Swiss Family Robinson; or, Adventures of a Father and Mother
     and Four Sons on a Desert Island. Illustrated. 2 vols., 18mo,
     Cloth, $1.50.

     The Swiss Family Robinson--Continued: being a Sequel to the
     Foregoing. 2 vols., 18mo, Cloth, $1.50.

Sandford and Merton.

     The History of Sandford and Merton. By THOMAS DAY. 18mo, Half
     Bound, 75 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




[Illustration: PLAYING "HOOKEY."

"Jimmy, I wonder if School's out yet?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Good Samaritan who would not tell his Name.=--Oberlin, the well-known
philanthropist of Steinthal, while yet a candidate for the ministry, was
travelling on one occasion from Strasburg. It was in the winter-time.
The ground was deeply covered with snow, and the roads were almost
impassable. He had reached the middle of his journey, and was among the
mountains, but by that time was so exhausted that he could stand up no
longer. He was rapidly freezing to death. Sleep began to overcome him;
all power to resist it left him. He commended himself to God, and
yielded to what he felt to be the sleep of death. He knew not how long
he slept, but suddenly became conscious of some one rousing him and
waking him up. Before him stood a wagon-driver in his blue blouse, the
wagon being not far away. He gave him a little wine and food, and warmth
returned. He then helped him into the wagon, and brought him to the next
village. The rescued man was profuse in his thanks, and offered money,
which his benefactor refused. "It is only a duty to help one another,"
said the wagoner, "and it is the next thing to an insult to offer a
reward for such a service." "Then," replied Oberlin, "at least tell me
your name, that I may have you in thankful remembrance before God." "I
see," said the wagoner, "that you are a minister of the Gospel: please
tell me the name of the Good Samaritan." "That," said Oberlin, "I can
not do, for it was not put on record." "Then," replied the wagoner,
"until you can tell me his name, permit me to withhold mine." Soon he
had driven out of sight, and Oberlin never saw him again.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Earthquakes in Chili.=--In some parts of South America men keep their
"earthquake coats," which are dresses that can be put on
instantaneously, with a view to a speedy exit from the house. The
advisability of such a practice may be inferred from the picture of one
of the features of life in Chili which is set forth in the following
extract from a letter of a young Englishman, who settled at Valparaiso a
few years ago. Under date of November 16 he writes: "I am in a most
nervous state on account of having had three days and nights of
successive earthquakes--fearful ones. The first night I walked the
streets, and indeed every one else did the same; the second night I went
to bed quite exhausted at about 3 A.M.; last night also at about 2 A.M.,
but I could not sleep, for we had about six shocks, though not so
strong. The whole cornice of a house close to ours came down into the
street, but luckily no one was passing at the time. The women rush into
the street in their night dresses, screaming like lunatics, and one
trembles from head to foot. I was crossing our street when the strongest
shock came, and I was transfixed with fright, for the road was going up
and down like waves. My hand even now shakes, for at any moment we may
have another, and how strong it may be no one can tell. I can assure you
I am afraid to take off my clothes. The large squares have been filled
for the last three nights with beds and people wrapped up in blankets."




SOLUTION OF THE PASHA PUZZLE.


[Illustration]

This is the solution of the Pasha Puzzle given on page 424 of YOUNG
PEOPLE No. 30. The puzzle was to make Hobart Pasha by combining a fort,
two sabres, two British gun-boats, two bayonets, a bomb-shell, and three
birds; and here you have an accurate (?) likeness of the fire-eating
Turk.




CHARADE

  My first is solemn and sedate,
    Or ought to be, that's certain;
  But sometimes, owing to the state
  Of human passions, or to fate,
  It is a scene of fierce debate
  And wrath; but ere it is too late
    I'll stop, and draw the curtain.

  My second visits many lands,
    In bright and stormy weather;
  'Tis fair to see across the sands,
  Though never quite at rest it stands;
  One mind alone its course commands;
  Within are many hearts and hands
    Most strangely met together.

  My whole is thought a happy time,
    Its praise is often sounded;
  'Tis told in books, 'tis sung in rhyme,
  In every age and every clime;
  Of youth and manhood 'tis the prime,
  Except when on the sordid grime
    Of avarice 'tis founded.




[Illustration: THE DOG PUZZLE.]

Here is a picture of two dogs ready for a fight. With one straight cut
of the scissors transform it into the illustration of an old fable.





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, June 1, 1880, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, JUNE 1, 1880 ***

***** This file should be named 28975.txt or 28975.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/9/7/28975/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
