The Project Gutenberg EBook of From the St. Lawrence to the Yser with the
1st Canadian brigade, by Frederic C. Curry

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: From the St. Lawrence to the Yser with the 1st Canadian brigade

Author: Frederic C. Curry

Release Date: June 5, 2009 [EBook #29045]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ST. LAWRENCE TO THE YSER ***




Produced by Graeme Mackreth and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









FROM THE ST. LAWRENCE TO THE YSER

_Frontispiece._

[Illustration: LIEUTS. KLOTZ, STRATHY AND CURRY AT AMESBURY.]




FROM THE ST. LAWRENCE
TO THE YSER

WITH THE 1st CANADIAN BRIGADE

BY

FREDERIC C. CURRY

LATE CAPTAIN 2ND EASTERN ONTARIO REGIMENT

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAPS

McCLELLAND, GOODCHILD & STEWART,

PUBLISHERS ... TORONTO.




_Printed in Great Britain._




To

LIEUT.-GENERAL SIR SAM HUGHES,

K.C.B., M.P., MINISTER OF MILITIA,

TO WHOSE EFFORTS

THE EFFICIENCY OF THE CANADIAN CONTINGENTS

IS LARGELY DUE.




PREFACE


In presenting this little work to the public the writer wishes to thank
those of his fellow-officers and others who brought to his notice
incidents that did not come under his personal observation.

Valuable assistance has been gained from the official accounts of Sir
Max Aitken, and from the historical writings of Mr. John Buchan with
regard to the parts played by other brigades and divisions with which we
were co-operating.

In spite of these attempts to broaden its outlook, the book stands in
the main a personal account of the actions of the 1st Brigade, Canadian
Infantry.

As such, however, the writer hopes it will be accepted, and not as a
detailed history of the events chronicled, though every attempt has been
made to check the accuracy of the facts stated.

One fictitious character has been introduced, that of Begbie Lyte, in
order to make the tale impersonal.

In all other cases the true names of persons mentioned, or initials,
have been used.

To Dr. Shipley, Master of Christ's College, Cambridge, the writer owes
much for his kindly criticisms and encouragement in this work.

F.C. CURRY.

_October, 1916._




CONTENTS


CHAP.                              PAGE

I. ANTE-BELLUM                      1

II. PETEWAWA                       11

III. MOBILISATION                  24

IV. VAL CARTIER                    31

V. THE CONVOY                      37

VI. IN ENGLAND                     44

VII. INTERIM                       49

VIII. YPRES, 1915                  54

IX. WITH THE DRAFT                 63

X. THE BREAKING IN                 72

XI. RESERVE BILLETS                80

XII. BAILLEUL                      88

XIII. THE TREK SOUTH               95

XIV. FESTUBERT, 1915              103

XV. CARPE DIEM                    110

XVI. GIVENCHY, 1915               117

XVII. NORTHWARD AGAIN             126

XVIII. NIGHTS OF GLADNESS!        132

XIX. IN FRONT OF MESSINES         140

XX. MINE WARFARE                  145

XXI. MYTHS, FAIRIES, ETC.         152

XXII. THE WINTER MONTHS           160




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


LIEUTS. KLOTZ, STRATHY AND CURRY AT AMESBURY         _Frontispiece_

                                                     _Facing page_

SAILING DOWN THE ST. LAWRENCE, NEAR BIC                  38

CHURCH PARADE                                            40

EASTERN ONTARIO REGIMENT, NEAR STONEHENGE                44

MANOEUVRES ON SALISBURY PLAIN                            48

FIELD KITCHEN IN RESERVE BILLETS                         82

AMATEUR THEATRICALS BACK OF THE LINE                    100

THE DISTILLERY AT GIVENCHY                              118

OUR SUPPORT TRENCHES AT GIVENCHY                        120

AFTER GIVENCHY                                          122

ENTRANCE TO PLUGSTREET WOOD                             130

OUR TRENCHES, PLUGSTREET WOOD                           134

OUR TRENCHES AT PLUGSTREET                              136

THE START OF THE SMOKE CLOUDS                           142

THE CACTUS TREEN                                        157

AFTER A FEW SHELLS AND A WEEK'S RAIN                    160




FROM THE ST. LAWRENCE TO THE YSER




CHAPTER I

ANTE-BELLUM


Before the war the Canadian Militia consisted of about 75,000 of all
ranks and all grades of efficiency. To a neutral eye it must have
appeared to be in a highly disorganised condition, for battalions and
corps had sprung up here and there throughout the country with no
proportion existing between them and the other arms of the service. And
yet within a short two months after the outbreak of hostilities a
complete division, armed and equipped, landed in England, and in a bare
six months were in the field holding their own line of trenches.

To appreciate the difficulties, however, that attended this
transformation we must look back to those happy days prior to August,
1914, and witness the Canadian Militia in its own home.

This consisted of the "Drill-hall," or "Armouries," a long, low building
equipped more or less with barred windows and castellated turrets at one
or more corners. This building is one of the sights of the city, and is
pointed out by the cabby or taxi-driver to the English gentlemen and
other tourists who come out with the laudable intention of writing
books.

If the castellated towers are missing, and the building is constructed
on strictly utilitarian lines, one is safe in referring to it as the
"Drill-hall"; but if a couple of old cannon, vintage 1800, guard its
portals, and barred windows and frowning turrets add to its martial
splendour, then you have an "Armouries." By observing this simple rule
one can discriminate between the two as easily as telling a church from
a cathedral.

The existence of such a building is largely due to the efforts of the
local member of Parliament, and the style of architecture varies
directly with the square of his popularity with the party in power. Thus
a flourishing full-strength battalion may be housed in a dingy, drab
wooden structure, and in the next town a very ornate and modern
building may be tenanted by a corps that is only struggling for
existence, or perhaps not even struggling. It is well, however, to
refrain from too much criticism of these buildings, pretentious and
hideous as they may be, for in them are taught the ideals and principles
which so many of our youth have died to uphold in the rain-sodden fields
of Flanders.

Considering the shortness of what is locally known as the "drill
season," the results obtained are good. General French, in his report of
a few years ago, described our horses as "half-broken and our men but
little more," but that is only to be expected in a country where a man
is considered to be wasting his time if he devotes even the little that
he can ill afford to the military profession.

However, even if the half-broken men and horses do kick over the traces
once in a while, they eventually "get there," and that, after all, is
the Canadian doctrine.

For the purposes of training the Militia is divided into two
classes--the "city" and the "rural" corps. There is also the permanent
force, our Canadian regulars, who exist as a school for "the Militia,"
as they refer to the non-professional army.

The city corps consist chiefly of infantry, heavy artillery, and
engineer corps, the last being generally in university towns and either
affiliated with or being actually the cadet corps of the college. One
might think the cadet corps would be affiliated with the Militia, but
this is a case where the boy is father to the man.

City corps do fourteen nominal days' training a year in the drill-hall,
and, of late years, a voluntary camp of five days. For each of these
days two night drills of two hours each count as a day; the militiaman
receives the sum of four shillings, with a slight increase according to
his musketry ability.

The drill season commences in the middle of March, and from then on till
Inspection Day--a boiling hot day in June--the voice of the
drill-sergeant is heard in the land. This individual is obtained on
indent from the permanent force; but more of him anon.

For two nights a week, then, at the season when a young man's fancies
are supposed to turn lightly to other things, the would-be Wellington
dons a suit of rifle green, or scarlet, or even the heathen kilt,
according to his taste, and, disguising it with a civilian great coat
(regulation coats being issued to 50 per cent. of the establishment),
slinks more or less bashfully down the back way to the drill-hall. There
he will learn to shift a rifle (weight nine pounds five and a few odd
ounces) from one position to another in response to quite unintelligible
commands that echo most absurdly from the roof. He will also learn to
move around the floor in something like the formations laid down in the
little red manual, practising especially those for whom our prayers are
desired, the favourites of the General Officer Commanding his district.

For, though regulations wax and wane, the G.O.C. changeth not; neither
does he bow down and worship the little tin gods the Army Council set
up. But instead, as one by one the formations he used to know are culled
from the manual, he watches the new formations with a passive eye and
reserves his choleric criticisms for the old reliables' "Echelon to the
right" and that maximum of military perfection the "March Past."

In rural corps, however, the season consists of fourteen actual days
spent in the broiling sun in camp. Lucky indeed is the company commander
who can bring a full company every year to camp, for many who come one
year come not again, and such are the conditions that no man sayeth him
nay lest recruiting be stopped altogether in that district. One sighs
for the press gang of Merrie England and subscribes for such incendiary
journals as those of the various National Service Leagues, for one has a
limited area to secure the recruits from, and must recruit at least 60
per cent. each year at a season when farm labour is at a premium.

Having secured your recruits, you must assemble them at some central
point where you have a large quantity of arms and equipment stored,
generally at your own expense--though "Sam" Hughes is remedying
this--and issue these, stave off complaints that the fit is not exactly
up to West End standards, and, if you are an old "stager," give them an
hour or two of drill while enthusiasm is at its maximum.

Then on the required date you marshal your little force at the railway
station, shepherd them into the cars, and detrain them a few hours
later, under even more trying circumstances, a few miles from camp.
Then, with a mixture of patience, perspiration, and profanity, you
finally march into your line of tents. Here you are met with great glee
by the colonel and the adjutant, who inquire blithely as to how many men
you have; this may seem useless, but as the men are strung out for at
least half a mile along the route it is reassuring to learn how many
there should be in the little procession.

We will take it that the colonel is pleased with your reply, in which
case he will tell you that his white horse has arrived, so if you will
drop around ... prohibition rules in our training camps, but a good O.C.
has always something under the mat.

What follows in the remaining days of the fortnight must be endured to
be appreciated. At the end of that time the shepherding begins again,
and for the next month the company commander scours his district, this
time locating uniforms which in defiance of his last orders, and
prayers, have not been turned in. Very often the man has gone West and
the uniform as well. So remote are the chances of seeing either again
that the expression "Gone West" has almost the same meaning as the
modern soldier's "Nah pooh!"

During the winter months classes of instruction are held in all the
training centres, the instructors being the non-commissioned officers
of the permanent Militia. The amount of good done depends largely on the
ability and personal effort of the commanders of the local corps. During
these months such officers as can spare the time or have not already
done so become, by various long and tedious processes, involving much
correspondence, attached to the various barracks for instruction.

This arrangement is a very popular one for all concerned, providing as
it does--

1. Frequent leave for junior officers of the permanent force;

2. An opportunity to drill men who know, by years of experience, what
movements one wishes to perform, and who will (D.V.) perform them with
machinelike precision despite wrong commands;

3. A pleasant change in the ordinary drill for the above-mentioned men
owing to the aforesaid wrong commands.

In the evenings lectures are given by senior officers who are not young,
married, or talented in other ways. These lectures comprise the hundred
and one things an officer is expected to know, from "Military Law" to
"Protection when at Rest." This last subject will require revision after
the present campaign, it being the writer's opinion that soldiers never
rest--not when there is a foot of Allied soil unturned by a shovel, at
any rate.

Eventually one passes an examination of sorts and becomes a qualified
officer of Militia. The questions set are not hard--they would doubtless
raise a smile if handed to a first year Sandhurst man--but they present
real difficulties to officers whose opportunities are limited and whose
spare time is largely taken up in the hard and thankless task of
recruiting.

Officers of the permanent force are, in the main, graduates of the Royal
Military College, Kingston, an institution second to none in the Empire.
Field officers of Militia can also take a training course at the
college, but the numbers who can avail themselves of this opportunity
are limited.

Our staffs are assisted by very able officers loaned from the Imperial
Army in exchange for officers of the same rank attached to Imperial
battalions.

But the bulk of the instructional work is done, and exceedingly well
done too, by the staff-sergeant--the Sergeant What's-'is-Name of
Kipling's song.

He is very carefully selected and trained, and becomes in time a walking
encyclopaedia of military affairs. He must be a marvel of tact and
diplomacy as well, for not only will he meet the officer who knows
nothing and appreciates that fact, but also that other type--not
uncommon in civil life as well--the man who knows nothing yet thinks he
knows all.




CHAPTER II

PETEWAWA


Petewawa is the training ground of the Canadian Field Artillery and the
Permanent Force. Until very recently it was strictly reserved for them,
and was regarded, by those who had not been there, as a sort of seventh
heaven for soldiers. Later, when the city corps were taken there for
five days one June--or was it July?--we changed our minds and decided
that, geographically speaking, it was part of one of Dante's seven
circles. At present it is the internment camp for enemy aliens, and if
they endure it for the duration of the war the Kaiser should present
them, one and all, with iron crosses.

Fifty square miles of sandy hills, covered here and there with second
growth scrub, it is an ideal ground for the purpose. The temperature
rises to 98 deg. Fahrenheit most of the days in summer. What it is like in
winter the writer does not know--probably 40 deg. below zero, as our
climate does nothing by halves.

The name, curiously enough, means "a sound (or music) as of water
falling in the distance." Anyone who has toiled through its sands in a
July sun can appreciate the subtle humour of the red man who named it.
Other attractions are sand fleas, mosquitoes, and black flies, so that
after passing through a fortnight in Petewawa one is versed in all
modern methods of warfare, including the subterranean and the aerial.

Here the artillery do all their training--heavy and fortress artillery
excepted. The latter, however, send quotas each year, though performing
their actual drill in their armouries. There are other artillery camps,
but none of the importance of Petewawa, for it is essentially an active
service camp. Jackets are strapped to the limbers, shirt sleeves rolled
to the elbows, and straw hats, locally known as "cow-breakfasts," take
the place of the more military cap. The gunner reverts to his original
state and becomes a farmer again. And he is none the less a good gunner
for so doing. Men who can understand the mechanism of a modern combined
reaper and binder have no trouble learning the recoil apparatus of an
eighteen-pounder gun, and for drivers one cannot find a better man than
the farmer, for the man enlisting as such brings his own team with him
and naturally will not neglect them.

So one sees the batteries drawn up behind cover, firing slowly and
deliberately as they do now on a "quiet" day along the Western front.

A sharp report, a glint of flame and of the gun recoiling between the
two men sitting on either side of the trail, and another shell is
whirring on its way to the target. Almost before the recoil is finished
the breech is opened and another round thrust in, and the breech closes
with a clitch-clatch of its own. A few seconds later corrections come
over the telephone and another shell goes speeding overhead.

With the infantry, however, Petewawa is a different matter. To them it
means manoeuvres; and every soldier knows what manoeuvres mean.
There is a popular idea that these tactical exercises are enjoyed by the
officers. Perhaps they are, if perchance one is on the staff, a dizzy
height the writer has not yet attained.

Let us follow the fortunes of a typical Militia battalion during the
several days covered by this mysterious term "manoeuvres."

The General Idea has been received the night before and duly discussed
at the "pow-wow" or conference that always follows the reception of this
document. Much time and whisky has been consumed, and the sum of the
evening's discussion is that the General Idea is exactly the same as
last year's, with the exception that the Blue Force is fighting the Grey
Force this year. "Last year we had the Red Army to contend with, and the
fact that they no longer oppose us is due to the annihilation they
suffered"--so says the colonel. "The invasion is coming from the
north--presumably the Esquimaux are up in arms against us."

Dawn brings with it reveille and brigade orders. This is a magnificent
bluff on the part of the brigade staff to give the impression that they
have sat up all night devising new and wondrous schemes for departing
from the beaten path of military science. This is quite unnecessary, as
sufficient departures will occur naturally in the course of the day, and
nothing on earth will convince the infantry officer that the staff ever
work.

The colonel, however, reads the orders to the little group around him.
First there is the General Idea, laboriously copied from orders of the
night before. Then comes the "Special Idea." This, too, bears a
time-worn similarity to its predecessors, but passes without special
comment. The next heading is "Dispositions": "The advanced guard will
consist of one troop of the Missinabee Horse and one company of the
Umpteenth Battalion." "Thank God for that!" murmurs the colonel,
realising that the one company of his battalion will be spared the
arduous duty of trying to replace cavalry, and that the other three will
be in the first of the fray and consequently the first out of ammunition
and free from the danger always incidental to the use of blank
ammunition at close ranges. Moreover, advanced guards have always been
his hobby, so he proceeds to issue his orders--verbally of course,
though he will write them out later for the sake of curious generals who
make collections of such things. While he is waiting for the cavalry to
report he engages in very earnest conversation with Begbie Lyte, the
signalling officer. Lyte is the serious-faced young man standing arguing
with his little knot of flag-waggers. He has just realised that one
mistake has already been made in the campaign, for, in the enthusiasm
of youth, he brought bicycles to Petewawa. He realises, too, that next
year he will either bring no bicycles or no men, for the latter having
pushed their machines through three miles of sand from the detraining
platform are already expressing their opinion, with true Canadian
freedom, as to their usefulness.

This difficulty is tactfully overcome by leaving the cycles in the
tents, and the "plot," as he calls the instructions he has just
received, is unfolded to them.

Meanwhile the cavalry come up, and the officer-in-charge, knowing
somebody who knows Lyte, spends a few seconds in the exchange of
pleasantries. His name being Horace Smith, it has been quite
conveniently shortened to "Horsey." Smith is one of those geniuses who
knows everybody whom anyone knows; consequently he is always able to
borrow money. Presently he trots off with his troop, and we know we
shall see no more of him until nightfall. In our turn we move off as
well, and the main body, already commencing to munch the haversack
lunches they are carrying, cherish similar opinions as to our fate.

Eventually the whole column is moving down the dusty road and presently
turns northward, following some wheel tracks that eventually merge into
the sand. Then for a long time nothing happens. The cavalry have long
since disappeared; the vanguard of one company shows up occasionally on
a hill top ahead of us and proves that we are at least moving in the
same general direction.

At one time two men detached themselves from the rest of the vanguard
and proceeded to divest themselves calmly of their accoutrements. Then
followed the feverish wagging of a flag in a manner that suggested news
of greatest importance. The colonel becomes impatient as he waits for
the message to come through, and suggests mildly that there seems to be
a falling off from the standard rate.

Lyte, however, is equal to the occasion, and calls to the reading
signallers "Tell the fool to semaphore!" "He carn't," gasps the sergeant
in a horrified whisper; "He's young, an' he don't know nothink but
Morse." Lyte groans. This young lad was pressed into service a few days
previously, on the strength of his boy scout record, to fill a gap
caused by another youth who had suddenly felt the call of the wild and
gone river boating.

Eventually the message is received and the flags on the hill top
disappear as the signallers hasten to catch up with their party. It is
the type of message embraced under the heading "Negative Information"
and stated to be of importance. "Scouts report no enemy in sight as yet,
10.15 a.m.--J. HORACE SMITH (Lieut.)."

There is a feeling that we have been deceived, and we trudge on, kicking
up angry little swirls of dust. Sympathy is already beginning to be
expressed for the children of Israel in their wanderings. The music of
water falling in the distance would be music indeed, for most of the
water bottles are by now empty, and great beads of sweat are standing
out on the men's foreheads as a result. Men will not learn that drinking
large quantities of water when marching only increases their discomfort.

However, other things soon occur to divert our minds; one or two false
alarms that the enemy has been sighted are satisfactorily straightened
out, with more flag-wagging, and finally the plop-plop of blank
cartridge is heard in the distance.

The advance guard now extends in long skirmishing lines with a view to
brushing aside any slight resistance offered by the enemy. Presently we
come on the horses of our mounted brethren in little groups of four in
rear of a hill, and as we climb the hill itself we see the backs of
Smith's gallant troopers as they fire from behind bushes that would
certainly prove their death warrants on active service. The enemy are
hidden in the edge of a large and straggly wood that only two days
before was the scene of a roaring bush fire. Occasionally a man can be
seen moving against the background of the charred trunks, but they, too,
are making the best of what cover there is. Smith, leaving us to clear
the wood, withdraws his men and reports to the colonel, and then moves
around to a flank, hoping to cut off the party inside the wood.

Meanwhile the main guard have reinforced the first thin lines of
skirmishers, and the enemy are already falling back through the wood. We
follow at a more leisurely pace, as the whole place is a mass of charred
tree trunks, burnt underbush and ashes. A voice from the rear bids us
"Lie down" in no uncertain tones, so, reflecting that after all the
Government knows best, we do so, and from then on the khaki begins to
blend with its surroundings in a way that the inventor of this variety
of cloth never dreamed of.

The wood turns out to be pear-shaped, and we, having by chance struck
the small end of the pear, emerge considerably before the other
battalions, who, having come up on our right, are biting into the
largest part of the pear. Sounds of heavy conflict arise, and having
still some five rounds each of blank we re-enter the wood and the
combat. From then on, as Lyte expressed it afterwards, "Things began to
occur just as they happened, like all great battles, the strategy being
worked out later."

Twice we engage friendly battalions until stopped by an irate umpire,
and once we surround and capture three sections of the enemy's horses.
These are found in a little _coulee_ running off a dried stream bed.
Altogether it is a glorious affair, and is just settling down to the
stage when personal combat begins when a bugle blares out the "Cease
fire." This is followed by the "assembly," and we straggle to the edge
of the wood to find most of our battalion there. The brigade is again
formed up and we sit down for lunch. The cavalry, our enemies of the
morning, trot back to camp, where a hot meal awaits them, and we know we
shall not see them again. As we have our blankets following we wonder
what is in the wind. We soon learn, however--the rest of the day is to
be spent in a route march to Chalk River, a stream about ten miles
further north, and bivouac will be made there. Blankets are to be worn
"en banderole."

The whole brigade busies itself in drawing the blankets from the waggons
and rolling them into long cylinders, which with a spare boot-lace are
made into an exaggerated sort of horse-collar. The luckless owner then
thrusts a head and one arm through the roll and he is ready to move on.
A hotter method of carrying a blanket could scarcely be devised, but it
is much preferable to the antique leather equipment that hangs year in
and year out on the armoury walls.

Presently the column moves off along the dusty road, a mere trail
winding through the brush, which, pleasant and green at first, soon is
as drab and sordid as the weltering men along the road. Now and again a
halt is ordered, and we throw ourselves on the roadside while another
battalion passes through to take its turn at the head of the column.
Some artillery waggons pass at the trot, raising clouds of dust and
profanity along the line, and then the piping of a whistle starts the
whole column moving again.

Chalk River is eventually reached and the bivouac formed; then the
joyful shout of "Tea up" is heard. Several buglers at the same time play
the "Men's Mess Call" with variations, and for a while contentment
reigns.

The officers stroll around to the Y.M.C.A. tent and write postcards
home, telling blithely how they are enjoying the lovely weather--not a
cloud in the sky! They mention nothing of the blistered necks and
sunburned noses from which the skin is already peeling. Begbie Lyte,
with a shameless disregard for the truth, buys a postcard of a typical
bunch of troops passing up that very same road, and selecting a figure
well concealed by dust, marks an X over it, and inscribing "This is me"
on the reverse side addresses it to the colonel's daughter.

The cool of the evening soon drives the noisy bathers from the river,
and the camp settles down around the inevitable camp fires until the
warning notes of "Last Post" and "Lights Out" sound.

The moon comes out and shines on long rows of blanketted forms and
stacked rifles, and the only sound is the uneasy stir of the horses and
tossing of an occasional man where the sand flea is already at work.

Such is a typical day at Petewawa.




CHAPTER III

MOBILISATION


It required the outbreak of the war to bring home the inevitable
weakness of such a system, and when the Canadian Parliament announced
the intention of sending a contingent of thirty thousand men, even the
most enthusiastic shrugged their shoulders and said "Impossible."

But the feat not only was accomplished, but nearly trebled in the
accomplishment, and if there is one man who can claim to have arisen as
a Moses from among the people and achieved this miracle it is
Major-General Sir Sam Hughes, at that time known generally as Sam
Hughes, the Minister of Militia.

Sam Hughes did not arise in a single hour--neither was Rome built in a
day. He had been rising for several years, and it had taken the combined
efforts of both the Liberal and the Conservative parties to hold him
down.

Looking backward one cannot help thinking what a pity it was he had not
been given a free hand. He supported the Ross rifle, and raised it from
the status of a political weapon to that of a military one, and whatever
opponents to this weapon may claim they must remember that it was the
weapon that held the line at Ypres in those last few days of April,
1915, and had it not been available the Canadian Division would have
probably been in England patiently drilling with dummy rifles, and the
glory of having saved the situation would have fallen upon other troops.

However, the actual declaration of war drew people's attention to the
Militia, and they demanded action.

Some commanding officers made stirring speeches by platform or Press,
offering the services of their battalions as complete units--an
impossibility to accomplish owing to the terms of enlistment; others
with more modesty sent in their applications, without any flourish of
trumpets, for service in any capacity.

But along the border, wherever there were canals, bridges, and other
public works that might easily be damaged by fanatic sympathisers from
the United States, volunteers were called for to supply the necessary
guards.

Subsequent events justified these precautions, but for some time the men
on duty were the object of much attention from the small boy and that
type of young man who still roams the streets and declares that the
Allies are a long time winning the war!

Spy fever was rampant, and such experts as Begbie Lyte were constantly
in demand to investigate lights that flickered in any manner that a
vivid imagination might possibly take for signalling.

At other points practical jokes were played, such as driving a calf at
night in the direction of the sentry. The soldier receiving no answer to
his challenge would fire in the direction of the noise, and a loud laugh
would greet him. Once or twice, however, the sentry waited for the laugh
and fired in that direction, so that this variety of joke soon lost its
popularity.

Once, however, mobilisation had been ordered the militiamen were
replaced by men who had volunteered for active service. The armouries
began to hum with activity. In the West it was hard to find
accommodation for the men who came from isolated homesteads and lonely
ranches, some even from the Arctic Circle, to enlist. The West still
continues to supply the bulk of our recruits, due largely to the fact
that the majority are, if not British born, at least the sons of British
fathers, and consequently felt the call more personally than the sons of
families four or five generations in the country. Quebec, from which
province one would expect the most owing to the ties of race and
language with our Allies, has been frankly disappointing, although
certain exclusively French-Canadian battalions have done, and are
continuing to do, as good work as any on the Western front.

A week or two dragged on before the actual order to depart for the big
concentration camps came, and various conjectures were made as to their
location. Petewawa was suggested as one, but given up as too isolated.
Niagara, Barriefield, Three Rivers, and other "annual" sites were other
favourites, but each had some objection, for no concentration such as
thirty thousand men had been held in the history of Canada.

Eventually, however, we learned that one large camp was to be formed at
Val Cartier. Except that Val Cartier was in Quebec, no one knew
anything of this little hamlet.

Orders came thick and fast ordering this equipment to be worn and that
to be left behind. Some days rifles were to be taken and greatcoats left
in stores, and next day the rifles were to be left and greatcoats were
to be taken. The result was that some of the telegrams went astray, and
commanding officers at the last minute ordered what equipment they
thought most suitable to be worn.

The Umpteenth Battalion took down the leather harness that had adorned
its armoury walls for many a year and spent an anxious day fitting it
together, Begbie Lyte and the other officers who had volunteered for the
front flitting from one group of contestants to another.

At last every man had a working knowledge of the fifty odd buckles and a
hazy idea as to where the straps were supposed to cross his chest and
where not. The colonel looked with pride on this difficulty overcome and
said, "Thank Heaven! we will probably get a more modern outfit as soon
as we strike camp." Alas! We buckled and unbuckled those straps and
rolled and unrolled our greatcoats for half a year before the new kit
was handed out.

This was only one of the many steps that led up to that final day when,
with the band playing such cheerful airs as "The Girl I left behind me"
and "Will ye no come back again," the active service volunteers of the
Umpteenth Battalion left their native town.

The way to the station is but dimly remembered as a haze of faces,
spasmodic attempts at cheering, and the waving of many handkerchiefs.
Much handshaking and the sudden thrusting of presents into arms already
full prefaced the actual pulling out of the train.

The officers gathered on the back of the last car and watched the white
faces of the crowd dwindle to pin points, and then a curve hid town and
people alike from view.

It was less lonely inside the car, where were officers of another
battalion whose men were in the fore part of the train. The elder men
talked in low, serious tones as befitted those who knew something of
what lay before them.

To Lyte and the younger subalterns it seemed as though they were on the
threshold of life's Great Adventure, as indeed they were.

But they were not facing a war of chivalrous deeds such as they
imagined.

Alas for our ideals! war now appears in its true light, as the game of
commerce played on a larger scale with human lives as pawns in the place
of dollars and cents!

And as for chivalry, how can it live in the midst of machine-guns,
asphyxiating gases, and liquid flames?




CHAPTER IV

VAL CARTIER


A more picturesque site for a camp than Val Cartier could hardly be
imagined, situated as it was among the foothills of the Laurentian
mountains along the banks of the Jacques Cartier River.

A gentle slope, dry sandy soil, and plenty of water made it ideal from a
sanitary standpoint, and with the ample manoeuvre grounds available,
the shower sprays, and running water piped throughout the camp, Val
Cartier was the peer of any camp the Canadians have yet seen.

But when we tumbled out of the train in the early morning there was
nothing to show the existence of a military camp except one lonely
bell-tent guarding the railway platform and a pair of wheel-tracks
disappearing in the clumps of second-growth cedars.

Following these tracks we came upon an opening on either side of the
road in which men laboured at clearing away the underbrush. The vivid
colours of the jerseys in which they were clad told the world that those
on the one side were students from McGill, while those on the other clad
in blue and white represented 'Varsity (Toronto). Further along the red,
yellow, and blue of Queen's University showed where their University
Field Company was at work. The same spirit of competition that existed
on the football field now kept the three units working at top speed.

A patch of land that one day was covered with cedars would next day be
bare of all but stumps, the brushwood blazing merrily in huge fires.
Next day the stumps in turn would be gone and by evening the new area
would be covered with tents.

Already some hundreds of tents had been erected on each side of what was
to be the main street of the camp. A ditching machine pantingly laboured
on one side of the road and dug as much in a day as fifty men. In the
ditch already made on the other side pipes had been laid and running
water was available.

Showers had been erected for each company, and, most welcome of all, the
advance party greeted us with a flourish of dirty aprons and ladles and
the joyful cry of "skillet."

During the afternoon greatcoats were received, and very necessary they
were, for when we rose next morning ice had formed in our pails, and the
trees on the mountain side were beginning to turn red.

Long before we left the mountain sides were a wild revel of colour,
reds, yellows, and browns predominating, where the frost had touched the
leaves. Particularly brilliant were the shot-scarred trees that stood on
the slopes forming the stop-butts of the rifle-ranges.

These ranges are worthy of special mention, comprising as they did
targets for fifteen hundred men.

The method of construction was simplicity itself. A deep ditch had been
dug and the earth thrown up like an ordinary trench to protect the
marker. Strong posts had been erected about six feet apart to carry the
targets, which took the form of squares of pulpboard mounted on a lever
pivoted to the upright. The weight of the target held it behind the
butt, and it was brought into view by pulling a short piece of rope
attached to the free end of the lever.

Crude as this arrangement was, it served the purpose admirably, and
daily we trudged out toward the mountain, around the foot of which this
trench wound much as the German line does around the foot of Messines
Hill, and fired ragged volleys into the re-echoing hill sides.

In only two ways could the training have been improved, and neither of
these two was practicable under the circumstances. Better checking of
the target registers and fire control would have necessitated officers
trained better in musketry, and such officers were not available, and
had the latest pattern ammunition in clips been obtainable instead of
the old square-toed bullet wrapped in paper packages, more practice in
rapid fire--the English Army's Mad Minute--could have been had.

But Sam Hughes had to work with the material at hand, and from an army
of men who had, in the majority, never fired a service rifle in their
lives, he formed an army that he described as being "the finest shooting
army in the world."

Drill was not by any means neglected, and there were few idle hours in
camp, even moonlight nights being eagerly seized upon by battalion
commanders for extra work.

Daily fresh drafts from battalions arrived and were formed into new
composite battalions, and daily the proportion of men in old civilian
clothing grew less.

Two reviews were held, after one of which the Honourable Sam had many
things to say to the officers. He told them that every officer, no
matter what political gender, would have an equal chance in the great
struggle for a place on the contingent, for instead of the one thousand
officers asked for some fifteen hundred officers were actually in camp.

Sam spake yet other homilies to the officers, and his address, delivered
from a mound on which he and his staff were drawn up, was irreverently
referred to around camp as the "Sermon on the Mount." A story is also
told that one of his aides suggested that all could not hear him.
"That's all right," he is credited with replying; "they can all see me!"

However, his words had a beneficial effect on all who heard them, and
when two weeks later another review was held and His Royal Highness the
Duke of Connaught inspected the contingent it was announced that the
First Canadian Division was ready to proceed over seas.

Begbie Lyte and other signalling officers were summoned over to
headquarters one day and received mysterious instructions from an
officer in naval uniform.

Two days later, on the 22nd of September, the ---- Battalion embarked on
a troopship, and after a wild evening's pleasure at the Chateau
Frontenac the writer, Begbie Lyte, and some others sought the narrow
confines of the ship. The rhythmic throb of the propeller woke them some
hours later as the ship moved out to anchor in mid stream.




CHAPTER V

THE CONVOY


For two days we lay at anchor opposite the Citadel of Quebec and
bemoaned the fate that separated us from the twinkling lights of the
Chateau Frontenac and the Dufferin Terrace. Then one evening the throb
of the propeller drew the crowd from the saloons to the decks and we
watched the lights fade away in the night. From the forts long fingers
of light followed us down stream, and blinking lights here and there
sent us farewell greetings. Up on the bridge we could hear the clatter
of the signal lamps, and the sooty odour of petroleum smoke hung in the
calm air around us. Begbie Lyte was on the job and became an important
unit in our little company. Through him alone would we get news of the
outside world for some weeks to come.

Nearing Father Point, below Quebec, where normally the pilot is dropped
or taken on when one is leaving or proceeding to Canada, the ship's
officers pointed out a small twinkling light that marked the grave of
the ill-fated _Empress of Ireland_. We had seen the collier _Storstadt_
that sent her to her doom while at anchor off the Citadel, and were much
impressed.

As night wore on the groups on the deck became smaller until the ship's
officers alone remained, and with darkened port-holes we slipped on
through the night. A distinct freshness in the wind spoke of a change
around us. We were nearing salt water. Next day we anchored in Gaspe
Basin. Already some six or eight ships lay there.

There we lay for some days watching the jellyfish and the gulls while
one by one our number was increased to thirty-two.

At this point a diversion occurred in the form of the last visit by the
Minister of Militia in a noisy tugboat. More important than the printed
copies of his farewell speech that were handed us was the news that now
was our last chance to mail letters. In childish simplicity we handed
down our mail, thinking the "hame folk" would receive these in a few
short days. The sacks were collected and taken to one of the other ships
and journeyed across the Atlantic with us. So our departure was kept
secret from all but a few, for, with a shrewd knowledge of the
"habitant" mind, Captain Gee, the gallant commander of "E" Company, tied
up a few letters in a handkerchief, weighted it with sundry pieces of
silver, and dropped the package into a fishing boat that had come
alongside with a load of fresh meat. The very amount enclosed spoke of
secrecy, and the "habitant" sailor used all due precautions in
forwarding the missives.

[Illustration: SAILING DOWN THE ST. LAWRENCE, NEAR BIC.]

By Sunday noon the ground swell had driven some of the officers to deck
chairs, while the others marshalled the troops on the rear deck for
Divine service. Service over, we watched the celebrated Perce Rock
fading in the distance and knew that Canada now lay far behind us. A day
later and Newfoundland too lay in the distance, and the magic circle of
the horizon closed around us.

Interest now began to be taken in things nautical. The sextant, compass,
and log were the cause of much discussion, and the usual bets were made
on the daily run, the stakes being held by the chaplain.

Three days out and the ship's library was taken by assault, and the
sevenpenny novels that formed it disappeared into the cabins. In vain
an officer was appointed librarian with powers to search and to seize,
but conditions were not bettered.

Lectures, physical drill, and other mild duties relieved a little of the
monotony, for the journey was a slow one, a condition made necessary by
the horse transports, one of which rolled in line ahead of us.
Occasionally a stir would be noticed on her decks and a horse that had
succumbed to _mal-de-mer_ would be unceremoniously dumped overboard.
Such occasions were marked by a fusillade of pistol shots from each ship
as the carcase drifted past, for, contrary to traditions, most of us
carried revolvers for the first time in our lives and were anxious to
display our prowess.

Nearly a fortnight was thus passed gazing in singular apathy at the most
remarkable demonstration of the command of the seas that military
history of any age affords.

In three long lines, roughly a mile apart, the transports formed an
armada such as Philip of Spain never dreamed of.

But about two days out from England a black column of smoke was seen to
port, and presently the contour of a heavy battleship could be
determined bearing down on us. There was wild excitement till the
Cross of St. George could be distinguished at her masthead. It was the
ill-fated _Queen Mary_, our latest and finest battle-cruiser. At an
almost incredible speed she overtook us and passed up our lines with her
crew manning the decks and her band playing "The Maple Leaf."

[Illustration: CHURCH PARADE.]

From then on we always could see the smoke of heavier battleships in the
offing, and knew we were getting close to somewhere.

We passed the Scilly Islands about 4 o'clock in the morning, but as
cards had continued till late the preceding night few but the ship's
officers saw the pin-point of light marking the westward sentinel of the
Old World.

Then on October 14th fishing smacks again appeared and the grey coast of
Cornwall hove in sight, and by noon we could distinguish buildings along
the cliffs.

Passing the Eddystone our course was altered and all hopes of landing at
Southampton vanished. Captain H----r was much excited. After nineteen
years he was returning to his native town--Plymouth. To a running fire
of his explanations we passed up the Sound to the Hamoaze. A tugboat,
looking ridiculously small against the gigantic liner ahead, now took
us in tow, and the throbbing of the ship's screw stopped. The cessation
of this pulse added a sombre touch to our voices; we were nearing the
end of the voyage, and in another day would know the ship no more.

Thus we glided slowly past the old wooden cruisers now used as training
ships, and from their crowded riggings came shrill treble cheers. To the
piping of the young cadets' voices was added the screaming of sirens and
the tooting of many whistles. Halyards on all sides of us broke out into
brilliant bunting and semaphores wagged with a madness that even Lyte
could not translate.

The clarion notes of the mess bugle called us from the decks to other
duties, and there between the soup and the fish we heard the hoarse
rattle of the anchor chain as we found our moorings.

Captain H----r, seizing the opportunity, rose, and in the capacity of an
old Plymothian gave us greeting.

Such was our welcome to England.

In the morning we looked out and saw rows and rows of chimney pots,
impressive in their similarity.

Then later we read an editorial in _The Times_ describing us as
pioneers and backwoodsmen. This provoked much comment, but the writer
for one was not greatly distressed, for he had been born within sound of
the shrill of a sawmill, and the perfume of cedar is still sweeter to
his nostrils than the costly unguents of Araby.




CHAPTER VI

IN ENGLAND


Our stay in England was marred by the heaviest rainfall of many years,
and Salisbury Plain, where we were quartered all winter, had the
reputation of being the muddiest spot in the world until we struck
Flanders; and even now there are patriots who maintain that the "Plain"
holds the championship.

But these were not our first impressions of the Downs. It is hard yet to
reconcile the mud in which we lived for months with the velvety swards
that first greeted our eyes.

We had detrained at Amesbury, bleary eyed and sleepless after a tedious
night trip from Plymouth. This had followed a seemingly interminable
march through Plymouth, during which our progress had been seriously
delayed by women who broke into the ranks and kissed and wept over our
dear boys. Officers escaped with mere handshakes, but still found the
ordeal rather trying.

[Illustration: EASTERN ONTARIO REGIMENT, NEAR STONEHENGE.]

However, a few minutes of standing around the platform munching
sandwiches while the necessary mistakes were made and corrected wakened
us thoroughly, and then to the crunch of our own footsteps we swung
smartly down the village street.

Here we found we were in a new world, a world we had read of in books.
The thatched cottages, the neatly-clipped hedges, the churchyard with
its headstones and tumbling wall, all seemed to fit in with what we
expected. When we passed a public-house with its wooden sign emblazoned
with "The Three Feathers," or some such emblem, the picture was
complete--it was the England of Jeffery Farnol!

Later we swung across the ample Downs, passing on our way Stonehenge.
After having said "I don't know" to a few hundred questions from the men
nearest you, it was a relief to be able to answer a few for a change.
What memory failed to supply imagination furnished; but this is every
guide's privilege. A momentary halt here--to give the men a
rest--afforded a chance for cameras to click, and then we left the road
and marched across the grassy Downs to the Bustard Inn. Here the rows of
tents that were to be our homes for the next few months had already
been pitched.

Other brigades went to Lark Hill, to Pond Farm, to Sling Plantation, and
to West Down, North and West Down, South ... one could lose a whole army
in this vast training ground.

Gone was the long main street of Val Cartier camp with its cinema shows
and booths of tempting merchandise. Gone, too, was the little river with
its gravelly shores for bathing.

But we were one step nearer our goal, and that was the one thought that
consoled us during those trying winter months that followed.

From then on we saw little but our own brigade--the 1st Brigade--and the
Princess Patricia's Light Infantry--who were also at Bustard Camp.

The latter held themselves rather aloof from the Canadian Division,
counting themselves as superior troops--as indeed they were, being
mostly veterans of one or two campaigns--and as they were not brigaded
with us we saw little of them.

Early in November the King, accompanied by Lords Roberts and Kitchener,
reviewed the Division. His Majesty took special interest in the
Patricias, so we were not surprised when in the early days of December
the "Pats" left the Plain to join the 27th Division. Of their subsequent
doings another book might be written, for no regular battalion of the
British Army has proved itself steadier on the field than this
magnificent corps--the gift to the Empire of a very gallant gentleman
who has since succumbed to wounds received while serving with it in the
field.[1]

Christmas brought with it leave and relaxation from the monotony of
drilling, but with the New Year we started brigade and divisional
manoeuvres, and we knew our stay on the Plain was drawing to a close.

We were again reviewed--in a drizzling rain this time--by the King on
February 4th, 1915, and on the following day--just six months after the
declaration of war--the First Canadian Division, complete in every
detail (horse, foot, and guns) entrained for France.

So secret had the departure been kept that people in the neighbouring
town of Salisbury knew nothing of the review or the entraining of the
troops till they were well on the high seas.

[Footnote 1: Major Hamilton Gault, referred to above, did not die of
wounds as first reported, but suffered the loss of a leg by amputation.]

After a very rough passage from Avonmouth the Division landed at St.
Nazaire in the Bay of Biscay, the last transport arriving some time in
the second week of February.

From there they were taken in box cars to that mysterious region known
as "the front," travelling forty men or eight horses to a car, a state
of affairs that one man complained "showed undue regard for horses."

But five whole battalions and a number of surplus officers who had
managed to get over to England supernumerary to their battalions were
left behind on the Plain as a base depot.

Amongst the latter were the writer and Begbie Lyte, and when they
rejoined a month or two later their battalion had been cut to pieces and
some twenty-five of the officers with whom they had trained were
casualties.

It is hard to imagine anything sadder than rejoining a battalion after
fighting such as that unless it is the saying of good-bye.

[Illustration: MANOEUVRES ON SALISBURY PLAIN.]




CHAPTER VII

INTERIM


For a time there was little news from the Canadians at the front, for
they were not immediately placed in the trenches. Trench warfare was
then still a novelty; its exact principles had not been developed, and
all the training done on the Plain had been the ordinary open style of
fighting--quite useless against the strongly entrenched positions the
Germans had taken up.

So while lying in reserve behind the lines the First Division dug and
manned trenches and practised themselves in the new warfare. Selected
officers from each company spent days in the front line with other
battalions and returned to their men bristling with information.

A little later selected platoons and companies took their turn in the
front line, and before the end of February the Canadian Division was
holding its own sector of the British line.

Casualties began to drift back to the Canadian base, which had now
become centred at Shorncliffe, and letters began to arrive with details
of the new methods of fighting. There was other news, too, of a more
cheerful sort that showed brighter glimpses of life that occurred when
enjoying brief rests from the firing line.

"Don't sympathise with us too much," wrote one officer; "we would sooner
be here than on the Plain. Last night we gave an oyster and champagne
supper at ---- to three Ottawa ladies who are running a soup and coffee
waggon for our battalion. We had a great time. D---- Dang and the Cat
(another subaltern) were in fine fettle."

But more serious work was in view.

On March 10th the British commenced an offensive at Neuve Chapelle
which, had it proved successful, would have involved the Canadians in
the projected advance upon the Aubers Ridge, which formed the key to
Lille.

But Neuve Chapelle, although a victory in one sense of the word, was a
very costly lesson, but a lesson that showed that our artillery must be
enormously increased if any further effort to break through the German
line was to be made.

For, having taken their objective, the British troops found not only a
second but a third line of trenches protected by entanglements of a most
formidable nature, and so situated as to render the ground recently won
at such heavy cost almost untenable. To carry these lines would require
another bombardment more intense even than that which had preceded the
attack. Our line had advanced one mile and there it stayed.

So ended the first attempt on our part to renew the offensive after the
stagnation of a winter of trench warfare. For years we had been taught
that an army that relinquishes the offensive acknowledges itself as
beaten. It now began to look as though military science had undergone a
complete revolution and that trench warfare and the policy of attrition
were to be the normal methods of the future.

But Neuve Chapelle showed something else--it showed that the indomitable
spirit of our men had not been quenched by the misery and suffering of
the winter months and that the British bayonet was as much to be feared
as ever.

"We were kept pretty busy," wrote a friend, "doing rapid fire, and lost
quite a few from shell fire. But our artillery had the time of their
lives, and fired pretty steadily the whole three days of the show."

Later he wrote that they were moving northward--probably to Hill 60--and
we could expect there would be something doing shortly.

It was not to Hill 60 that the Canadian Division went, but further
northward in the Ypres salient to the left of the 27th Division, where
the "Princess Pats" were winning immortality at St. Eloi.

So the days wore on, the surplus officers chafing at the monotony of
drill on a barrack square, relieved as it was by "Thes Dansants" at the
Metropole and promenades along the Leas at Folkestone.

Then one day a medical officer dropped a sure tip. He had been warned to
prepare beds for a thousand casualties--the Canadians were in something
big at last!

Just how big it was we realised a week later when the newspapers broke
forth into flamboyant headlines, "CANADIANS SAVED SITUATION," "FOUR GUNS
RECAPTURED," and other startling sentences that danced before the eyes.

Lyte and the writer were returning from some light festivities, when
the hoarse cry "All about the Canadians" arrested their attention.
Papers were hurriedly bought, and the brief vague lines of the official
_communique_ eagerly scanned. "By Jove!" was Lyte's exclamation; "but
isn't that great!" The writer, however, hardly heard him; he was
thinking of the many good friends who had taken part and the price they
had to pay, and his answer was the monosyllabic "Huh!" of the aborigine.

That evening we packed our kits.




CHAPTER VIII

YPRES, 1915


The Second Battle for Ypres, as the fighting at Langemarck and St.
Julien is officially designated, was largely a regimental and company
officers' battle. This does not, however, reflect adversely on the
brigade and other staffs, who did all that was humanly possible with the
information that was at hand. Even at this date there are questions
about the action that cannot be cleared up until it will be permissible
to reproduce the whole of the war diaries of the various units that took
part.

On the 2nd and 3rd Canadian Brigades fell the brunt of the fighting in
which the Canadians took part, as the 1st Brigade was in rest billets in
reserve.

But, without detracting from their work, it must be admitted that the
account by the official "Eye Witness" does not give the 1st Brigade the
credit it deserves. This, however, is inevitable. In a modern battle
one sees nothing but what happens in the immediate vicinity of the
observer, and we must therefore depend largely on the accounts furnished
by others of what occurred in other parts of the field.

It will do no harm, however, to quote from the description by an
officer, since killed, of the action of one of the battalions of this
brigade, which from respect for the censor must remain nameless.

It would, however, serve no purpose to conceal the true names of those
officers and men whom he thought fit to mention, for the majority of
them have also laid down their lives in the field.

"During the latter part of the evening of April 22nd French and Algerian
troops in large numbers began retreating through _Vlamertinghe_ in the
utmost confusion, throwing away their arms and crying 'Asphyxie!
Asphyxie!!' Empty limbers and gun teams without their guns dashed down
the road, already thick with refugees and fugitive soldiers. Captain
Culling therefore ordered the company to stand to arms and be ready to
move off as soon as orders were received.

"Orders came about 9 p.m., and we moved off to the battalion rendezvous
at the junction of the _Brielen_ road, where we found the rest of the
battalion formed up. From here we continued north easterly up the
_Brielen_ road, across the canal toward _St. Julien_.

"A short distance past the canal the battalion deployed from the road,
No. 3 Company being on our (No. 2 Company's) left and continued to
advance.

"Moving forward in this formation was very difficult owing to the thick
darkness and the ground being so cut up by hedges, but Captain Culling
got in touch with the battalion on our left, which turned out to be the
_Canadian Scottish_ under Lieutenant-Colonel Leckie, at about the
farmhouse that afterwards became our dressing station. The advance
continued slightly more to the north, and a few minutes later the
company lay deployed about fifty yards in rear of a trench (A B)
occupied by the 10th Canadian Battalion. They were enfiladed from a
German trench to their right rear (C) and an adjoining farmhouse (M G).

"Wounded men, including their commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel
Boyle, lay everywhere about the trench and parados, but they were too
weak to attack this short piece of trench, although it was rendering
their position quite untenable.

[Illustration]

"One of our platoons successfully attacked this trench, while another
under Mr. Doxsee attacked the neighbouring house and succeeded in
driving the enemy from it with a loss of only two men killed and another
wounded.

"Steps were then taken to improve the position by reversing the parapet
of the captured trench (C) and extending the original trench to the
right. The house (M G), too, was prepared for defence, and thus the
night was passed and no man slept.

"At dawn of the 23rd the enemy commenced shelling the house and trench,
but the losses inflicted were slight owing to the two parallel hedges,
which made both ranging and observing difficult. They then commenced an
attack on the house supported by machine-gun fire, which proved a far
more serious affair, as in the house itself we lost two men killed and
some wounded, while in the trench we lost two valuable men,
Platoon-Sergeant Abelarde and Lance-Corporal McGurk. The former had
crawled out along the hedge to a dangerous and commanding knoll, and
from there put eighteen of the enemy out of action before a sniper's
bullet found him. The dead lay exposed where they fell, and could
readily be counted from the house.

"About 9 o'clock, while Captain Culling was organising a counter-attack
on a small portion of the German trench (D E), two companies of the
Toronto Battalion under a major arrived as reinforcements, and took
cover behind our parados as there was no room in the trench. Captain
Culling asked that they take on the attack, and Mr. Doxsee volunteered
to lead it. The response was feeble, and the attack petered out to
nothing, Bugler Hunt and a man of the _Toronto_ Battalion being killed
by the side of Doxsee, who, finding himself alone, returned to the
trench unharmed.

"The _Toronto_ men now tried a flanking movement on our immediate right,
but lost eight men and had to abandon the attempt. However, coupled with
our fire from the second story of the house, the effect was sufficient
to cause the enemy to retire from this point, and the remainder of the
day passed quietly, though the enemy's artillery continued to shell our
position and a machine-gun played on the house at every sign of
movement. By evening we had some seventeen casualties, a remarkedly
small number considering the shelling.

"As soon as darkness set in, under cover of a few skirmishers, two
platoons continued our original trench (A B) along a line (B B 1) about
fifteen feet in rear of the forward hedge surrounding the house and
linked this trench to the position in our right rear with a
communication trench, the majority of this work being done with the
small entrenching tool.

"This enabled us to get the whole company under cover, and with a
machine-gun of the _10th Battalion_ in the house we felt fairly secure.
Captain Hooper held a house immediately in front of our lines called
_Hooper House_, and our original trench was held by a mixture of our own
men and the Canadian Scottish under Mr. Hugill.

"Dawn on Saturday found our positions unaltered, but about 7 o'clock
orders came from Lieutenant-Colonel Rodgers, our second in command, to
take over all of the original trench and relieve the _Scottish_.

"Simultaneously Mr. Doxsee called for reinforcements to repel a direct
frontal attack on our forward trench and machine-gun house.

"Reinforcements hurried up along the new communication trench, but were
anticipated by Mr. Scott and a score or so of men, who dashed across the
open and repelled the attack, Mr. Doxsee being unfortunately killed at
this point.

"Captain Richardson now took over _machine-gun house_, and his company
(No. 2) relieved us along our original trench. The two Toronto companies
had entrenched to our right, forming a narrow and very dangerous salient
(C F).

"All day this house was the target of the enemy's artillery and
machine-guns, the latter sweeping the building so effectively that the
garrison was forced to lie flat on the floors.

"Six attacks were made by their infantry and repulsed before they could
get closer than two hundred yards, in spite of the fact that our only
machine-gun jammed incessantly owing to the rapidity of its firing.
About 2 p.m. one of our own guns came up, and from then on both guns
remained in action.

"About this time troops in French uniforms were seen moving down a road
on our right toward _St. Julien_. At first no notice was taken of them,
but presently it became apparent that these were Germans, who had
adopted this ruse to get behind our flank.

"Fire was immediately opened on them with what rifles could be spared
from our front line, and one machine-gun was hastily posted in a barn
(G), from which it did excellent work.

"At 3.30 orders were received to retire in the direction of battalion
headquarters. (These orders had originally been sent out at 2 o'clock,
and when Lieutenant-Colonel Watson received no response he sent them
again and again until he finally saw the last company passing the
shattered house that had served alike as dressing station and battalion
headquarters, and not till then did he leave the field himself.)

"The retirement took place across open ground swept by both shrapnel and
machine-guns, and the men just seemed to melt away.

"Men straggled in for hours, and when the battalion finally assembled at
brigade headquarters at _St. Jean_ the company had lost one hundred and
thirty-nine of all ranks, of which four were officers."

It was a black situation. No one knew how other parts of the field had
fared or how much ground had been lost. British troops were being rushed
up to relieve the 2nd and 3rd Brigades, who in some incredible manner
still held on in spite of two attacks with the gas. But they had paid a
terrible price. Of the former brigade there were scarcely a thousand men
and of the latter not many more.

If this, then, is the account of what one battalion--nay, what one or
two companies--accomplished, what must be the stories, as yet untold, of
those other battalions of the First Canadian Division that filled the
gap that led to Calais?




CHAPTER IX

WITH THE DRAFT


On returning to our barracks we found notices that "the following
officers will hold themselves in readiness to proceed to their
respective units with the next draft." Eagerly we scanned the list to
make sure our names had not been omitted, and then transferred ourselves
from the crowd that gathered in the ante-room to those who waited their
turn outside the telephone cabinet. Letters and telegrams were being
feverishly written in all parts of the building, and a hurly-burly of
voices in the mess-room proclaimed the general opinion that we had been
pretty badly cut up. A tailor's agent had somehow made his way into that
sanctuary, and voices were demanding "Who can lend me a blank cheque?"
in a wild endeavour to get him out again.

Telegrams were also arriving, one or two from the front. A subaltern
spread the sheet of flimsy in his hand to find his cousin had been
killed in action. There was a sudden hush in the turmoil as he turned
and walked slowly to the window; men at such times are mute and trust to
the simple pressure of the hand to tell that sympathy which the tongue
cannot frame.

A colonel whose hair had grown grey in the service passed from one group
to another, giving a word of advice here and receiving a word of
sympathy there, for his age had debarred any further activities in the
field. "But I have one son over there now," he proudly told you, "and my
other is coming with the next contingent!"

The orderly room clerk entered and pinned up the daily orders. These
were at once surrounded, and would have perished in the _melee_ had the
colonel not taken the situation in hand and read them out in his
sternest parade voice with appropriate comments of his own.

"All officers and men warned for draft will parade to the ranges at 5
o'clock tomorrow morning--that will teach you to sit up all night
playing cards!

"Markers and other details--that includes you, Lyte--will be at the
butts and all targets ready for firing at a quarter before the hour,
&c., &c.

"Light marching order will be worn by all ranks, including one hundred
and fifty rounds per man. Haversack rations to be carried.

"Officers' valises--maximum weight thirty-five pounds--to be rolled
ready for transport by 2 p.m., &c., &c."

This last caused an immediate thinning of the crowd, and till late that
night we struggled over our kits, rolling and unrolling them to try and
bring their weight down to something like the regulation amount.

At 4 o'clock next morning we fell in to march to the ranges, Lyte and
his ill-fated companions having left half an hour before, and from then
on till the afternoon we toiled in the hot sun. Returning about 3 that
afternoon, we found the draft ordered to be ready to proceed at 6
o'clock, barely time for the men to get their tea; and tea in the Army
is a meagre meal at the best of times.

Then after some hours waiting on the barrack square the draft moved off
down the Cheriton road and through the streets of Folkestone to where
the transports lay awaiting us.

Here the British Navy took hold of us again, and there were no further
delays. The men were led below decks and packed as close as they could
stand to one another, the officers having the privilege of being able to
sit on their valises, which were piled unceremoniously on the deck.

Then when all were accounted for the mooring ropes were cast off, and
with no more ceremony than the tinkle of the ship's telegraph we slid
out of the harbour under cover of the scudding clouds.

But we were not alone. A long, lithe shape, strangely suggestive of a
greyhound, crept out of the darkness around us and came up alongside,
and a brief conversation, ending in "All right, full speed," was held.

The telegraph tinkled again and our ship bounded forward, leaving a long
trail of phosphorescent foam in her wake.

The sighing of the rigging in the wind, the slap-slap of the Channel
breakers at our sides, and the lashing "hish" of the spray across the
decks blended with, but did not break, our thoughts.

And the dark shapes of the destroyers and the other transports
momentarily revealed by gaps in the scudding clouds, the gleaming wake
of the ship, and the faint white of the life-belts, that showed dimly
where little groups of two or three stood or sat together, made a
fitting scene for such an orchestral accompaniment.

Thus we reached France.

There followed a long march through the darkened streets of Boulogne to
a camp on the Plains of St. Martin, not far from the tall column that
marks where Napoleon gathered his great army and waited for the time
that never came, when he would be master of that little strip of water
we had just crossed.

A drizzling rain had started, and the men had now been nearly eight
hours without food and practically a whole day without a proper meal. We
were able to draw bully beef and biscuit at once from the stores, but
the situation was really saved by the ladies at the Y.M.C.A. tent, who
supplied hot cocoa and cake to all who cared to apply. A nominal charge
of one penny was made to those who wished to pay, but no man was refused
because of his inability to find this sum, small as it was.

Only a small thing, you may think, but it is only the smallest part of
what this wonderful organisation is doing for the soldier at the front.

And a smile and a cup of coffee at 5 o'clock in the morning "look pretty
good to me," as one recipient expressed it.

We were held in camp all the following day and then, carrying two days'
rations, we entrained for the north. For a while we made vain attempts
to find our destination from the French railway staff, but concluded
they either did not understand our variation of their beautiful language
or were sullen brutes knowing nothing.

As we continued northward the throbbing of distant gunfire became
plainer, and a strange flickering could be seen in the morning sky. This
strange light, caused by the flash of the guns and the flares or
illuminating fuzees shot up by the infantry, resembled nothing so much
as our own Aurora Borealis, and we were not surprised to find, a little
later, that our men had already nicknamed them the "Northern Lights."

Dawn brought us to a halt by some little town where the engine-driver
proceeded leisurely to fill his boiler. We availed ourselves of the
chance to exercise our French on some Algerian troops who were lying
wounded all over the platform. A rough tent had been made with waggon
tarpaulins, and under this lay the worst cases--ghastly wrecks of men
with blood-soaked bandages and blood-encrusted clothing, face muscles
twitching convulsively as masses of flies settled on them. One French
medical orderly with a strip of silver on his sleeves and an assistant
seemed to be the whole staff of the place.

One tall chap with a handsome beard showed us how a bullet had torn
through his cap and grazed his head, while a rude sling and a crutch
spoke of a more serious injury of which he said nothing. His white teeth
and smiling face turned to a horrible scowl as he continued talking, and
thinking we were over-exciting him, we moved away. Had we only known, he
was trying to describe to us the terrible effect of the asphyxiating gas
on his comrades who were less educated than he!

A few miles further on we detrained at Poperinghe and were soon marching
along a beautiful avenue of poplars--now perhaps the most famous highway
in Flanders, the Vlamertinghe road.

Refugees passed us with all their worldly effects piled on a waggon, the
women and little children clattering along behind in their wooden
sabots. It seemed so unnecessary. The guns that had been pounding away
all night were now strangely silent, and the fields on either side
seemed peaceful enough. There was even a farmer plowing stoically in
one.

A little further on we saw a horse that had been hurriedly cut out from
a gun or waggon team. It needed but one glance to tell us that shrapnel
had done its deadly work there, and we wondered vaguely what had become
of its rider, for the saddlery and harness were still on it.

On entering Vlamertinghe we saw signs of shelling on most of the
buildings, particularly around the church and the square, the steeple of
the former forming, of course, the aiming mark for the German guns.
Here, too, the body of a woman lay half in and half out of a doorway.
The place seemed absolutely deserted. An aeroplane droned overhead, but
whether our own or the enemy's we could not ascertain. However, we took
no chances and marched on, hugging the shelter of the walls on either
side of the street.

In this formation we were met by the gaunt figure of old Joey ----, our
quarter-master. He fell in beside Major V---- and guided us to our
transport lines, a farm a little on the Ypres side of the town. Here we
lay for half an hour munching biscuits and bully beef and watching an
anti-aircraft gun shelling the aeroplane we had noticed before, which
was now low enough to distinguish the sinister black crosses painted on
its wings.

This was the reason for the extraordinary silence on the part of the
guns, so skilfully hidden all around us.

The "Archibalds," as the anti-aircraft guns are popularly known, seemed
to be making extraordinarily bad practice as the fleecy puffs of
shrapnel burst all around the plane without apparent effect, and the
machine, having spotted something, dropped a signal that burst into
brilliant sparkles and turned for the enemy lines.

At this moment Joey returned from the outhouse concealing the
telephonists with instructions that we were to proceed to the field,
where the battalion was dug in at once.




CHAPTER X

THE BREAKING IN

"We take the old road we have taken for years;
For you cannot cut corners in war, it appears."


The truth of this old maxim was impressed on us by the roundabout route
we took to reach the field only a few hundred yards away where the
remainder of the battalion lay.

Actually about two companies strong, they looked a mere handful as they
lay huddled close to the hedges in the shallowest of shelter pits
scratched in the soil with the field entrenching tool.

The draft was immediately ordered to "dig in," as the plane we had been
watching a few minutes before had dropped its signal directly over this
position.

We lost no time in digging more of these shallow pits, that reminded one
rather gruesomely of graves, and had barely scraped them deep enough to
roll into before a hail of small high-explosive shell fell all around
us.

For half an hour the whoop and crash of falling and bursting shells kept
us alternately ducking our heads and raising them again to see "where
that one went," for curiosity is many times a stronger impulse than
fear.

Curious things happened. A tree was cut in half by a shell, and the
plumed top, falling clear of the stump, planted itself like a dart in
the ground a few feet away.

A pack horse suddenly bolted across the open field with a slight cut on
one flank, and half a dozen men made wild grasp at its bridle before one
succeeded in recapturing the brute. And here and there groups of men
finding their corner of the field a bit too "hot" for comfort would just
as suddenly bolt across to another part and start feverishly digging in
anew.

The shelling ended with as little warning as it had begun. There came a
pause, and we thought naturally, "Well, thank God that's over!"--and
said so. "Just a minute," said my companion; "there are the Three
Sisters to come yet!"

Before one could say "Here they are!" the rush of much larger
projectiles was heard, and in quick succession three heavy shells
crashed into the foot of the field, throwing up black columns of smoke.
"Those are coal-boxes," continued my tutor; "they used to have four guns
in that battery, but they are only using three now."

The chuckle with which he added this last showed that he, at any rate,
had no doubt as to the fate of the fourth gun.

This was evidently the end of the shelling, the enemy having,
theoretically, made the field untenable. The actual casualties were,
however, very slight, and the field entrenching tool, until now regarded
as a toy, became a valued possession. We were already beginning to learn
that the British infantry equipment is the finest in the world.

The shelling over, the draft was divided up amongst the remnants of the
four companies, and Lyte and the writer had the good fortune to be
placed with the same one.

Our company commander had been a lieutenant till a few days before, and
was now a temporary captain. His senior subaltern was wearing a "British
warm," the skirt of which had been riddled by machine-gun bullets, and a
sergeant was to come out in orders that evening as an officer to take
the remaining platoon.

A machine-gun duel in mid-air between one of our planes and an enemy
machine that was eventually driven off and the dropping of some large
shells into Ypres were the only other events of the day. Most of us
slept, as there was work for us to do that night, until the joyful sound
of "Tea up!" and the smell of hot "Maconachie" rations told us that
supper was ready.

At 7 o'clock the battalion fell in to move up to the front line and dig
some trenches. Hardly were we formed up when another violent shelling
started, and we hurried back to the cover of our funk-holes.

Again the shelling was singularly ineffective, due, probably, to the
fact that the enemy was using high explosive and not shrapnel. One shell
by an unfortunate chance caught an artillery limber full of ammunition
on the roadway, and it blew up with a sickening roar. The double report
of this explosion evidently satisfied the German gunners, for a few
minutes later the bombardment ceased and we again fell in.

The greatest secrecy was observed, and nobody but the guides knew our
destination, and we followed them in silence up the shell-pitted road
and across the pontoon bridge that spanned the Yser Canal. Various dark
forms hobbled past, their baggy trousers showing them to be Algerians. A
French outpost challenged us, and a party of Ghurkas passed us leading
pack horses with the bodies of their fallen officers lashed across the
saddles. The Ghurkas never leave an officer's body on the field, so the
sergeant in rear of the platoon ahead informed us.

On either side of the road was a ruined trench, and even in the weird
half-light of the flares we could see what a shambles they had become.
The road was well called "Suicide Alley!"

Then suddenly we left the road and took to the open fields on the left,
passing a trench occupied by some Imperial troops--it was our own first
line trench. Then we knew what our work was to be; we were to dig an
advance trench to link up with the French on our left and the English on
our right. The advance continued up a gentle slope across which--nearly
a thousand yards of bare bullet-swept field--the Ghurkas had a day or so
previously tried to charge. The bodies still lay there in rows just as
they had fallen under the bursts of fire that mowed them down--pitiful
huddled figures in the grass staring ahead into the great void. Few of
the faces showed signs of suffering--such is the mercy of the rifle
bullet; and so great was the resemblance to sleep that later, when we
came to retire, the writer and others shook the bodies mistaking them
for our own men.

In the midst of this ghastly scene, lit up by fitful glances of
moonlight as clouds scudded over the sky, two companies moved forward, a
long line of shadowy forms, to act as a covering party while the
remaining half-battalion dug the new trench.

As we moved forward and lay down we could hear the thudding of the picks
as they were driven into the ground, and from somewhere in the darkness
ahead the plick-plock of the sniper began. Captain H----, our new
company commander, passed down the line to warn us to count our men and
see that all bayonets were fixed and magazines loaded.

The sniping increased, and a farmhouse ahead of us that had been
smouldering for some time burst into flame. Two colts that were
evidently confined near the blaze started to whinny and neigh, and a man
who had been hit began to curse vilely.

From somewhere in rear a battery of French "seventy-fives" opened up
with their ear-splitting reports, and we could see the outlines of the
ruined farm ahead of us silhouetted against the crimson flashes of their
bursting shrapnel. But of the enemy there was no sign--nothing but the
arching trail of the flares that shot up and the steady plick-plock of
the snipers. It was most trying.

It was nearly 2 o'clock before the trench was completed and we wakened
our shivering men to retire, for so exhausted were they that, despite
the cold and danger, many had dozed there on the body-strewn field with
one hand firmly grasping the rifle.

By this time traces of dawn began to show themselves in the eastern sky,
and the moon seemed to flood the whole country with light.

Platoon by platoon in Indian file we drew off the field, carefully
checking the count of our men as they passed until all were accounted
for. Then the march back to billets began. And such a march! Worn out by
the week's hard fighting, the older men staggered all over the road, all
but dropping out from sheer exhaustion. Nor were the new men in better
condition. Unaccustomed as yet to the weight of their packs, shaken by
shell fire, and in some cases still weak from the sickness of the rough
Channel passage, it was only sheer pride and the cruel taunts of the
older men that kept them in the ranks. And thus we straggled on past the
French outposts and over the Yser again, and on, on past the field we
had lain in all day, on through Brielen to Vlamertinghe, back to
billets. But the draft was broken in.




CHAPTER XI

RESERVE BILLETS


It was only the prospect of several days of comparative rest that held
us together at all as we floundered over the slippery cobble stones into
Vlamertinghe. At the cross-roads that formed the battalion rendezvous in
case of alarm, we got into some kind of military formation, for we spied
the gaunt figure of the colonel there sitting his horse like a centaur.
A grim man he was, who never spared his horses, himself or his men, and
his only comment as we hobbled past was, "Dress up those fours!"--and
tired as we were, the fours dressed up. When, however, Captain H----,
who had gone to the rear of the company to chase up stragglers, came by,
his greeting was a little more personal. "All well, H----?" he asked,
and our gallant skipper answered, "All present, sir." It showed rather
plainly the difference in feeling that existed for some time between
those who had been through the Second Battle of Ypres and those who had
not--a difference that it took much hard fighting to outweigh.

At last the company ahead turned down a side street, and we marched into
our billet alone. It was a deserted warehouse with plenty of straw and
quite comfortable, and, having got our men safely stowed away, the
officers walked across the road to an empty house that formed our
billets.

On the way H---- pointed out the coffee waggon of which mention has been
made. A sad-looking wreck it was, too, as a result of a stray shell. The
ladies who had been in charge of it had been swooped down upon and
gathered in by an irate provost-marshal some days before the shelling,
and were, I am told, sent back to England for venturing so near the
front line. The loss to the battalion was, however, immeasurable, as the
ladies had been most devoted, and no matter at what hour the troops came
in there was always a cup of coffee or soup awaiting them, and a
smile--a smile that means so much to men whose hearts are lonely. Truly
Raemaekers struck a key-note when, in his address in London, he asked
England to "keep on smiling."

Arriving at the house, we found coffee ready and breakfast in the
process of preparation. Bacon, an omelette, toast and marmalade (plum
jam being out of season), it was a feast for the gods, any minor
deficiencies being overcome by the keenness of our appetites. Then,
having satisfied the inner man, we climbed the crooked little stairs to
the bedrooms, where we found our bedding rolls stretched out on some
mattresses the owners had left in their haste, and in three minutes we
were asleep. Never did any bed seem more welcome.

We did not stay long in this billet, however, as we shifted the
following day to a farm on the Brielen road. It was well we did so, for
the enemy bombarded the town again and dropped one shell in our old
billet a few hours after we left.

The farm we moved into is worthy of a little description, as it was
typical of any farm in Flanders. The three buildings that constituted
the house, barn, and cowbyre were arranged in a hollow square around a
brick courtyard, the centre of which was graced by a large pile of
manure in an advanced stage of decomposition. Outside the square of
buildings was a moat full of green slime and mosquito larvae. Here the
men washed, and here, too, our buckets were filled each morning for the
"lick and a promise" that served as a substitute for a bath.

[Illustration: FIELD KITCHEN IN RESERVE BILLETS.]

Yet in spite of its unsanitary surroundings the house itself was
beautifully clean inside, and no one could be healthier than the two
buxom girls who formed part of the family that lived within. An exact
census of the family was never obtained, as they poured out from nooks
and crannies into the living-room occupied by us as sleeping quarters,
generally at such awkward moments as when we were dressing or
undressing. This was a matter of constant annoyance to Lyte, as the
people persisted in announcing themselves with a "Bon jour, monsieur,"
no matter what state of nudity they had caught you in.

We shared this room with an artillery officer, a young Irishman named
Lee, who had a battery hidden somewhere near. We saw little of him,
however, as we were generally falling in to move off when he came in for
the evening, and when we returned after a night dug in in rear of some
other troops, he was leaving to go up to his guns.

On some occasions we returned so late that the family were already up
and at work, and instead of unrolling our valises we popped right into
their beds. This was the subject of much joking of the simple peasant
sort on the part of the young ladies, and consequent blushing on the
part of poor Lyte. We all accused him of being their favourite, as he
had nicknamed them "Ox-eye" and "Freckleface," names much more
descriptive than the Marie and Jeanne their parents had chosen, and,
having taken "Ox-eye" into our confidence, told her that poor Lyte was
"_tres timide_." That was all she required, and from then on she
directed all her charms toward him.

The next morning, his servant being as usual somewhere else, he ventured
to ask for a little shaving water, in French of the first-steps variety.
"Oh, monsieur speaks French," she answered, quite ignoring the mess-tin
he held out. "Why did you not tell me?"--this last with an accusing
glance at A----, the senior subaltern. Lyte began to deny all knowledge
of the language, and she suddenly swung into English. "Nevair mind, I
speak bloody good English," and then amidst our whoops of applause she
demanded "It ees good? What!"

Lee came in one morning in a great state of excitement, his rich brogue
being augmented with the news he brought. It seemed that on going up to
his guns that morning he had found the farm there, till then occupied by
a Belgian family, vacated and the white half-door--so familiar in all
peasant countries where they keep pigs--placed lozenge-wise on the red
roof. A hasty search revealed a partly burnt map and other papers of a
military nature, and a German plane was already buzzing aloft. He had
hurriedly withdrawn his guns; but siege guns take time to move, and
before they could get away the shells were upon them and one gun crew
had been practically wiped out. He was much excited, as became a man who
had seen his first death.

We, too, had passed a very strenuous night. The Germans had commenced
another attack on our line, using the gas again. We were wondering how
much good the little respirators we were carrying would be, and the
answer came soon enough.

As we moved forward we met men falling back gasping, coughing and
sobbing, and the stink of their clothing was of hell's own reek, a choky
mixture of chlorine and sulphur. "It's not war, mate; it's bloody
murder!" was all one man gasped as he threw himself coughing on the
ground, where he died before we moved on. It was not a pretty sight, and
more than one rifle-butt was grasped the tighter and more than one oath
sworn to get at the fiends who had let loose this vile poison, against
which the only protection we had was a little pad of gauze to fasten
over the mouth and nose after soaking in water from our water-bottles.
These had been supplied by the thousand as soon as the authorities made
known their wants by the women and children of England, and, feeble
though this protection was, these simple little pads saved many lives
that week.

But it was not our fate to meet the enemy again while in the salient.
After continuing our march about another quarter-mile we lined a
roadside and commenced digging another trench.

Here we lay and shivered all night, the men crouching in the trench,
every fourth man alert and watching, the officers lying on the ground
behind in shell holes or walking up and down swinging their arms and
trying to keep warm. It was only one night of many.

The Germans continued to discharge gas against our line until May 15th,
when they retook Hill 60. The bitter struggle of the past three weeks
had begun as a mere counter-attack to our capture of this small but
important mound.

By this time, however, the Canadians had been withdrawn, and we left the
salient with few regrets. But somewhere on the German side of our trench
line there are thousands of graves of our fellow-countrymen, and when
the time comes for the balancing of accounts we shall expect these to
weigh heavy in the scales.

Our brigade was the first to be relieved, marching out on the night of
May 3rd, wondering vaguely where we were going, and also, perhaps, what
would become of our friends "Ox-eye" and "Freckleface," with their
stolid faces, their ample bosoms, and their square hips.




CHAPTER XII

BAILLEUL


Our next stop was Bailleul, a town of some fifteen thousand inhabitants
just over the Franco-Belgian frontier. Possibly it was never known
before the war, but it is now, for sooner or later everyone goes to
Bailleul: it was, until the taking over of the line below Arras, the
Mecca of the British Army.

But it was fifteen weary miles from Brielen, fifteen miles that we
stumbled over in a drizzling rain on slippery cobblestones before
turning up through an archway off the main street to our billets. Good
billets they were, too--a loft with ample straw for one platoon, a
school-house for the other three, and houses on another street for the
officers.

In spite of the early hour, about 3 o'clock, Madame was up and around
and soon made us fresh coffee and the inevitable omelette; then we
clattered up the steep little stairs to bed. F----, the sergeant who had
been promoted, joined us here and proved a jolly good sort. We went out
to hunt up new billets the next day. He, being a Quebecker, acted as
interpreter, as our room was too small and stuffy for two, and,
moreover, looked into the operating-room of a hospital opposite.

We were fortunate in finding another billet quite close--an important
point, as we were to mess together--and then took a stroll around the
town.

Bailleul is, like most French provincial towns, arranged like a star,
the Grande Place and Hotel de Ville forming the centre. We found our way
to the cathedral, where a white-haired old _cure_ showed us around,
pointing out the door leading to the great square tower and the axe
marks left by the German soldiers who burst it open. They had used the
tower as an observing post during the week their cavalry had held the
town the preceding October. The old man had been held as hostage by
them, together with the mayor and some other notables, but when asked if
he had been badly treated he was very non-committal. "Qu'est-ce que vous
voulez?" he answered. "C'est, la guerre!" That is the doctrine of
humility taught France in 1870. "C'est la guerre!" It is used to
explain anything from the shooting of civilians to the high cost of
hand-made lace!

In a jeweller's on the Grande Place we obtained a little fuller
information as to the Germans' actions. They had robbed Madame of all
her rings, deliberately broken up all her watch glasses--there was not
one to be obtained in the town--and smashed with their sword hilts the
glass of her show-cases. And across the square they had confiscated all
the champagne in a _cafe_, and when no more was forthcoming they piled
the tables on the _pave_ and burnt them; also she had heard----; but
here F----'s patience had worn out, and as he said "Hearsay evidence is
not admitted," so we said "Bonjour" and returned to billets.

Fortunately we did so, as we found we were slated to take a bathing
parade at 1 o'clock and would barely have time to lunch. However, we
caught the parade in time and marched the men to an old factory labelled
"Divisional Baths." Here each man was supplied with a hot tub, soap and
a clean towel, and was issued on stepping out from his tub with
freshly-washed underwear, turning his soiled clothes in. This was a
splendid system, and when later the clothes were not only washed but
sterilised it ensured the men freedom for a short time at least from
vermin.

It took some time running the whole company through in batches of forty,
so we had a brief look around that part of the town. We also found that
at the asylum officers could get a real bath--full length that one could
stretch out in--at any time, but as it was late when our last man was
ready to march off, we simply returned to billets.

We found the streets full of ambulances, most of them being gas cases
from around Hill 60, and, in spite of the respirators, most of them
pretty bad cases.

Being somewhat of a chemist, I managed to see some of these cases a few
days later. The hospital was so crowded that many cases were lying on
stretchers in the garden that lies at the back of all these hideous
perpendicular French houses, shielded from the weather by an awning
only. But the worst cases were upstairs in a long hall--some eighteen of
them, none of which had any hope. Reeking with chlorine, their faces a
livid purple or an even ghastlier green, they lay there on the
stretchers, each with a little bowl beside him, coughing his life away.
And gradually the body would become weaker, the poor tortured lungs
fail to clear themselves of the secretion that poured from their
outraged tissue, and the fluid would accumulate slowly--oh, so
slowly!--and the agonised victim died, not with the merciful swiftness
of a bullet, but by gradual drowning.

This was the death that the Germans--ashamed of their own
brutality--afterwards described as painless and merciful!

They may find justification for their crimes in Belgium, they may even
smooth over the sinking of the _Lusitania_, but it must always be
remembered that they, and they alone, are responsible for introducing
into warfare this most ghastly and hideous death. It is said that German
scientists spent years in perfecting this horror, practising its powers
on plant life in the desert parts of Australia.

And the neutral nations--what of them? Are they not after all
"accessories after the fact" and equally guilty? For, having sworn in
solemn convention at the Hague to abstain from the use of asphyxiating
gases, they entered no definite protest, though public opinion ran high
on the subject.

Silence gives consent, and the poisoning of your enemy by chemical gases
has now become the proper and chivalrous thing to do, and warfare has
an added horror.

But the Allied chemists were at work devising means of lessening and
preventing this danger, and already success was crowning their efforts;
a new pattern respirator was devised and being issued, and a solution
for dipping it in was already available. Dr. G----, of Queen's
University, then serving as a subaltern in No. 2 Company, had been
experimenting in private and devised a solution which varied only in the
proportion of one of its elements from that adopted by the British Army,
so we were probably the first brigade in the B.E.F. to receive this
protection. Bottles of this fluid were carried by that long-suffering
man the platoon sergeant, and parades held showing the men how to adjust
and use the respirators.

Later we received flannel hoods, with mica windows, that had been dipped
in the same solution, and these gave place in turn to the present gas
helmet--a fearsome-looking affair, which, however, gives almost complete
protection.

Our stay in Bailleul was enlivened by the arrival of a draft and the
posting up of a schedule of training. The draft, needless to say, was
the more welcome of the two. With the draft--who were magnificently-built
men from the Middle West--we received a major who took command of the
company, Captain H---- dropping back as second in command. We thought
this was rather hard lines, but H---- made no complaint, though he felt
it rather keenly, but finding our new man had the South African ribbon,
we were a bit mollified.

Here, too, we held a memorial service for our fallen comrades, a
powerful address being delivered by Major the Rev. William Beatty, one
of the brigade chaplains. The troops, both old and new, were addressed,
too, by Major-General Alderson, the divisional commander, who spoke of
what the old men had done that the new men might understand what was
expected of them, and stated that from now on he would count on us all
as old troops.

Then we marched away feeling we were now a definite part of the old
regiment, and a few days later started our trek southward.

We had entered another epoch!




CHAPTER XIII

THE TREK SOUTH


Until we left Bailleul the Canadian Division had been a part of the 2nd
Army under Sir Herbert Plumer. We were now to go to the other end of the
British line and become part of the 1st Army, then commanded by the
present Commander-in-Chief, Sir Douglas Haig.

The news of this change was greeted with little enthusiasm by the old
soldiers in our midst, but old soldiers are invariably pessimists, and
imagine that every inspection is the prelude to more "dirty work at the
cross-roads" and that every change made in their dispositions is for the
worst.

Still, we were all sorry to leave Bailleul, with its bright little
shops, and to say good-bye to the _cure_ and our other friends there.

We fell in at night in the Grande Place--the little square that has
probably seen more British troops come and go than any other town in
northern France--and waited there for the battalion to form up. It was
a beautiful summer night, the square tower of the cathedral and the
Moorish spire of the Hotel de Ville forming perfect silhouettes against
the starlit sky.

We were not kept waiting long; the shrill of a whistle from somewhere in
the darkness put an end to all talking, and we hastily slung our packs
on our shoulders again and started on our long tramp south to La Bassee.

For a while our route lay through country that some of us had traversed
before, and Merville, Vieux Berquin, and other places were hailed with
delight. There is a certain charm in returning to places that one has
never expected to see again. Much speculation began as to whether we
were going back to our old trenches at Bois Grenier and Fleurbaix or
not, but all hopes of this happening were dashed to pieces when, after
passing through Neuf Berquin, we turned sharply to the right.

After this disappointment our packs began to weigh more heavily; the
mouth organs and vocalists were less persistent in their efforts and
gradually stopped in disgust, and only an accordion, wielded by a husky
Scotchman at the rear of the company, strove to cheer us up. It was
probably "Lochaber no more" or some other dirge he was playing, as he
always showed unnatural fondness for the weird and the sad--probably due
to the difficulty of fingering lively airs while on the march.

Passing through Merville, A----, who was marching beside me, regained
his spirits sufficiently to point out a shop where a pretty girl sold
champagne, and then relapsed into silence again.

A little further along the road we saw the adjutant riding alongside the
major, and we knew we were nearing our billets. We turned up a side-road
through Calonne, and the companies again broke off in different
directions to the various farms to which they had been allotted.

We were again fortunate in getting very good accommodation--good airy
barns, a mill-pond for washing, and a well of no-worse-than-the-ordinary
water. But imagine our surprise to find chalked on the gate of the
largest and best farm a sign:--

"SMALL POX.
BY ORDER."

Here we were in a fix, as the men would not enter the place till we
hunted up that long-suffering individual the interpreter. Then we found
the placard to be only a ruse on the part of the unsophisticated
peasantry to avoid having troops billeted there.

Having been found out and beaten at this game, Madame produced a sheet
of paper she called a "reclamation," for some straw she claimed had been
stolen by the preceding troops, and while she and the interpreter
harangued over this we stowed our men away and sought our own billets a
little distance up the lane.

At Calonne we received newspapers telling of the starting of the French
offensive in the Artois district and prophesying an attack on our part
to co-operate with them. We got out our maps and saw we were quite close
to Neuve Chapelle, and as the Aubers Ridge--the great natural barrier to
Lille--formed the obvious point to attack, we were not greatly surprised
when a day or two after arriving at this peaceful little village we
again took the route--this time toward Neuve Chapelle. We had heard the
guns drumming along the Aubers Ridge all the day before during church
parade service (May 9th), and were, on the whole, rather disappointed
when after a few miles' march we turned off the road into a farm near
"le Cornet Malo" and lay there in the mud all day. Some of the Lahore
Division passed us on their way into the affair, the Indian gunners
sitting on their limbers like statues.

It was rather a wretched day we spent in this farm. A heavy rain had
turned the orchard in which we lay into a "bit of a bog," and all the
straw we could buy or steal from the inhabitants could not keep us out
of the mud. Here, too, we found the first instance of friction between
the troops and the civilian populace, and the old lady made no bones
about telling us how unwelcome we were. She opened hostilities by taking
the rod from the pump so that we could not fill our watercart, and the
troops retaliated by stealing bundles of unthreshed wheat. This was
speedily put a stop to (and paid for) by the officers, and, for a while,
peace reigned supreme while a thriving trade was done in coffee at two
sous a cup and beer at three sous a glass.

Then some of the officers, seeing a lot of freshly-baked bread in a room
just off the kitchen, offered to buy some. To our surprise the old woman
started to wave a knife around dangerously and screamed: "You take my
wheat, you take my water, and now you won't even leave me my bread! I
would rather the Germans had come; they at least pay for what they
take!"

As we had just paid her for the straw we thought this was going a little
too far, and F----, who had a fine taste for sarcasm, waved his
coffee-cup eloquently in the direction of the two slatternly girls that
were peddling the coffee to the soldiers through the window, and said
"What? With all these beautiful daughters," and then continued with a
graphic description of the horrors in Belgium.

This quieted the old lady down, but we were not sorry to leave there and
shift to billets further up the road that night. It was the only
instance we encountered of our being unwelcome in France, and the billet
we occupied that night, although one of the filthiest houses we came
across, was marked by a much more cordial spirit.

We were fortunate to get into this farm, as two of the companies had to
bivouac, there being only accommodation for the staff and two companies
in the area. The matter was decided by lottery, the major being lucky
enough to draw a long straw.

[Illustration: AMATEUR THEATRICALS BACK OF THE LINE]

It was rather a squeeze getting the company stowed away that night, but
we managed somehow, and then turned into the kitchen. Here we were
entertained with a graphic description by an old hag of how she had been
wounded. It seemed that in some of the preliminary fighting she had run
across a field between our troops and the Germans and received three
bullets. She was quite cheerful about it and showed us two wounds, and
when A---- casually asked about the third she collapsed in a chair and
went into spasms of laughter. All the rest of the evening she would
point her finger at him and start again to tee-hee. A---- was much
annoyed.

We stayed in that vicinity another day, as it was not certain whether we
would be thrown into support in the attacks on the Aubers Ridge at
Fromelles or the Bois de Biez, but it was eventually decided that the
artillery preparation had been inadequate, and the following night we
continued our march southward.

Near Locon we passed some of the Indian Cavalry, gigantic-looking men
with their turbanned heads. They surveyed us gravely as we passed, one
or two flashing brilliant smiles in response to some friendly greeting.
Then shortly afterwards we crossed the canal, and without further
incident reached the outskirts of Bethune, where we went into bivouac in
an open field, being favoured, most fortunately, with fine weather.

Our long trek had ended.




CHAPTER XIV

FESTUBERT, 1915


While the 4th Army Corps were trying to gain a footing on the northern
end of the Aubers Ridge near Fromelles the 1st Army was making an
equally desperate attempt to the south in front of Festubert, a village
already in our hands.

But here, as at Neuve Chapelle, we found that the enemy front line, once
penetrated, brought us in front of a series of strong points bristling
with machine-guns, with dug-outs of almost incredible strength, some of
them twenty and thirty feet under ground and safe against anything but
the heaviest of field-guns, weapons that we were lamentably short of.

We could batter their front line to bits, for, like our own, it was
situated on lower ground, and consisted of breastwork parapets owing to
the water-soaked state of the whole plain; but their infantry would
retire to these deep dug-outs, only emerging when their sentries warned
them of the lifting of our fire to permit the attack.

We could, and did, drive the enemy from his front line, and once there
we held on, but that was as far as we could go, for each of these strong
points presented a new and entirely different problem to attack, and
required a separate bombardment.

Our offensive had started on May 9th and reached its height about the
16th, by which time we had won ground to an average depth of six hundred
yards on a front of four miles.

At daybreak on the 16th the 7th Division attacked in the direction of
the Rue D'Ouvert and Canteleux, and by 7 o'clock had entrenched
themselves in a line running roughly north and south, half-way between
their original trenches and La Quinque Rue. The remainder of the day and
the following night were spent in consolidating this position and trying
to drive the enemy from some short trenches and posts that prevented
this division from linking up with the 2nd Division on its left. This
was accomplished by noon of the 17th, and by nightfall further ground
had been gained to the right. Slight advances were also made on the
18th, but bad weather had greatly hindered the operation of our
artillery.

On the 19th, the 2nd and 7th Divisions, having suffered very severely,
were withdrawn, the latter being relieved by the Canadians.

Part of the 3rd Canadian Brigade had already become involved and had
taken part in an attack on La Quinque Rue, where they succeeded in
advancing the line some five hundred yards and linking up this ground
with the Wiltshires on their right and the Coldstreams on their left.

Further advance was held up by one of the enemy's strong points known as
the "Orchard." This position was naturally strengthened by a deep ditch
full of water on three sides, besides hedges and wire entanglements.

During the afternoon of the 19th the Orchard was heavily bombarded by
our guns, the shelling continuing till 7.45 p.m., when the Canadian
Scottish advanced to the assault, supported by the 13th Royal
Highlanders of Canada. Simultaneously the 48th Toronto Highlanders
attacked some hundred yards to the right of the Orchard.

These attacks were made in broad daylight, and, despite the torrent of
fire with which the enemy opposed them, the objectives were quickly
gained, though the casualties were most severe, and by night the new
line was consolidated.

Meanwhile the 2nd Brigade, which had been occupying trenches to the
right of the Orchard, had attempted to take a position known as the
"Bexhill Redoubt," but with less success, as the preliminary bombardment
had been quite ineffectual.

Another bombardment of the position was made, and, supported by the
Grenade Company of the 1st Brigade, a portion of the enemy's line to the
right of the Bexhill Redoubt was gained and barricades erected and this
portion held, in spite of a shelling that continued without ceasing the
whole of the 22nd. The enemy attempted a counter-attack during the
afternoon, but were repelled by our machine-gun and artillery fire.
During the night the troops holding this line were relieved by
Strathcona's and King Edward's Horse, then, of course, serving as
infantry.

On the night of May 23rd the Bexhill Redoubt was taken by the 5th and
7th Battalions of the 2nd Brigade, reinforced by a squadron of the
Strathcona's Horse. The captured positions were held all day, despite
the enemy's bombardment--the heaviest shelling this brigade had yet
experienced--and when they were relieved that night by the Royal
Canadian Dragoons and the Eastern Ontario Battalion the brigade had lost
55 officers and 980 men.

The 1st Brigade, during these operations, had been occupying a portion
of the line and suffering severely from shell fire. The writer's
battalion, the Eastern Ontario, had relieved a battalion of the Black
Watch on the night of the 19th near Indian Village. The Highlanders
seemed glad to be leaving; one or two expressed their opinion that it
was a "hell of a hole," a statement no one contradicted, as the place
was vile with mud and stank from unburied corpses.

Between our line and the Western Ontario men, who held the old German
trench ahead of us, lay hundreds of bodies that had been there since the
last winter, for this narrow strip--not much more than a hundred yards
in width--had been "No Man's Land." Attempts made by day and night to
bury some of these bodies had to be given up, as the enemy swept the
parapets of both trenches, on the least sign of movement, with
"whizz-bangs." The Western Ontario Battalion suffered horribly, a
constant stream of stretchers coming through our lines, starting with
daybreak. These small shells were fired from light field-guns that had
been brought up to the trenches, and were in consequence so close that
the shell arrived and burst almost simultaneously with the report of the
gun. Shells fired at the ordinary ranges announce their coming by a
prolonged whirr, allowing a certain amount of time to get under cover
before the burst comes.

We held this line till the night of the 24th, when we went forward to
relieve the 3rd Brigade and consolidate the ground won by them. Each man
carried two days' rations, a shovel, an extra bandolier of cartridges,
and twelve sandbags, in addition to his ordinary fighting equipment.

Most of the companies had some kind of trench to start work on, but at
our end there was nothing but a line marked out by the engineers.
Listening posts and covering parties were sent out, and by morning we
were occupying a ditch about three feet deep with a fairly good parapet
in front. No fires were permitted, as we were hidden by grass from the
enemy and the trench was not yet in shape to stand any bombardment.

The next night we were fortunate in obtaining more sandbags and some
timber from a German trench we had passed on the way up. Some mail and
parcels of food came up, and we managed to clear out our wounded. Most
welcome was ammunition for the flare pistols the officers carried. We
had come into the trench with six rounds for each pistol and had been
carefully saving them in case the enemy attacked.

Our parapet was now high enough to be easily visible to the enemy, and
we received considerable attention from his snipers and artillery the
following day. No serious damage was done, however, and we were relieved
the following night by a Territorial battalion of Highlanders.

On the 26th General French, having attained for the moment the immediate
object in view, ordered a curtailment of the bombardment and a
consolidation of all positions won, and the Battle of Festubert came to
an end.

By the 31st of the month the whole Canadian Division had been withdrawn
and lay in reserve billets around the outskirts of Bethune.




CHAPTER XV

CARPE DIEM


"Home again!" said Begbie Lyte as he watched his servant unrolling his
valise in the little field we had left a fortnight before, and the rest
of us laughed, for he voiced the thoughts of all.

It required a bit of an optimist to see a home in that apparently
comfortless situation, but men just relieved from the firing line are
not over-critical, and the prospect of a night under the stars, but away
from the crash of shell and the "phit" of striking bullets, was pleasant
enough to satisfy the most chronic grouser.

We had, of course, only reached this billet about dawn, so without
wasting any time over such niceties as washing we bundled our clothes
into a sort of pillow in the head of our "Wolseleys" and drew from the
depths of that wondrous combination of a valise and bed that luxury of
luxuries on active service, a pair of pyjamas, and were soon dozing
comfortably in dreamland.

Our men, lacking such comforts as Wolseley valises and pyjamas, merely
denuded themselves of their equipment, and, with perhaps a preliminary
search for "trench pets," slept in their greatcoats under shelters
rigged up with waterproof sheets. They had no blankets, for it was
summer, and blankets and rum issue are alike "Nah pooh" on the 1st of
June. We had in fact turned in our blankets before starting southward
from Bailleul.

Here and there bivouac fires had been lighted, and round them small
groups sat and talked over our recent losses. In another day they would
mention them no more, though they would never forget them.

Presently even these fell asleep, and when, a few hours later, the moon
showed herself between the clouds she looked down on a still and silent
camp, the only signs of life being the dying embers of the fires and the
dark forms of the sentries moving slowly up and down the field.

Custom permitted us to sleep on till noon the next day, and then
everybody had a grand clean up. A shower-bath was extemporised by the
simple process of standing over a ditch naked and unashamed while a
patient _batman_, with the aid of what is called, in official language,
"one pail, collapsible canvas," poured water over until, breathless but
refreshed, the victim shouted to stop. Later on sundry private soldiers
whom one had known in civil life would approach and ask for the loan of
the pail. Such is democracy in the "Colonials."

Bath being over, the razor was vigorously applied and a week's growth
scraped painfully from sunburnt chins, on which talcum powder was
afterwards daubed in copious quantities till we smelt to heaven like a
Gaiety chorus!

Then breakfast! Its fragrance had been tantalising our noses during all
this gay preliminary, for dirty as we may get--and yet sit down to eat
in the trenches--it was an unwritten law that no man who was not shaved,
shorn, and washed after the manner of the Romans should sit down to mess
when in reserve. Lyte one day in a burst of enthusiasm, while treasurer
of the mess, decreed that the servants should also wash before starting
to cook, but after one trial, dinner being thereby delayed a couple of
hours, the mess rebelled and the cooks were allowed to revert to their
former state of barbarism.

Breakfast over, there came the censoring of mail, so that it could be
sent to battalion headquarters before 2 o'clock. This is supposed by
some to furnish an endless amount of amusement to the officers, and
often facetious remarks are introduced by the writer to this end, but to
most of us censoring is a beastly bore, and one views with dismay the
enormous pile of letters that your platoon sergeant dumps down on your
bed each day at noon with the laconic announcement of "Mail, sir!"

One runs across people of many sorts while reading through this heap.
The first and commonest is the married man who sticks strictly to
private affairs and perhaps says to to his wife: "You remember Jimmy
D----who used to work at So-and-so's. He was killed by a shell, but you
can tell his wife he didn't suffer none, as he died quick." Not a word
you will notice of his own escape or of anything that would tend to
aggravate the sorrow of the stricken family. Of the same affair he would
probably write to a chum: "You know poor old Jimmy D----. He was all
blew to hell by a whizz-bang. A chunk of it just missed my napper by an
inch. I come near going West that time, believe me!"

Then there is another type whose endless exaggerations make one wish to
scribble the word "liar" at the end of each paragraph, but which you
pass, after scratching out the numbers of our slain and some of the
grosser statements.

Once in a while you may come across a guileless sort of man who, after
extolling the virtues of his platoon commander, proceeds to tell his
friend Bob: "No, I haven't been made a corporal yet, but our section has
none now and I am the oldest soldier left." One feels great curiosity as
to the state of this paragon's conduct sheet.

However, these are mere details. The great joy of being in reserve
billets is the ability to go, after parades, of course, into the nearest
town and spend the 125 francs that the paymaster exchanges once a month
for a Bank of Montreal cheque. The private soldier, receiving a meagre
30 francs a month, has to content himself with simpler joys than
champagne (vintage 1914) and hand-made lace. Instead he partakes of
French beer at three sous a glass, and his friends overseas receive
hand-embroidered postcards of brilliant but patriotic designs worked by
the crippled children of Paris.

The greater part of the soldiers' money, however, is spent on
food--dainties such as oatmeal, sardines, canned fruit, and so
forth--and little shops close to the firing line welcome the
twice-monthly visit of the paymaster.

Bethune, the town outside of which we were at this time billeted, was
quite the gayest place we had visited since leaving Poperinghe.

"Business as usual" was its motto, in spite of the almost daily shelling
it received by light guns, said to have been mounted on an armoured
train.

This bombardment took place, as a rule, between 6 and 7 o'clock each
evening, but the damage done was very slight, only one soldier being
reported killed during our stay. There were civilians killed at various
times, but from a military point of view the shelling was absolutely
useless.

If, perchance, one was taking tea with Marie, or anyone else for that
matter, and the shelling started, it was quite the thing to seek the
shelter of the cellar and stay there "_en famille_" until the
bombardment was over, when you would emerge, Mademoiselle perhaps
pushing a loosened hairpin back in place, and continue to enjoy your
tea.

It was not everyone's fortune to have this happen, however.

The bank took a more serious view of the affair, and, having sandbagged
the cellar windows, posted notices stating that, in the event of
shelling, customers could continue business in the cellar. And this was
in a nation that we have always looked upon as effeminate and excitable!

Under these pleasant circumstances, plus a little setting-up drill and
"physical jerks," we passed a very pleasant fortnight before going into
the trenches again--this time at Givenchy.




CHAPTER XVI

GIVENCHY, 1915


It was now the turn of the 1st Brigade to emulate the gallant deeds of
the 2nd and 3rd Brigades at Ypres and Festubert, and right gallantly
they did so.

Givenchy, while receiving but slight mention in Sir John French's
dispatches, was perhaps only a minor affair; but the fact that, owing
largely to a shortage of bombs, we were unable to hold the ground we had
gained does not in any way detract from the gallantry of the attack.
Comparisons with Hulluch or Loos cannot be made, as we had nothing like
the support of either infantry or guns that were available on those
later occasions.

The Canadians relieved the Guards in the Givenchy trenches during the
second week in June. Our brigade was still in reserve around Bethune
when they passed us; the Prince of Wales, a slim, tired-looking boy in
khaki, marched by with his regiment. It wasn't often we had any of the
Royal Family march past us; generally the boot was on the other leg!

We entered the trenches at night and, as usual, in a drizzling rain.
Except for the fact that it was miserable weather, that we had followed
the La Bassee Canal in, and that he had a jumping toothache, the writer
has no vivid impressions of that night.

We lay in some trenches just in front of the ruined distillery, dug in a
commanding mound that had been thrown up in building the canal, and
stayed there till next night, when we moved forward again, two companies
going into the front line and two, one of them the writer's, occupying a
support trench.

Here we learned what work was, every bit of food, bombs, and ammunition
required for the front line being carried up these narrow twisted
communication trenches by the support companies, for the proximity of
our line to the enemy would not permit of taking a single man from the
front line. It was the one time we cursed the heavy mailbags that
arrived with unceasing regularity every night.

The right of our trenches here rested on the canal, and could go no
further forward owing to a small marsh that lay in front. But about
the centre of the position the line swooped forward into a small and
dangerous salient known as the "Duck's Bill."

[Illustration: THE DISTILLERY AT GIVENCHY.]

It was opposite here we proposed to attack, the actual objective being
the high ground between points H2 and H3 on the map. If we and the 7th
Division on our left could gain this high ground it would straighten out
this dangerous salient and give us a footing on the Aubers Ridge.

Great preparation was made for this attack. A mine that had been under
construction for months was to be sprung, and we were to give the Hun a
bombardment such as he had never had before.

Two field-guns were brought up on the night of the 14th and placed in
_epaulements_ that had been dug in rear of the front-line trench to
receive them. They were to be kept masked till the last moment before
the attack, when they would cut wire and silence machine-guns along the
front over which we were to attack.

The Central Ontario Battalion was to make the attack, supported by the
Toronto Battalion, while the Eastern and Western Battalions were to man
the captured trench, consolidate it, and provide for any
counter-attacks. On the left, the East Yorks and another battalion of
that brigade were to co-operate.

Meanwhile the mine was being hastily completed, and by noon on the 15th
it was ready for firing, the explosive being carried up by Lyte and his
satellites from near the distillery. They had had rather a bad time of
it crossing the Pont Fixe, a wrecked bridge that was under observation
from the German position.

The Huns, seeing the first load of these white boxes being carried over
the bridge, laid a gun on it and when the second party came across
opened fire on them, wounding several men close to F----, the Quebecker,
who as junior sub. was bringing up the rear. He, however, kept the men
from dropping the explosive, and the party reached the mine shaft
without any further casualties.

Our three days' bombardment, which had started on the night of the 13th,
now died down slightly, and the Germans, having had ample time to bring
up their reinforcements, waited for the attack.

At 3 o'clock our two companies in the front line drew off to the right
and the men of the Central Ontarios took their places, while the
communication trenches leading up were choked with the Toronto men who
were to form their supports. Our artillery now tuned up again and caught
the Germans by surprise. They, in turn, shelled us heavily, causing many
casualties owing to the crowding of the trench.

[Illustration: OUR SUPPORT TRENCHES AT GIVENCHY.]

A---- and the scout-corporal went up the trench and were caught by a
shell and the corporal was killed, A---- being fortunate in escaping,
though very severely wounded.

Another shell lit fairly on a bomb depot about this time and destroyed
one of our reserves of these weapons, and a third shell killed
Lieutenant-Colonel Beecher, the second in command of the attacking
battalion.

The two guns in the front line had been unmasked and were cutting wire
with desperate rapidity, though their crews were practically wiped out a
few moments later, and in the midst of this turmoil the mine went up.

It was quite the largest mine that had been exploded along the front,
and the tremor of the earth could only be compared to an earthquake.

So eager was the engineer officer to reach the German trench, that,
finding he was striking water underground, he loaded in something like
a ton and a half of explosive to make certain. Thus he achieved the
double result of winning the Military Cross for his skill and blowing up
a portion of our front line, from which fortunately our men had been
withdrawn.

But a number of our own men were killed and wounded, and, what was far
worse, another reserve depot of bombs was buried under the _debris_ of
the explosion.

In the meantime, masked by the fountain of earth thrown up by the mine,
the attack had been launched and was already in the first German line,
the bombers were beginning to work along the trench to the right and
left, and the little flags that marked their progress could be seen
moving slowly to the left to link up with the East Yorks.

But the East Yorks had been unable to advance owing to the wire not
having all been cut and the machine-gun fire that enfiladed them from
their flanks.

Meanwhile the Canadians had gained the third German line, but already
the shortage of bombs was beginning to be felt, and they were forced
back to the second line, where they established blocks in the trench
and were able to hang on until the following day, when the German
counter-attack forced them to fall back to our own front line.

[Illustration: AFTER GIVENCHY.

Left to right: Capt. Birdsall, Winnipeg Brown, Ponton, Capt. Richardson,
Gutty.]

The brigade had lost heavily. Of twenty-three officers of the Central
Ontario Battalion who went over the parapet only three returned
uninjured, the remainder being either killed, wounded, or missing!

Nor had the Yorks fared much better.

During the second day of the affair the writer was moving up a narrow
communication trench with a platoon carrying ammunition to the front
line when he encountered a party of about the same strength coming down
the trench in defiance of a notice board marked "In only." After asking
in vain for the officer in charge of the party he was told "For God's
sake, sir, we aren't any party. We're all that's left of two companies!"
There was nothing left to be said!

Once again it had been proved that attacks by daylight, unless supported
by masses of supports, are bound to fail.

The 2nd Canadian Brigade relieved us, marching in by one side of the
canal while we marched out along the other. We called across our best
wishes to them as we passed. We had, it is true, been heavily pounded,
but we were far from being depressed, though we might well have been.

Instead, as we passed an electric towing machine lying neglected along
the towpath, a man in the ranks behind asked his mate what they were
used for.

"Don't you know?" was the reply as he glanced at the broad-tyred wheels;
"why, they use them for rolling down the water in the canal after a
storm!"

It was in this mood we returned to billets.

[Illustration: APPROXIMATE LINE AFTER FESTUBERT AND GIVENCHY, 1915.]




CHAPTER XVII

NORTHWARD AGAIN


After Givenchy the Canadian Division rested for another week around the
outskirts of Bethune before starting its long tramp back to the northern
end of the line again.

But it was far from being a week of idleness, and hard drilling was the
order of the day. Great stress was laid on bomb-throwing, and, in spite
of the heavy casualties the bombing sections had suffered, there was no
dearth of volunteers for the "Suicide Club," as the bombers termed
themselves. The men, as well as the officers, recognised the value of
this weapon, old as the use of gunpowder itself, but now reinstated to
greater importance than ever before.

So we started northward, a very uneventful and tiring march, our first
stop being at Neuf Berquin, where we rested a day.

The march had been very fatiguing; it was the latter end of June, and
"sunny France" had been living up to her reputation, and even the
nights, in which we marched for the sake of coolness and concealment,
were most oppressive. And it was in weather like that that the famous
"First Seven Divisions" fought and marched twenty-five or thirty miles,
dug in and fought again, only to have again to retire!

And we were only averaging fifteen miles a march!

Our next halt was at Noote-Broome, a mere hamlet, where we held church
service and then marched straight into the trenches.

This was a new area for us. We had grown so accustomed to shifting from
one part of the line to another that we had already nicknamed ourselves
the "Canadian Foot Cavalry."

However, we were fated to rest in that vicinity for several months,
though our brigade shifted from one position to another along that line
all summer.

We first relieved a battalion of the Middlesex on June 28th opposite a
poisonous little spot known as "la Petite Douve." Here a small stream,
dignified by the name of the Douve River, wandered lazily across the
flat at the foot of the Messines Ridge and coiled like a natural moat
in front of the Petite Douve Farm.

This, like all farms in Flanders, was a square of strongly-built brick
buildings. In it the enemy had established concrete machine-gun
positions and converted the place into a veritable fort. It projected in
a salient from their average line and enfiladed the main road running
from our position to Messines.

The Middlesex, on our relieving them, had told us a weird tale of the
number of rounds of rifle ammunition they expended in a single night. We
discounted this by the usual 50 per cent., but our major had an extra
supply brought up in case of emergencies.

An evening or two later we found the reason for the Middlesex's heavy
expenditure of cartridges, for the enemy, on a three-mile front,
suddenly opened up rapid fire, keeping up this fusillade for nearly half
an hour.

This occurred at odd intervals for some time while we occupied that
front, and was known as "the Germans (or the Fritzes) getting their wind
up." The Middlesex had been trying to beat down this fire with their own
rifle fire; we contented ourselves with sitting tight and, by careful
patrolling, watching for the first signs of an attack. On such a night
as this poor F---- was out on patrol when the rapid fire opened up, and
we nearly struck him off the company strength. Much to our surprise he
and his patrol came in later, quite unhurt, having discovered, and taken
shelter in, an advanced German trench near some willows.

Later it became quite the thing to take a few men out with you and bomb
this trench.

We only did two "tours" in this particular piece of trench, as the next
time we came in that company frontage had been allotted to the battalion
on our left and we moved just around the corner, the Petite Douve Farm
being almost hidden from our view by trees but continuing to annoy us
with its machine-guns.

It was here that we celebrated "Dominion Day" (July 1st), a Canadian
ensign that had arrived a few days before in a parcel from "home" waving
gaily behind our lines.

It was here, too, that Captain Frank Tidy, of the Toronto Battalion,
astonished the brigade by making a sortie from the trench in daytime and
bringing in two prisoners whom he had observed moving in the tall wheat
that here and there shut off our view of the German line.

Much courage is required to make a sortie of this sort, and one is not
surprised that a third German had to be shot before the other two
surrendered to Captain Tidy and his two comrades.

No information of importance was gained from these prisoners except that
the enemy had sent them out to ascertain who the new troops occupying
our line were.

Summer was now well advanced, and it was doubtful if a further "push"
would be attempted that season, and we gradually settled down to the
routine of trench warfare.

During the middle of July we did one tour in the trenches in front of
Wulverghem, relieving a battalion of Northumberland Fusiliers. We only
stayed there a few days, but were greatly bothered with rifle-grenades,
so, finding that our grenades fell short of the German line, the major
and a small party took the grenade-gun out in the long grass until they
were able to reach the enemy and thus secured a temporary peace.

The East Yorks then relieved us, and when next we entered the trenches
it was a little to the right of our old position and in front of the
celebrated Ploegsteert Wood.

Here the right battalions of the brigade had rather a strenuous time,
as some mines had been exploded and there was still a struggle going on
around the craters.

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO PLUGSTREET WOOD.]

But on the left, abutting our old position near the Douve Farm, we had
rather an easy time of it, there being little shelling and the trenches
nearly two hundred yards apart.

In fact our greatest activity was at night and at dawn, conditions at
the latter time being well expressed in an anonymous sonnet we found
pinned up in a dug-out entitled "Stand To":--

   "Early every morning,
   As the stars begin to tire,
   Without the slightest warning,
   Our maxim opens fire;
   A German gunner answers back,
   And one by one the rifles crack,
   All down the line you can hear the rattle,
   And then begins our morning battle;
   And as the dawn creeps in the sky
   A couple of shells go whistling by.
   The bullets are flying in every direction
   Just as the larks begin to carol,
   And all because the machine-gun section
   Wanted to warm their hands on the barrel."




CHAPTER XVIII

NIGHTS OF GLADNESS!


Our nights around Ploegsteert fully made up for the peacefulness of the
days, and "No Man's Land" between the two lines of trenches became the
scene of many exciting adventures.

This was particularly true of the area directly in front of us, as a
large beanfield extended from the German line nearly to ours. It was a
dull night indeed that our listening post did not either bomb, or get
bombed by, an enemy patrol. Casualties, though, were fewer than one
would expect from such combats, as bombs are very local in their action,
and it was not easy to locate the enemy's position exactly by ear as he
rustled his way through the beans.

Behind the lines there was less romantic work; for General Joffre, in an
odd moment, had sent a circular letter to the various divisions calling
attention to a new form of trench for protection against shell fire,
and we dug these trenches till there was hardly a foot of Allied soil
unturned. Later, during the rains, we drained our living trench into
them on the principle that the uncomfortable sensation experienced
during a heavy shelling would act as a distraction to the inconvenience
of standing in several feet of water.

While we were in these trenches the enemy fired the dry yellow grass in
"No Man's Land" a few nights after their capture of our line at
Sanctuary Wood, near Hooge, with the flame projectors or
"flammenwerfers." A hurried "stand-to" was ordered, as we thought a
similar attack was about to be made.

But the fire died down and we saw no signs of the enemy coming over. It
was, however, an anxious night, and great interest was taken in widening
our wire entanglements as more and more details of the Hooge affair
trickled down to us. How we longed for a supply of the iron stakers that
our patrols brought in time after time from the German wire! We got
them, too--later.

Later the Germans could not have burned down our wire, even had they
tried, as a week of heavy rains came on, and, on such trifles do the
fates of nations hang, these had a most serious effect on the "Autumn
Push"--it was already September--as our offensive around Hulluch and
Loos was called.

We were in reserve during the first two days of the attack, and received
with clock-like regularity the _communiques_ telling of our successful
advances.

Our gunners were co-operating by the process known as "engaging the
enemy's artillery," but we did not doubt that the Toronto Battalion,
then occupying our trenches, were having rather a warm time of it, as
the Hun, instead of being a sportsman and shelling our batteries, used
to retaliate on our trenches.

We set off the following day for the trenches. It had started to rain
about 4 o'clock, so that by 7, when we reached the head of Mud Lane, we
had no reason to doubt the origin of this homely name.

In pleasing contrast to our growlings and grumblings as we took their
places, the Toronto men filed out prophesying all sorts of cheerful
things in store for us. All we could see ahead of us was plenty of work,
for the shelling they had received had smashed down our bulwarks and
annihilated the officers' kitchen--rather an elaborate structure, of
which we were justly fond--and they, in the sure and certain knowledge
of a relief, had only cleared away enough of the _debris_ to make the
trench passable.

[Illustration: OUR TRENCHES, PLUGSTREET WOOD.]

Meanwhile our listening posts, soothed with a wee drappie o' rum, went
over the parapet laden down with waterproof sheets fully determined to
make the best of a bad job, our sentries were posted, and the welcome
order to "Stand down" came along the trench. Those of us not otherwise
occupied turned into our dug-outs and were soon asleep. After a certain
stage one becomes unconscious to even a revolver-butt prodding one in
the ribs.

It seemed only a few minutes before the sergeant thrust his head into my
dug-out with a "Midnight, sir!" I groped around for my pocket lamp and
looked at my watch--some way you always hope the sergeant is wrong, but
he never is--and tumbled out to relieve poor Lyte, who had spent a
miserable four hours.

A rift in the clouds showed our friends of the midnight watch--the Great
Bear and Cassiopeia--twinkling merrily as though it had never rained for
a fortnight.

I sloshed my way down to the far end of the trench. Pools of water lay
ankle deep here and there along its length. Already one or two men, who
had just come off sentry, had started to drain these into little
catch-pools. From here it was baled by means of the ever-useful
Maconachie tin into an equally useful biscuit tin, which was afterwards
dumped on the enemy's side of the parapet.

In other places the men had turned in and were already asleep, so they
were promptly stirred up and told to "Get busy," and, for the night, the
blosh of the baling tin took the place of the smack of a shovel on a
freshly-placed sandbag.

At frequent intervals it was necessary to crawl out and visit the
listening posts, who lay in the rank grass just beyond our own wire.

On returning, not only were one's feet wet, but knees and elbows as
well. Then it was up and down the trench again for another hour or so.

A fine drizzle set in and the stars again disappeared, the drizzle
turning to a steady shower.

I retired to company headquarters, only emerging when necessary to visit
the sentries and listening posts again. There, by the aid of a
sputtering candle, I sought diversion in the shape of a sevenpenny novel
that some kindly soul had forgotten in his haste to be relieved.

[Illustration: OUR TRENCHES AT PLUGSTREET.]

Just as I reached the stage where I could sort the various characters
into their ultimate _roles_ of hero, villain, and heroine the sergeant
again intruded with the news that one of the listening posts reported an
enemy patrol approaching. A few flares were fired up, but revealed
nothing except a white glare of grass field, the bean patch, and the
inky black of a few willows with our listening posts huddled at their
bases. These men were, of course, invisible to the enemy, as the flare
had fallen between their line and the willows. A flare must fall behind
the object aimed at to reveal anything with accuracy.

Even a couple of parachute lights fired from "Little Archibald," as we
called the special gun used for these larger flares, revealed nothing,
so I gave up in disgust, woke the only two men who had not been
disturbed all night, tied a couple of sandbags around each knee, and
once again disappeared over the parapet.

An hour later, on returning, the signaller warned me it was time for
the "situation" report. I scrawled out the usual formula, "Situation
unchanged; enemy quiet; wind northerly," and handed him the form.

It was ten minutes late, and though the adjutant would not read it till
morning I knew I was in for a wigging. Wet and disgusted I turned to my
dug-out.

A few minutes later traces of dawn showed themselves in the east. The
rain ceased and a fine mist took its place. The men stumbled out to
their rifles in response to the order "Stand to," and I made a final
promenade of the trench, dragging out a man here and there who was
tardy.

Then I stirred up the officer of the day and handed over my duties.

The mist cleared away, showing the German line, grim and formidable as
ever!

Another day had dawned.

It was on such a dawn as this that poor Jack L----, my platoon-sergeant,
was killed. The fog had lifted a little, revealing an enemy patrol to
our listening post.

He, taking the nearest two men with him, went out in search of them, and
a flare falling near the little party showed them up to the enemy
snipers. He alone was hit.

We buried him in the battalion cemetery the next day, the colonel
reading the service over his body, and we thought as we lowered him into
his grave what a very good friend he had been.

It was not very many days later that we changed from this brigade area
to another, leaving Ploegsteert with its memories, sad and otherwise,
behind us.




CHAPTER XIX

IN FRONT OF MESSINES


The Second Canadian Division arrived in France during our stay in
Ploegsteert, and after a short rest took over a sector on the right of
St. Eloi and in front of Messines.

Here it was that we relieved them about a fortnight later--our third
move while in front of this grim hill, the scene of such hard fighting
in October of the year before.

The line at this point swung forward in a small salient to within fifty
yards of the enemy--the only footing we now held on this famous
ridge--and to the Toronto and Eastern Ontario Battalions fell the honour
of guarding this point all winter.

Here, too, we were to learn something of grenade and mine warfare such
as the other two battalions of our brigade had been waging all summer
near Ploegsteert.

And the little graveyard in rear of the line was to receive the bodies
of many of our comrades and hold them in common sanctity with those of
other gallant men, British and French, Highlanders and Turcos, who had
perished on the slopes of Messines.

For a week we systematically registered our guns on new points in the
enemy's second and third lines--the usual preliminary to an
offensive--and bombarded them severely.

This was done to prevent the enemy from moving any of his guns from this
area to the southern end of the line, where, now that the weather was
again favourable, the British were to make another thrust.

For this purpose, too, we were to make a "little demonstration" on our
front, using smoke bombs to make the enemy believe we were going to use
gas, and, to our great satisfaction, it was announced that in those
areas where the real offensive was being made the Germans would be
treated to a dose of their own poison. Too long we had waited and
allowed the enemy to use this fearful weapon against us, thinking the
neutral nations might intervene; but their interest in the cause of
humanity was largely a financial one, and we determined to adopt a
broader view, perhaps, of what justifiable weapons are, and make use of
the advances of science. France was already using the gas, but Britain
hesitated at setting her hall-mark on such a usage, necessary as it had
become.

The day, October 13th, was ideal for observation, beautifully clear,
with a gentle breeze from our trench towards the enemy's. Nothing finer
could be desired for our operations to the south.

About 2 o'clock our guns, along the whole British front, started to cut
wire as though preparing for an attack.

The Germans in return sprinkled our lines vigorously with shrapnel, the
fleecy white puffs of their shells showing up like clouds on the clear
blue sky.

From our trench on the hill top we could see the long line of trenches,
hidden here and there by trees, stretching southwards to Armentieres,
the tall chimneys of which were clearly discernible.

Anxiously we glanced from this view to our watches while the hands crept
slowly around to the appointed moment. In the distance there suddenly
appeared faint lines of whitish smoke among the trees; and we lit our
smoke bombs and hurled them over the parapet. There was a moment's
pause, and then they burst into clouds of yellow smoke, hiding the
German trench from view.

[Illustration: THE START OF THE SMOKE CLOUDS. The Little Demonstration,
October 13th, 1915.]

The tone of their bombardment changed immediately, and crashing salvoes
of high explosive fell around us.

Our guns paused for a moment, and the crisp rattle of musketry, the
droning of myriads of bees, and the bursts of machine-gun fire were
heard alone as they ran through whole belts of cartridges; then all
minor sounds were again drowned out by the clashes of our shells as they
burst all along the German front line.

Gradually the smoke cleared away as the bombs burnt themselves out and
showed that no attack was being attempted. The bombardment slackened,
though the Germans continued to shell us heavily till almost dusk, but
with little further effect except that they rendered the evacuation of
our wounded more dangerous.

Our casualties had, however, been slight, but it was simply marvellous
luck, for our parapets were ruined heaps and the trenches filled with
_debris_.

We gazed sadly around, knowing it meant many nights of hard work to
restore these, and mentally decided to join the artillery in the next
war, as they alone had enjoyed the afternoon's work.

The German guns had certainly been kept busy, and it was some
consolation to read in their report of the affair that "an attack using
gas on a thirty-mile front had been repulsed with heavy losses to the
enemy."

We had produced the desired effect.

Below La Bassee the 46th Division had been equally successful and gained
the Hohenzollern Redoubt, while on their right in the vicinity of Loos
the 4th Corps were holding nearly twelve hundred yards of German
front-line trench.

It had been a good day's work, but summer was now over and good weather
could not be depended on, so no further offensive was made, though
fighting of the most stubborn and desperate sort took place around the
newly-gained ground, which was, however, successfully consolidated.

During the remainder of the month, except for the exploding of a mine
and aerial activity, there was little that occurred on the Canadian
front.




CHAPTER XX

MINE WARFARE


Among the other things we took over from the outgoing battalion when we
first moved into this position was the care and continuance of a mine,
and this mine was to form our chief worry as long as we held that line.

At first we were inclined to regard the mining officers--of which we had
two--as a sort of nuisance like engineers, trench mortar men, and some
others, who were always demanding men for carrying and working parties.
But we were not long in finding that they were, like ourselves,
necessary evils, and they became welcome guests at our little mess when
in the trench.

Whenever the trenches approach as close as they did at this point mine
warfare becomes inevitable, and it is a game at which it is best to be
first.

To defend a position against this method of attack one commences a
counter-mine at a depth sufficient to take the gallery or tunnel
underneath the enemy's one, which, once it is located, is blown in
before they manage to get under the defenders' trench. The tunnel or
gallery is barely large enough for a man to crawl along on his hands and
knees, and must be boarded foot by foot as it progresses to prevent it
from collapsing.

In this cramped position the sapper wields his pick, a peculiar affair
not unlike a harpoon, and scrapes the loosened earth back with a short
grubber to another man who removes the earth in sandbags.

Progress under such circumstances must be slow, but it is made slower by
the necessity of running galleries at right angles to the main tunnel
from time to time in an effort to locate the enemy.

Here men are posted, while all work is for a time stopped, to listen for
the first sounds of the enemy's sappers--the thud-thud of the picks or
the "cough" of the man whose lungs seek this relief in the stuffy air of
the cramped tunnel.

If the enemy is not found, progress is continued forward from both ends
of the cross-gallery and the game goes merrily on.

About this stage the mining officer will, if you happen to be holding
the trench under which he is grovelling, wax eloquent over a crumpled
sheet of tracing linen that he presents to your view as a diagram of the
workings. It looks like nothing so much as a drawing of the kith and kin
of an old and prolific family; but you dare not tell him that, or he
will be your enemy for life.

Instead you should say, "Ahem!" and "Oh, yes; how clever!"--then he will
ask you for only ten instead of twelve men on the night's working party.

But once the enemy is located you begin to regard him more seriously,
for on his skill depends the life of every man in the trench above, and
a false change in direction may mean missing the enemy's tunnel
altogether.

Sometimes, but not often, the mining is so quietly done that the first
sign of the enemy is the sudden collapse of the wall of earth between
the two galleries, leaving the rival workers face to face!

At other times, and this is a normal occurrence, the enemy are heard to
one side or the other, and a small charge of powder is laid and his
gallery is blown in, crushing his workers to death, or perhaps merely
burying them to perish miserably by suffocation.

To prevent this occurring men are kept in the ends of all the passages
listening for the tap-tap of the picks that spells danger!

If the picks are heard for a while and then stop, there are anxious
moments, for it may mean that the enemy has located our workers and
decided to blow first and wreck our galleries, or it may mean the
explosive is already in place and ready for firing, or perhaps only a
change in the direction of the enemy's tunnel.

The situation is not a pleasant one for either the men in the trench
above or the sappers in the galleries below, and on the mining officer's
decision much depends.

It was while we were breakfasting one morning that the corporal in
charge of the underground sentries reported that the enemy could be
heard working in No.--gallery.

This was the third time since taking over the mine that tapping had been
reported, and both the preceding times had proved to be the result of
overstrained imaginations. Captain H----, our skipper, had on both
occasions descended to the bowels of the earth and listened patiently
for half an hour, emerging again disgusted with things in general.

This time he motioned to the writer to accompany the corporal, and
together we made our way to the mine, shedding our jackets and belts at
the head of the shaft, and taking only our electric pocket lamps we
crawled along the muddy galleries to No.--.

The noise had stopped, the listener whispered to us when we touched him
gently on the leg, so we lay there all three listening for it to start
again, the tick-ticking of our wrist-watches and the pulsing of our
hearts sounding loud to our strained ears.

Three--five--seven minutes passed by without a sound, and then suddenly
there came a slight thud.

The man in front of me stiffened slightly like a well-trained setter and
the corporal behind me pinched my leg in the height of his exultation.

The thud-thud continued (there was no mistaking it now), then a
pause--and a voice, distinctly guttural, was heard, and a sound, easily
distinguishable from the muffled reports of the rifles some thirty feet
overhead--the scraping of a shovel on the wooden floor of a gallery not
more than eight feet away!

Passing the sentry a revolver and torch, we blew out his candle and
crept away as noiselessly as we had come.

On reaching the head of the shaft we met the mining officer, who crawled
down and returned to confirm our judgment.

Then followed some mysterious telephoning to the "higher authority"
while a charge was hastily laid, and permission was at last secured to
"blow" the mine.

No time was lost, and in half an hour all was ready, the mining officer
returning from his final inspection with the news that the enemy was
still digging blissfully away.

Remembering the mine at Givenchy, we cleared the trench in the danger
zone and had this party "stand by to repel boarders" and, if necessary,
man the crater.

At 2.30 the mine was fired.

A fountain of earth roared upwards from "No Man's Land," and, armed to
the teeth with bombs, we rushed forward, losing a couple of men on the
way who had been struck by the falling _debris_, and manned our trench
while machine-guns raked the enemy's parapets.

However, he showed no inclination to man the crater--a yawning pit some
forty feet in width half-way over to his trench--and contented himself
with throwing a few bombs into it and covering it with machine-gun
fire. In spite of which Begbie Lyte, having now risen to the dizzy
height of senior subaltern in the company, took out a small party and
filled it with barbed wire.

The affair was only briefly mentioned in the _communiques_: "On the 22nd
a mine was exploded under a German gallery on our front. An enemy mining
party is believed to have been blown up."

The mining officer was greatly pleased, however, as only some few yards
of his own gallery had suffered.




CHAPTER XXI

MYTHS, FAIRIES, ETC.


In every position you take over there are a certain number of myths
which when you go out you carefully repeat to the incoming battalion;
and the tale seldom loses in the telling. These are handed down to
posterity in naming new field-works; hence the frequency of "Suicide
Alley," "Sniper's Cross-roads," "Dead Man's Corner," &c, &c.

Some of these myths are worth repeating--all are worth noting, for they
are in most cases founded on possibilities.

The most popular myth or fairy on the Messines front was undoubtedly the
"Mad Major." This individual was supposed to be an artillery officer who
spotted for his own battery--which incidentally always did the most
marvellous shooting--from an aeroplane, in which he performed the most
daring feats while dodging the "Archibalds" or anti-aircraft shells.

Whether there was any truth in this myth we never found out, but we did
see an enemy aeroplane forced down behind our lines by Robert Lorraine,
the actor aviator, on October 26th, after a very daring fight.

A large enemy aeroplane of the "Albatross" type had been making a
reconnaissance somewhere northward in the Ypres salient with unusual
boldness when Lorraine sighted the machine and gave chase. Instead of
turning directly back to his own lines the German flew along the line of
our trench at such a tempting range that machine-guns all along our line
started to cough and spit in the air in an effort to wing him.

Meanwhile our own aeroplane was getting within range, and a pretty duel
in mid-air commenced, the two machines circling and swooping like a pair
of immense white gulls, while the "tut-tut" of their machine-guns was
the only sound as both Germans and British watched this unique battle.

Suddenly the German machine showed signs of distress, pitched suddenly
forward, and started a long glide for the German trenches, our aeroplane
still pursuing and forcing the enemy even lower.

But the German had followed our trench line too far down, for at this
point our trenches ran forward nearly a quarter of a mile where a
French cavalry brigade in a dismounted action the year before had made a
last effort to retake Messines.

And now, when it became apparent their machine could not regain the
German lines, their gunners began to shell their own plane, containing
as it did two of their own men, in an effort to destroy the machine.

But, though they fired over a hundred shells into the little wood behind
which the aeroplane landed, they were unable to prevent the men of our
Royal Montreal Regiment, who occupied the trenches at this point, from
capturing the observer and his papers, the pilot having been killed in
mid-air at the time the machine made its fatal plunge.

Then occurred one of the strangest of coincidences, vouched for by the
official Canadian Eye-witness, when, on examining the wrecked aeroplane,
the Royal Montrealers found the machine-gun with which it had been armed
to be one formerly the property of this same regiment, but lost during
the fighting around St. Julien just six months before while loaned to
another battalion.

The "Mad Major" may have been only a myth, but Lorraine certainly was
not, and for this exploit both he and his pilot subsequently received
the Military Cross.

But there were a lot of tales that had their origin in a desire to suit
the "Cook's tourists." These individuals were officers sent over from
the Canadian Training Base for short periods of one or two weeks to
receive practical instruction in trench warfare. Incidentally they
brought with them some wondrous ideas about the proper methods of doing
things, gathered from some official publications known as "Notes from
the Front," and were greatly surprised to find we were not in touch with
this "trade" journal.

Like the "Daily Summary of Events," known to us as "Comic Cuts" or the
"Daily Liar," these little handbooks are written by wise men wearing red
tabs and living miles away from the front, where the continuity of their
thoughts is only interrupted by the tea hour, and not by the "Jack
Johnson" shells. Here they design "wire meat safes," patent refuse
burners, mud scrapers, and other weird contrivances that can be
fashioned from biscuit tins, ruined houses and other _debris_, and issue
these sheets for the guidance of the poor, long-suffering infantry. Once
in a while they turn their attention to steel helmets, grenades, &c.,
so that their existence is almost justified.

The "Cook's tourist," however, is not a dangerous creature, taken in
small quantities, and is a very handy man to send out on working parties
when the company is supposed to be resting in reserve. So he is not
without his uses.

For those who found the ordinary trench routine dull we had, however,
several stock entertainments that never failed to satisfy.

The first and mildest was to take the victim through the "Catacombs," as
we called the galleries and connecting passages of our mine. This had
the advantage of rendering his cuffs and decorations less conspicuous
and giving him in five minutes all the war-worn appearance of a veteran.

If, however, he still craved excitement, he would be allowed to put out
some more wire in front of the parapet--always a delicate operation
where the lines are close. Many were satisfied by this means.

The third degree was always administered by Captain H---- himself. It
was in the form of a little sortie from the trench to a stumpy willow in
"No-Man's-Land," a willow that bore a striking resemblance to some
giant cacti and was called by us the "Cactus Treen."

[Illustration: THE CACTUS TREEN.]

From this point it was possible to bomb the German trench, and a little
excursion of this sort generally satiated the visitor's curiosity.
Incidentally, it kept the Hun from coming out and bombing us. He did,
however, treat us liberally to rifle grenades, and our casualties from
these beastly contrivances were large.

On one morning we were most unfortunate, a grenade killing our bombing
sergeant and two men, and we started to retaliate with every variety of
grenade we had. At this moment the trench mortar officer came up the
trench and volunteered to assist us. He had a new gun throwing
thirty-pound bombs and was keen on displaying his skill; what was more
important, he had twenty bombs available, and he started to fire these
off with an alacrity that, under the circumstances, was most pleasing.

But we had reckoned without our host. Before half a dozen rounds had
been fired an eight-inch gun back of Messines Hill started searching for
the trench mortar man and his gun, and twenty-five high explosive
shells plunged around us and shook our trench out of existence. It was
very fascinating to watch these shells coming. From the point, high in
the air, when they started to drop on their target they could be clearly
seen, first as a black ball, then gradually lengthening out till they
plunged into the ground and flung up dense fountains of earth and
fragments.

The nearest burst was within ten feet of the trench mortar position, and
the officer withdrew his party, a sadder and a wiser man.

From the rifle grenades, too, we lost both of our mining officers, one,
Lieutenant Alfred Evans, dying of wounds, the other being very severely
wounded. So two merry souls who had shared the vicissitudes of our
messing passed from our ken, and we could only wait our own fate and
say, like the French, "C'est la guerre!"

[Illustration: APPROXIMATE GERMAN LINE IN FRONT OF MESSINES DURING
WINTER OF 1915-1916.

(Successive positions held by 1st Brigade shown 1, 2, 3.)]




CHAPTER XXII

THE WINTER MONTHS


November brought with it a week of steady rain, and we knew the winter
months were at hand. In less than two weeks our trenches, once the pride
of the division, were a series of collapsed heaps where the sandbag
walls had been undermined by the seepage of water.

But we suffered nothing like the discomforts endured by the British
troops during the previous winter. Rubber boots reaching to the thigh
were issued, sparingly at first, but gradually until every man had a
pair, and whale oil and spare socks were available in large quantities
to aid in the fight against trench-foot. Nothing, however, could prevent
the mud, which lay a foot deep along the gangways of the trench. Pumps
were issued, but the mud was too thick to pump; our only hope lay in
drainage, and by the time proper drains were constructed the mud was too
thick to run, even though we were on a hill top.

[Illustration: AFTER A FEW SHELLS AND A WEEK'S RAIN.]

So we pumped and drained and built new sandbag walls all winter, and as
fast as one portion of our line was renewed another portion would
collapse, or, more disheartening still, be shelled to bits by the big
"minenwerfer."

This was a German gun brought up to this front to counteract our trench
mortar. Throwing a shell about six inches in diameter of high explosive,
it could in three bursts do more damage than a whole company could
repair in a night. And regularly twice a week three shells were dropped
along Delta Road, a communication trench forming the third side of the
little salient.

The effect of the "minenwerfer" was very local, however, owing to the
thinness of the shell wall, but such men as it killed were not a pretty
sight. Fortunately, too, the shells could be seen both by day and night,
and rose to such a height before dropping that men could scamper for
shelter from the threatened spot. But no dug-out could withstand its
explosion, and a series of craters, eight or ten feet in depth and
twelve feet in diameter, marked the "minenwerfer's" work.

Every battery that covered our area had, by the time winter was over,
reported they had silenced "Minnie," but when we left that area months
later she was still doing business at the old stand.

To relieve the monotony of this sort of thing the Canadian Corps
organised a series of night raids on the German trenches.

The first, and most brilliant, of these was conducted by the 5th and 7th
Battalions of the 2nd Brigade on a barricade or forward trench that had
been constructed by the enemy near our old position opposite the Petite
Douve Farm.

This raid was made on a villainous night blacker than Egypt during the
plagues and raining as only Flanders can.

With faces blackened with charcoal, the raiding parties crept out to the
enemy wire and cut it strand by strand, a process lasting several hours.
During this time the cooks of one of the battalions carried out
pannikins of hot tea to the men who were lying in the mud hacking at the
wire.

Finally the path was reported clear except at one point where a deep
ditch full of water could not be crossed, and at the appointed moment
the raiding parties swooped in on the enemy trench.

Secure, as they thought, on such a vile night, the enemy were
completely surprised, but put up a stubborn resistance. An officer and
about thirty men were secured as prisoners, and where resistance was
more determined the enemy was driven from his trench with bombs. Then on
a given signal the raiders returned to their own trenches, bringing
helmets, saw-tooth bayonets, and Mauser rifles as souvenirs of their
midnight call.

By this time the alarm had spread through the German lines, and his
artillery, in response to red signals shot up by men very lately
deceased, began to pound their own trench, thus catching their own
bombing parties, who, now the trench was only occupied by dead and
wounded, had regained the barricade.

But we had another surprise awaiting them. A field-gun had been
man-handled up to our front line and at point-blank range proceeded to
blow the barricade to bits. This was done and the gun successfully
withdrawn by a car from a motor-machine-gun battery, in spite of the
fact that the first car sent for this purpose had to be hauled from the
ditch into which it had skidded.

So thorough had been the preparations, and so well organised the raid,
that an account of it was published in the orders of the French Army as
an example of efficient preparation.

The prisoners taken in the Petite Douve affair had boasted of the
preparations they were making for a gas attack on a scale hitherto
unknown, and on the Sunday before Christmas the enemy made another
attempt to gain the Ypres salient by this means.

Early in the morning of the 20th the smell of gas was evident even down
as far as our position a few miles south of the salient, and our guns
began a desultory bombardment of the enemy lines. Thinking we were as
deficient in artillery as in the previous April, the enemy infantry
advanced in mass formation about 9 o'clock. Then our artillery did open
fire. About noon another attack was made, and also failed without a yard
of our line being lost.

There were no further attempts!

On Christmas Eve we were relieved by the Toronto Battalion and marched
out to rest billets in divisional reserve.

It was a weird march out. Not a rifle was fired nor a single flare shot
up from either trench as the two battalions interchanged.

We wondered if on the morrow there would be the handshaking and
hymn-singing that had characterised the first Christmas of the war; a
routine order had been published forbidding such demonstrations of good
feeling, but it was hardly necessary--flame projectors and asphyxiating
gas had attended to that!

Everything was very peaceful in the little hamlet when we arrived,
however. It was a clear, starlit night, a little snow in the fields, and
the dark silhouettes of the houses and church loomed up against the
clear sky. The little church was in darkness--no midnight mass was being
sung this year--and we slipped into our various billets in silence, very
tired and not a little homesick.

Christmas Day the men were marched into Bailleul, where a big dinner was
given them by the officers of the battalion. In the evening another
dinner was held for the officers themselves. There were the usual toasts
and speeches, and before the party broke up Captain George T. Richardson
asked for a few minutes' silent prayer for those who would not be
present at our next dinner. It was a wonderful tribute to his sincerity
that this was granted, for the evening was well advanced, and soldiers,
as a rule, dislike having their religion tampered with by anyone but
chaplains and other authorised personages.

Poor George! he was the first of us to go but a few weeks later!

We relieved the Toronto Battalion on the 29th, giving them a chance to
celebrate the New Year in a similar fashion.

Then the second week in February we attempted a raid similar to those
made on our right and left by other battalions. The most obvious point
was selected for the attack, and, by an unfortunate chance, a night when
the moon was nearly full.

As a result we were unable to get the wire cut, and the proposed raid
was cancelled, the enemy having men dug in amongst their wire watching
it.

For some reason or other Captain Richardson, who was in charge of the
affair, again went over the parapet, possibly to see that all were
safely in, and was discovered a little later fatally wounded in amongst
our own wire. He passed away a few hours later in the little dressing
station at the Support Farm.

So died a man who never gave a command he would not himself have
executed willingly, and whose character and ideals were such that all
who knew him envied him.

And on his grave his brother officers placed a wreath with these simple
words: "He played the Game."




EPILOGUE


Our later experiences are too recent for publication to-day; here, then,
this brief story of the Canadians must make an end.


THE WHITEFRIARS PRESS, LTD., LONDON AND TONBRIDGE.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of From the St. Lawrence to the Yser with
the 1st Canadian brigade, by Frederic C. Curry

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ST. LAWRENCE TO THE YSER ***

***** This file should be named 29045.txt or 29045.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/0/4/29045/

Produced by Graeme Mackreth and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
