Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, August 3, 1880, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Harper's Young People, August 3, 1880
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: June 8, 2009 [EBook #29066]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, AUG 3, 1880 ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S

YOUNG PEOPLE

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.--NO. 40. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, August 3, 1880. Copyright, 1880, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: GOING THROUGH THE LOCK.--DRAWN BY A. B. FROST.]

[Begun in YOUNG PEOPLE No. 31, June 1.]

THE MORAL PIRATES.

BY W. L. ALDEN.


CHAPTER X.

The policeman did not return, and the boys slept until an hour after
sunrise. They then rowed down the river to the steamboat landing, where
they left their boat in charge of a boatman, and went to a hotel for
breakfast. The waiters were rather astonished at the tremendous
appetites displayed by the four sunburned boys, and there is no doubt
that the landlord lost money that morning. After breakfast, Harry went
to the express office, where he found a large water-proof India rubber
bag, which the Department had sent in answer to his letter. At the
post-office were letters from home for all the boys, and a postal order
for ten dollars from Uncle John for the use of the expedition. Harry had
no idea that this money would be needed, but it subsequently proved to
be very useful.

Quite a quantity of stores were bought at Albany, for the voyage up the
Hudson had lasted longer than any one had supposed it would, and the
provisions were getting low. No unnecessary time was spent in buying
these stores, for a fair wind was blowing, and all the boys were anxious
to take advantage of it. By ten o'clock they were again afloat, and soon
after noon they reached Troy, and entered the canal.

The canal basin was crowded with canal-boats, and to avoid accidents the
_Whitewing's_ mast was taken down, and the oars were got out. Harry knew
that, in order to pass through the locks, it would be necessary to pay
toll, and to procure an order from the canal authorities directing the
lock-men to permit the _Whitewing_ to pass. The canal boatmen, of whom
he made inquiries, told him where to find the office, which was some
little distance up the canal. When the office was reached, an officer
came and inspected the boat, asked a great many questions about the
cruise up the Hudson, and seemed to be very much interested in the
expedition. He told the boys that the water was low in the Champlain
Canal, and that the lock-men might not be willing to open the locks for
so small a boat; but that they could avoid all dispute by entering the
locks at the same time with some one of the many canal-boats that were
on their way north. He charged the _Whitewing_ the enormous sum of
twenty-five cents for tolls, and gave Harry an important-looking order,
by which the lock-men were directed to allow the skiff _Whitewing_,
Captain Harry Wilson, to pass through all the locks on the canal.

Thanking the pleasant officer, the boys pushed off. After they had
passed the place where the Champlain Canal branches off from the Erie
Canal, they were no longer troubled by a crowd of canal-boats, and were
able to set the sail again. Unluckily, the mast was just a little too
high to pass under the bridges, and at the first bridge which they met
they narrowly escaped a capsize--Jim succeeding in getting the mast down
only just in time to save it from striking the bridge. They had hardly
set sail again when another bridge came in sight, and they could see
just beyond it a third bridge. It would never do to stop at every bridge
and unship the mast, so Harry went on shore, borrowed a saw from a
cooper's shop, and sawed six inches off from the top of the mast, after
which the bridges gave them no more trouble.

The boys were very much interested in passing the first lock. They
slipped into the lock behind a big canal-boat, which left just room
enough between its rudder and the gate for the _Whitewing_. When the
lock-men shut the gate behind the boat, and opened the sluices in the
upper gate, the water rose slowly and steadily. The sides of the lock
were so steep and black that the boys felt very much as if they were at
the bottom of a well; but it was not many minutes before the water had
risen so high that the upper gates were opened, and the big canal-boat
and its little follower were released.

Passing through a lock in a small boat, and in company with a
canal-boat, is not a perfectly safe thing to do, for if the ropes which
fasten the canal-boat should break--which they sometimes do--the water
rushing in through the sluices would force the canal-boat against the
lower gate, and crush the small boat like an egg-shell. It is therefore
best always to pass through a lock alone, or in company with other small
boats. The danger, however, is in reality very slight, and very few
accidents occur in canal locks.

The wind died away before sunset; and the boys having had only a light
lunch, which they ate on the boat, were glad to go ashore for supper.
They bought some corn from a farmer, and roasted it before the fire,
while some nice slices of ham were frying, and the coffee-pot was
boiling, and so prepared a supper which they greatly enjoyed. The moon
came up before they had finished the meal, and they felt strongly
tempted to make another attempt at night-work.

"I'll tell you what we can do," exclaimed Harry. "Instead of rowing,
let's tow the boat. One fellow can tow while another steers, and the
rest can sleep in the boat."

"All right," said Joe. "I'm willing to be a mule. Only I'd like to know
where my harness is coming from."

"We've got rope enough for that," replied Harry. "I'll take the first
turn, and tow for an hour, while Joe steers; then I'll steer for an
hour, while Joe tows. Then the other watch will take charge of the boat
for two hours, and Joe and I will sleep."

"If I'm to sleep on the bottom of that boat," said Joe, "I want some
nice sharp stones to sleep on. I'm tired of sleeping on coffee-pots, and
want a change."

A long tow-line was soon rigged on Harry's shoulders in such a way that
it did not chafe him; a space in the bottom of the boat was cleared of
coffee-pots and other uncomfortable articles, and a pair of blankets was
spread on the bottom board, so as to make a comfortable bed, which Tom
and Jim hastened to occupy. Joe took the yoke-lines in his hand, and
called to Harry to go ahead. When Harry first tugged at the tow-line,
the boat seemed very heavy; but as soon as she was in motion, Harry
found that he could tow her as fast as he could walk, and without any
difficulty.

Had the locks been open and the canal-boats been out of the way, the
experiment of towing the _Whitewing_ at night would have been very
successful. As it happened, the locks were kept closed during the night,
because the water was low; and the canal-boats, not being able to pass
the locks, were moored to the tow-path. These boats gave Harry and Joe a
great deal of trouble. When one of them was met, Harry had to unharness
himself and toss the rope into the boat, and Joe had to get out an oar
and scull around the obstacle. This happened so often that Tom and Jim
got very little sleep; and long before it was time for them to resume
duty, a lock was reached, and Harry had to call all hands to drag the
boat around it.

This was a hard piece of work. First, all the heavy things had to be
taken out of the boat and carried around the lock. Then the boat had to
be dragged out of the canal on to the tow-path, hauled up a steep
ascent, and launched above the upper gate. It took a good half-hour to
pass the first of these closed locks, and when the boat was again ready
to start, it was time to change the watch.

Tom and Jim had managed to get only a few minutes' sleep, but Harry and
Joe could not sleep a single wink. They had not "turned in" for more
than ten minutes when another lock was reached. This involved a second
half-hour of hard work by all hands, and twenty minutes later three more
locks close together blocked the way. It was foolish to persevere in
dragging the boat around locks all night long; so, after getting her out
of the canal on the side opposite to the tow-path, the boys dragged her
behind some bushes, where the canal boatmen could not see her at
daylight. They then spread their rubber blankets on the ground, and
prepared to sleep through the remaining four or five hours of darkness.

"Boys," said Joe, suddenly, "does it hurt a fat woman to jump on her?"

"Don't know," answered Harry. "What do you ask for?"

"Oh, nothing," said Joe. "Only when I was jumping from one canal-boat to
another while I was a mule, I landed awfully heavy on a fat woman who
was sleeping on deck."

"What did she do?" asked Harry.

"She didn't do anything. She just muttered something that I could not
understand, and I got away as quickly as possible."

"Well, if she likes it, that's her business, not yours," suggested
Harry. "Go to sleep, do!"

"I am going to sleep; but I don't think we ought to spend our nights in
getting run down by steamboats and jumping on strange fat women. I'm
sure it isn't right. There, you needn't throw any more shoes at me. I
won't say another word."

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




SOME TRUE STORIES ABOUT STEEPLES.

BY C. F. M.


A great many years ago a hurricane occurred in Utica, New York. Just as
it began it was noticed that a heavy swing sign in front of a store was
held out in a horizontal position for some time.

Before long the force of the wind increased to such a degree that
several houses on Genesee Street Hill were unroofed, and the spire of
the Second Presbyterian Church was thrown to the ground.

After the storm was over it was discovered that the rod holding the
weather-vane on the top of the tall steeple of the First Presbyterian
Church was bent so that it became nearly horizontal. It was unsightly;
but how to repair the injury was the question. It would be no easy task,
as there was a large ball, or globe, on the rod below the vane. After a
while a sailor offered his services. He ascended the steeple, and
climbed the rod until he came just beneath the globe. Then he threw a
rope out a good many times, until, after a while, the end looped around
over the rod, above the globe, long enough to reach to him. Twisting the
rope together, he let go of the iron rod, and trusting himself to the
rope, swung out free. By climbing it he now managed to get on the top of
the globe. Standing there, he succeeded in straightening the rod that
held the weather-vane.

Now how was he to get down? Again trusting to the rope that was fastened
to the rod above the globe, he swung free at a great height from the
earth; then lowering himself, and swinging back and forth, he managed to
grasp the rod beneath the globe, and soon reaching the spire, descended.

The steeple of Salisbury Cathedral is the highest in England, and next
to that of Strasbourg Cathedral, the highest in Europe. Every year a man
climbs to the top to grease the weather-vane. This is done by ascending
the inside as far as possible, and then going out of a manhole and
climbing the rest of the way by means of the brass staples fastened on
the outer wall.

Once on a festal occasion, when the King was present, a reward was
offered, as usual, to any person who would ascend and attend to the
weather-vane. A sailor agreed to do it, and ascended in the way I have
told you, until he came to the copestone, when, to show what he could
do, he stood on his head. Then performing the task he was sent to do,
that of greasing the vane, he descended, and claimed his reward. But the
King was so exasperated at the sailor for needlessly frightening the
people by standing on his head at such a great height, that he would not
allow him to be paid.

A long time ago, in the town of Northam, England, the steeple of the
church was found to be unsteady. It swayed back and forth whenever the
great bell struck, and continued to sway thus, until, as it leaned over
on one side, it opened large cracks on the opposite.

It was not long before the boys of the town found this out, and the
bright idea entered the head of one of them, and was by him told to the
others, that it would be a capital place to crack nuts. So, boy-like,
they had to try it, and standing at the base of the spire, would fill
the cracks as far as they could reach with good English walnuts, and
then stand back for the steeple to return to an upright position,
cracking the nuts. As the great clock in the tower struck, the jar
caused the spire to lean in the opposite direction. The boys now got
their nuts, and then put in more, that the operation might be repeated,
for they considered it rare sport.

But in the course of time the people of the town who had such matters in
charge decided that the steeple was unsafe, and strengthened it with
bands of iron; but this not proving satisfactory, after a while each
stone was numbered, and the steeple taken down and rebuilt in the old
style. And from that day to this, to the regret of the boys, it has
never been known to crack nuts.

During a great fire in New York, a few years ago, one of the buildings
destroyed was a church having a very tall steeple. The flames ran up
inside this steeple, and, bursting out at the top, melted the zinc and
copper about the lightning rod, so that they fell in showers of green,
gold, and crimson fire, producing a spectacle of most wondrous beauty.




FLOWER QUEENS OF NIGHT.

BY MARGARET EYTINGE.


  "Pretty, fragrant four-o'clocks,"
    Said the rose one day,
  "Pity 'tis your buds unfold
    Into blossoms gay
  When the west begins to burn
    With the sunset light--
  Sweetness wondrous rare to waste
    On the drowsy night.

  "Other blooms have birds to sing,
    Bees to hum, their praise,
  Butterflies to visit them
    Through the summer days.
  Bee but seldom hums for you,
    Bird but seldom sings,
  Butterfly is ne'er your guest,
    Pretty, fragrant things."

  "Lovely, graceful, crimson rose,"
    Said the modest flowers,
  "Though the sun we scarcely know,
    Happiness is ours.
  Moon we have, and sparkling stars
    (Each a heavenly gem),
  And their light so gentle is,
    We can look at them.

  "And the flashing fire-flies
    Round us gleam and glance,
  Like a countless host of fays
    In an airy dance.
  And the moth king, velvet-winged,
    Dainty kiss bestows,
  As he whispers, 'You are sweet,
    Sweet as any rose.'

  "Grieve no more for us, dear friend;
    Thrice content we are,
  Loved by moth and fire-fly,
    Dew-drop, moon, and star.
  And while you o'er garden reign
    In the bright daylight,
  We are hailed by wand'ring winds,
    Flower queens of night."




OLD TIMES IN THE COLONIES.

BY CHARLES CARLETON COFFIN.


No. III.

ISAAC BRADLEY AND JOSEPH WHITTAKER.

Twelve miles from the sea, on the bank of the Merrimac River, is the
busy town of Haverhill. It was a small settlement in 1690. There was a
cluster of houses and a meeting-house. The country beyond, all the way
to Canada, was a wilderness. The Indians came down the river in their
bark canoes, carrying them past the falls where the city of Lowell now
stands, past Amoskeag Falls, where the Manchester factories to-day are
humming. They caught beaver, bear, and foxes, and sold the furs to the
traders.

The Indians were under the influence of the French, and when war broke
out between France and England for the restoration of James II. to the
throne from which he had fled, the settlers of Haverhill, in common with
the people all along the frontier, knew that the Indians, influenced by
the French in Canada, might be upon them at any moment.

[Illustration: EARLY SETTLERS GOING TO MEETING.--DRAWN BY HOWARD PYLE.]

The settlers had their guns ever at hand. If at work in the field, they
placed them where they could seize them quickly. When they went to bed
at night, they put a stout bar of wood across the door, and examined
the flints and the priming. On Sunday, when they went to meeting, each
man carried his gun, and the minister looked down from the pulpit upon
men who had powder-horns and bullet-pouches slung across their
shoulders, and whose muskets were standing in the corners of their pews.
Some of the settlers kept watch outside while the others were in
meeting. They went on scouts through the dark woods, peering among the
trees to see if the Indians were prowling in the vicinity.

The settlers were obliged to work hard. While the men were at work in
the fields, the women were spinning and weaving. Boys and girls had
little time for play. There was always something for them to do. When a
boy was sixteen years old, he was expected to do the work of a man. They
all learned to shoot, and some of them, when they were only twelve,
could bring down a squirrel from the highest tree every time, or shoot a
deer upon the run.

Two boys--Isaac Bradley, who was fifteen years old, and Joseph
Whittaker, who was eleven--were at work one day in Mr. Bradley's field,
when suddenly a party of Indians sprang out from the woods and seized
them. Isaac was small, but he was bright, cool-headed, and
brave-hearted. Joseph, though four years younger, was as large as Isaac,
but he was not so stout-hearted nor self-reliant as his companion.

The Indians were from Canada. They did not stop to kill any of the
settlers, but hastened away, travelling through the dark woods northward
to the beautiful Lake Winnipiseogee, where they remained through the
winter. The lake swarmed with trout and pickerel, which they could catch
through the ice, and the woods were full of bears and deer.

Isaac made himself at home in the wigwam, and picked up the language of
the Indians in a very short time. The squaws made him do their drudgery;
but the warriors liked him, and the Indian dogs wagged their tails when
he looked at them out of his kindly eyes.

Winter passed and April came.

"We go to Canada now," said one of the Indians.

Isaac had no intention of going to Canada. Day after day he thought over
the matter. He knew that the English settlements were far away to the
south, but there was no path to them. He had no compass. How could he
ever reach them? He would be guided by the sun by day, and the stars by
night. He would make the attempt. He might perish, but death was better
than captivity.

"I am going to try it to-morrow night, but I am afraid you won't wake,"
he said to Joseph, who always slept soundly, and snored in his sleep.

"Oh yes, I will," Joseph replied.

The Indians had killed a moose, and Isaac had managed to hide a large
piece of meat in the bushes near the camp. He filled his pockets with
their corn-bread. Night came. All were asleep except Isaac, who was so
excited by the thought of escaping that his eyes would not close. Every
sense was quickened. He arose softly and touched Joseph, who was sound
asleep. He did not stir, and Isaac shook him harder.

"What do you want?" Joseph asked.

In an instant Isaac was stretched out, snoring; but the Indians did not
wake, and after a little while the boys arose softly, and crept out of
the wigwam, Isaac with an Indian's gun and powder and balls. They made
their way to the meat, took it under their arms, and started upon the
run, guided on their way by the stars. On through the wilderness, amid
the tall trees, over fallen trunks, over stones, through thickets and
tangled brushwood, they travelled till morning, and then crept into a
hollow log.

Great the consternation in the camp of the Indians. Their captives gone!
a gun lost! At daybreak the Indians, with their dogs, were on the trail,
and in swift pursuit.

The boys heard the barking of the dogs, which soon came sniffing around
the log. What shall they do now? Isaac is quick-witted.

"Good fellow, Bose! good fellow! here is some breakfast for you;" and he
tosses the moose meat to them. The dogs know his voice, devour the meat,
and are as happy as dogs can be. The boys are their friends. They cease
barking, and trot around, with no further concern.

The Indians come up on the run. The boys hear their voices, as they
hasten by, followed by their dogs.

Through the day they lie hidden in the log, and when night comes, strike
out in a different direction from that taken by the Indians. All night
long they travel, nibbling at their hard corn-bread. Morning comes, and
again they conceal themselves. Once more at night they are on the march.
On the third day Isaac shoots a pigeon, but does not dare to kindle a
fire, and they eat it raw. They find a turtle, smash its shell, and eat
the meat. On, day after day, they travel, eating roots, and buds of the
trees just ready to burst into leaf. The sixth day comes, and they
suddenly find themselves close to an Indian camp. They peep through the
underbrush, and see the warriors sitting around their camp fire smoking
their pipes. They steal softly away, and then run as fast as their legs
can carry them. The morning of the eighth day comes. Joseph's strength
is failing; his courage is gone; he cries bitterly. They are in the
wilderness, they know not where, with nothing to eat, their clothes in
rags, their feet bleeding.

"Cheer up, Joseph; here are some ground-nuts. Here, drink some water,"
says Isaac.

No brave words, no act of kindness, can quicken the courage of the
fainting boy. What shall Isaac do--stay and die with him, or try to find
his own way out? Sad the parting, the younger lying down to die upon a
mossy bank, the older turning away alone, lost in the wilderness.

With faltering steps, Isaac pushes on, and discerns a house. No one is
there, but he knows there must be white men not far away. With quickened
pulse, he turns back to the dying boy, awakens him from sleep, rubs his
eyes, bathes his temples, cheers him with encouraging words.

"Come, Joseph, we are saved. There is a house close by."

Joseph's eyes brighten. He stands upon his feet, walks a few steps, and
falls. Isaac is stronger than ever. He lifts his fainting comrade, takes
him in his arms, staggers on, reaches the empty and desolate house, and
discovers a beaten path leading southward. He goes on, resting now and
then, but ever speaking words of cheer.

At last they see before them a placid river, and beside it a cluster of
houses. They know that in a few moments they will be once more among
friends, and brave Isaac Bradley is almost overcome with the joy of this
knowledge.

[Illustration: ISAAC BRADLEY CARRYING JOSEPH INTO THE SETTLEMENT.]

What a sight is that which the soldier on the look-out at the
garrison-house on the bank of the Saco beholds, just as the sun is going
down--two boys, one carrying the other!

Saved. They are kindly cared for by the soldiers, their wounds are
dressed, nourishing food is given them, once more they are clothed in
the garments of civilized beings, and there are moist eyes in the
garrison as they tell their thrilling story. And what rejoicing when at
last they reach their homes!




TOM CHESTER'S SILVER MINE.

BY A. A. HAYES, JUN.


Tom Chester's father lives in a pleasant town in New England, and Tom
himself grew up like other boys in that part of the country. In winter
he went to the village school, in an old red building with a great stove
in one corner, and on his way home "coasted" down the long hill at the
foot of which he lived. In summer he helped the hay-makers, and rode on
the high-piled cart, and went on picnics to Blue Mountain, and bathed in
the clear brook under the willows. He grew to be stout, hardy, and
red-cheeked, very unlike his father, who pored over his books, and took
no exercise, and grew paler and thinner each year.

One day, as Tom was sitting on the door-step making a whistle out of a
slip of willow, he saw old Dr. W---- drive up in his old-fashioned
"sulky," tie his horse to a post, and go to his father's library,
bidding him good-morning as he passed. He remained some time with Mr.
Chester, and as he came out Tom heard him say,

"Very well, then, we will call that settled. And mind, the sooner you
start, the sooner you may expect to find yourself better and stronger."

Mr. Chester, who had followed the doctor to the door, saw the inquiring
look on Tom's face, and asked him, with a smile, how he would like to go
to Colorado.

"What! to dig for silver?" cried Tom.

"No; to seek for what is more valuable than silver--health," said his
father. "Dr. W---- says that I must go to the Rocky Mountains, and we
shall start in a few days."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was dark when the train rolled into Denver, and Tom, even if he had
not been tired and sleepy, could have seen nothing of the town as they
drove to the hotel. But in the morning, when he woke up and looked out
of the windows of his room, which was on the western side of the house,
he cried aloud with surprise and delight. All along the horizon rose a
great range of mountains, with two lofty peaks towering over the others,
one at the north and the other at the south. They seemed so near that
Tom thought he could walk to them; but when he had dressed himself and
gone down to the office, he asked the clerk how long it would take, and
the man looked at him, and said, "I wouldn't advise you to try, you
little _tender-foot_."

"My feet are _not_ tender," replied Tom, sharply.

The people in the room all laughed, and a miner in a blue flannel shirt
patted Tom on the back, and said, "That's right, my boy. You remind me
of a kid of my own up at Fairplay. The fellow's only chaffing you. When
any one's been just a little while in the country, they always call him
a 'tender-foot.' You mustn't mind that."

Then he went on to explain to Tom that the foot-hills which looked so
near were at least fifteen or twenty miles away. Then he told him about
the mining towns, or "camps," as they are called, and how the men who
look for mines, called "prospectors," search through the mountains,
seeking signs of silver ore; and that when they find them, they put
stakes in the ground to mark the "claims" which the law allows, or the
right to dig in a space 1500 feet one way and 300 the other. Then he
described how they dig down in hopes of finding what they call "pay
gravel," or ore which contains enough silver to make it worth sending to
the works. He mentioned some men whom he knew who had sold "prospect
holes," as he called them (or shafts partly sunk, and not yet proved to
be good mines), for large sums. Tom was immensely interested in these
narrations, and was eagerly listening when his father came in to find
him.

"Guess you'd better let me have that boy of yourn to make a miner of,
Colonel," said this new friend to Mr. Chester. "He's got plenty of
_sand_."

Mr. Chester knew that people in the West give titles to almost every
one, but it was some time before either he or Tom found out that it was
a great compliment to say that any one had "sand," which means, in the
rough but very expressive language of the mountains, that one possesses
bravery and great strength and force of character.

After seeing all the sights of Denver, Tom and his father took the train
one morning for a little town called Golden, near the foot-hills. Here
they were transferred to a railroad only three feet wide, and found an
open or "observation" car, from which they could see very well. The
train entered what is called a canyon, or gorge, down which poured the
waters of Clear Creek (which, by-the-way, were not clear at all, but
very muddy). It wound up this canyon, the walls of which seemed to come
together away over the heads of the passengers. No boy who is fortunate
enough to make a journey to Colorado should fail to see this remarkable
place. The little engine tugged at the train, and dragged it up the
steep canyon, and by the side of the winding stream, until it came to a
valley surrounded by high hills, where is the town of Idaho Springs.
Here Tom and his father left the train, and walked to a neat-looking
hotel, where they took up their quarters. Mr. Chester already felt the
benefit of the change of climate, and he wanted to spend much time in
excursions to different points. He and Tom went up by the railroad to
Georgetown, and drove to Central City, and at both places they saw a
great many mines. They went down in buckets, lowered by great ropes, six
and seven hundred feet into the shafts, and then sometimes came out by
tunnels cut from the sides of the hills. They saw mills in which gold
ore was crushed by stamps, or great iron bars falling heavily on it, and
works where silver ore was put into hot furnaces--in fact, they saw so
many things that Tom became rather bewildered. All the time, however, he
found himself thinking about what the miner had told him in Denver, and
longing to try his own hand at prospecting. When he told his father, one
day, that he would like to go up on the hill-sides or in some of the
canyons and look for a mine, the latter at first laughed, and then grew
rather serious, and began to talk about the danger of being led away by
this desire to be suddenly rich without labor.

"You hear, my boy," he said, "about the one, two, or three men who
succeed, but not a word about the hundreds, and even thousands, who make
failure after failure, and pass their lives in the misery of 'hope
deferred.'"

Tom listened respectfully to his father, but could not make up his mind
that it would not be a fine thing to find a silver mine. He began to
take walks by himself, and look out for the signs about which various
miners had told him. At times he would think that he had found
something, and he would bring little pieces of rock to show to a friend
whose acquaintance he had made in the little town. This was an old miner
named Sam, a rough but very kind-hearted man, who did not laugh at all,
but told him pleasantly that he had not yet found any mine.

One day, while walking in a canyon near the hotel, and chipping with a
hammer at the broken rock, he saw two poorly dressed men carrying
bundles, as if on a journey, who stopped and asked what he was doing.
They told him that there was no use in searching in that place, but that
they had an excellent prospect hole, already showing "pay gravel," which
they had been compelled to abandon on account of pressing engagements
elsewhere, and which, although it was worth many thousands, they would
sell him for ten dollars. Poor little Tom had just that sum, which his
father had given him on his birthday, and to which he had proposed to
add his savings, for the purpose of buying some fishing-tackle. Perhaps
his slight "craze" about a mine made him less cautious than usual. At
all events, he accepted the men's offer, and promised to meet them that
afternoon near a tree which they pointed out.

He was there on the minute, with his ten dollars in his pocket. The men
took him up the hill, and showed him a rather deep hole, into which a
rough ladder led. Down this they went, and Tom saw some ore of just the
kind that his friend Sam had told him he ought to find. Then the men set
two stakes in the ground, on which they rudely marked "T. C.," took his
money, and walked hastily away. Tom went down to the hotel full of his
purchase. His father had gone to Georgetown, but Sam was there, and to
him Tom eagerly narrated what he thought his good fortune. Sam heard him
without remark, and then put on his hat, and taking pick and shovel,
asked Tom to show him the mine. Arriving there, he shovelled up some of
the ore which Tom had seen, and disclosed quite a different rock below.
On this lay a piece of board, which he handed to Tom, who read thereon,

"u ar sold bad u yung tender-fut this aint no mine."

For a moment he did not understand; then came a shock of disappointment,
and then a sense of indignation, not so much against the men who had
deceived him as at himself for his delusion and stupidity.

Sam looked kindly at him. "Pretty rough on you, Tom, wasn't it?" he
said. "Why, my boy, this is an old claim of mine, which I gave up long
ago as no good. They've just gone and salted it--I mean, put some good
ore in to deceive you. So they walked off with your ten dollars, the
miserable scamps! Tell me what they looked like."

Tom described them.

"Ho! ho!" said Sam. "I saw those same fellows taking the train for
Denver. I'm going down there to-morrow, and the Chief of Police is a
friend of mine. Perhaps we'll run across them some day."

As they walked home, he tried to cheer Tom up by telling him stories of
clever men who had been served in similar ways; but Tom was sober, not
on account of his loss, but because it had come to his mind how foolish
he had been from the first. He felt easier when he had told his father
the whole story.

The latter laughed heartily, and said, "Well, Tom, my boy, considering
how badly you had the mining fever, I do not think that ten dollars was
a large price to pay for a cure."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some time after Tom had returned to his home he received a letter from
Colorado, which proved to be from his friend Sam, reading partly as
follows:

"... I am glad to tell you that we catched them two claim-jumpers [men
who steal claims]. They'd spent all your stamps, sure enough, and you
won't never see them no more; but it's a comfort that they got two years
at Canyon City [where the penitentiary is]. Better luck next time. Come
out again next summer, and I'll help you find an A1 mine...."

But Tom says that if he ever has any money at all, it will be earned in
some good old-fashioned way; that he is not a "tender-foot," and that he
does not want any more interest in prospect holes.




WOLF-CHILDREN.

BY JAMES GREENWOOD.


Some years ago a soldier stationed at Bondee, in India, while passing
near a small stream, saw three wolf cubs and a boy drinking. He managed
to seize the boy, who seemed about ten years old, but who was so wild
and fierce that he tore the trooper's clothes, and bit him severely in
several places. The soldier at first tied him up in the military gun
shed, and fed him with raw meat; he was afterward allowed to wander
freely about the Bondee bazar. A lad named Tanoo, servant of a Cashmere
merchant then at Bondee, took compassion on the poor boy, and prepared a
bed for him under the mango-tree where he himself lodged; here he kept
him fastened to a tent-pin.

Up to this time he would eat nothing but raw flesh, but Tanoo gradually
taught him to eat balls of rice and pulse. In about six weeks after he
had been tied up, and after much rubbing of his joints with oil, he was
made to stand and walk upright, whereas hitherto he had gone on all
fours.

One night, while the boy was lying under the mango-tree, Tanoo saw two
wolves creep stealthily toward him, and after smelling him, they touched
him, when he got up. Instead, however, of being frightened, the boy put
his hand upon their heads, and they began to play with him, capering
about while he pelted them with grass and straw. Tanoo tried to drive
them off, but could not. At last, however, they left, but the following
night three wolves came, and a few nights after four, which returned
several times.

The wolf-boy, however, could not be entirely reconciled to civilized
life. In being removed from place to place he never lost an opportunity
of endeavoring to escape into the jungle. At last Tanoo was sent away on
a short journey, and when he returned, his savage charge had
disappeared, and was never again heard of.

The story of another wolf-child is even more wonderful than the above.

In March, 1843, a cultivator who lived at Chupra, about twenty miles
from Sultanpoor, went to cut his crop of wheat and pulse, taking with
him his wife, and a son about three years old. As the father was
reaping, a wolf suddenly rushed upon the boy, caught him up, and made
off with him toward the ravines. People ran to the aid of the parents,
but soon lost sight of the wolf and his prey.

About six years afterward, as two sipahees were watching for hogs on the
border of the jungle, they saw three wolf cubs and a boy come out from
the jungle and go down to the stream to drink; all four then ran to a
den in the ravine. The sipahees followed, but the cubs had already
entered, and the boy was half way in, when one of the men caught him by
the leg and drew him back. He was very savage, bit at the men, and
seizing the barrel of one of their guns in his teeth, shook it fiercely.
The sipahees, however, secured him, brought him home, and kept him for
twenty days, during which he would eat nothing but raw flesh, and was
fed accordingly on hares and birds. His captors soon found it difficult
to provide him with sufficient food, and took him to the bazar in the
village of Koeleepoor, to be supported by the charitable till he might
be recognized and claimed by his parents.

He is unable to speak or to articulate any sound with distinctness. In
drinking, he dips his face in the water, but does not lap like a wolf.
He still prefers raw flesh; and when a bullock dies, and the skin is
removed, he attacks and eats the body in company of the village dogs.




[Begun in HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 37, July 13.]

THE STORY OF THE AMERICAN NAVY.

BY BENSON J. LOSSING.


CHAPTER IV.

Commodore Preble sailed from the United States for the Mediterranean in
the frigate _Constitution_ late in the spring of 1803. The ships of the
squadron did not sail together. Bainbridge, with the frigate
_Philadelphia_, first entered the Strait of Gibraltar, and found a
Moorish corsair cruising for American prizes. He captured her and took
her to Gibraltar. When Preble arrived he proceeded to Tangiers with the
squadron, when the Emperor of Morocco declared that he had never
authorized any depredations on American commerce. The affair was
amicably settled. Soon afterward the _Philadelphia_ chased a corsair
into the harbor of Tripoli, and in so doing struck upon a sunken rock.
She was fast bound. The Tripolitans captured her, made Bainbridge and
his officers prisoners of war, and consigned the crew to slavery.

With Preble was Stephen Decatur, a gallant young Lieutenant, son of a
veteran naval commander. He was in charge of the brig _Enterprise_, with
which, late in December, he captured a Tripolitan ketch laden with girls
which the ruler of Tripoli was sending as a present to the Sultan. The
maidens were landed at Syracuse, and the ketch (which was renamed
_Intrepid_) was used by Decatur in an attempt to recapture or destroy
the _Philadelphia_. With seventy daring young men he sailed into the
harbor of Tripoli on a bright moon-lit night (February, 1804), the
_Intrepid_ assuming the character of a vessel in distress. Most of her
officers and men were concealed.

The _Intrepid_ went alongside the _Philadelphia_, when Decatur,
followed by his men, who sprang from their hiding-places, boarded the
frigate, slew many of her defenders and drove the rest into the sea, set
her on fire, and escaped with only four men wounded. This daring act
produced great commotion in the harbor. The _Philadelphia_ was soon in
flames; the great guns of the castle and of the corsairs lying near
thundered incessantly; and to this roar of artillery was added that of
the cannons of the frigate as the flames reached them. The heroes of
this exploit were received at Syracuse with demonstrations of great joy,
and Decatur was promoted to Captain. The ruler of Tripoli was abashed by
this display of American energy and valor.

[Illustration: DECATUR AND HIS MEN BOARDING THE GUN-BOAT.]

The harbor of Tripoli was guarded by batteries mounting more than a
hundred heavy guns, by numerous gun-boats and other vessels, by
twenty-five thousand soldiers, and a sheltering reef. Undismayed by
these, Preble entered the harbor in the summer of 1804, with the
_Constitution_ and several gun-boats, and opened fire on the formidable
defenses. In that engagement Decatur again displayed his valor. He
captured one gun-boat, and boarded another, on which he had a fierce
hand-to-hand fight with its powerful commander, but triumphed. The
Americans withdrew, but renewed the struggle a few days afterward, when
a hot shot exploded the magazine of one of the American gun-boats,
killing two officers and eight of the crew. When the smoke cleared away,
Midshipman Spence and eleven others were seen on the sinking vessel
working her great gun. Giving three cheers, and firing it at the enemy,
they were picked from the water a few minutes later, for the vessel had
gone to the bottom.

In a fourth attack on Tripoli by the gallant Preble a sad accident
occurred. It was determined to blow up the cruisers in the harbor by a
floating mine or huge torpedo. The _Intrepid_ was laden with a hundred
barrels of gunpowder, over which were laid shot, shell, and irregular
pieces of iron. In charge of Captain Somers, she was towed into the
harbor on a very dark night (September 4, 1804), when all eyes were
strained to observe the result. Suddenly a fierce and lurid light shot
up from the dark bosom of the waters, like a volcanic fire, and was
instantly followed by an explosion that shook earth and air for miles
around. Flaming fragments rose and fell, and then all was profound
darkness again. Somers and his companions were never heard of. They
probably perished by the premature explosion of the mine.

Soon after this, Preble, who had done excellent service in the
Mediterranean, was relieved by the arrival of Commodore Barron, prepared
to carry on the war with Tripoli vigorously, but it was ended by treaty
early the next year.

The ruler of Tunis was yet insolent, but the appearance of an American
squadron of thirteen vessels before his capital soon so humbled him that
he sued for peace and made a treaty. A small American naval force was
kept in the Mediterranean, and for several years the Barbary powers kept
their hands off American commerce.

At the close of the war of 1812-15, the Dey of Algiers, believing the
British navy had utterly destroyed that of the United States, sent out
his corsairs to depredate on our commerce. Determined not to pay tribute
or longer endure his insolence, the United States accepted the Dey's
challenge to war, and sent Commodore Decatur with a small squadron to
humble him. Decatur sailed in May, 1815, and as soon as he entered the
Mediterranean he found the Algerine pirate fleet cruising in search of
American vessels. In June he captured the flag-ship of the Algerine
Admiral and another corsair, with six hundred men. With these he entered
the harbor of Algiers, and demanded the instant surrender of all
American captives in the hands of the Dey, payment in full for all
American property destroyed by his forces, and the relinquishment of all
claims to tribute from the United States thereafter. The terrified ruler
hastened to comply. Obeying the summons of the Commodore, he appeared on
the deck of the _Guerriere_ (the flag-ship), with his civil officers and
the captives. Having complied with all demands, the Dey left the vessel
in deep humiliation.

Decatur now sailed for Tunis, and demanded and received of its
frightened ruler $46,000, in payment for American vessels which he had
allowed the British to capture in his harbor. Then the Commodore went to
Tripoli, and summoned the Bashaw, or Governor, before him. He demanded
$25,000 of him for similar injuries. The Tripolitan treasury was empty,
and Decatur accepted, in place of cash, eight Danish and two Neapolitan
captives held by the Bashaw.

This cruise of a little American squadron in the Mediterranean Sea in
the summer of 1815, and its results, gave full security to American
commerce in these waters, and greatly exalted the character of the
government of the United States in the opinion of European nations. A
portion of its navy had accomplished, in the way of humbling the rulers
of the Barbary States, and weakening their power for mischief, what the
combined governments of Europe had not dared to attempt. Decatur was the
most conspicuous hero in the war with the Barbary States.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration]

WHAT THE BUTTERFLY SAYS.


  Through all the sunny summer days
    I wander here and there,
  And hardly ever stop to rest
    A moment anywhere.
  There are so many things to see,
  And time is rather short with me.

  I only have a month or two,
    And time soon runs away
  When one is seeing something new,
    Or sporting every day.
  And how the little people try
  To catch me as I flutter by!

  But I know what they want me for--
    It's not to use me right;
  It's not to give me sunny fields,
    With daisies sprinkled white;
  But just to pin me on the wall
  To show their friends, and that is all.




THE SHIP OF THE DESERT.

BY A. E. T.


Unlike other ships, this one begins by being a very feeble and helpless
little craft indeed. For the first week after its launch on the great
sea of life it requires much careful watching on the part of the owners.

Strange as it may sound, in very truth a baby camel is every whit as
helpless as a human baby. It can not stand alone; without help it can
not so much as take its own food even; while its long neck is at first
so flexible and fragile, that unless some one were constantly at hand to
watch, the poor little creature would run every risk of dislocating it.

Those who have closely observed camel nature tell us it is never known
to play or frolic like lambs or colts, or like most young creatures of
the earth, in fact; but that in its babyhood it is as grave and
melancholy as in its old age, born apparently with a deep sense of its
own ugliness, and a mournful resignation to a long and joyless career.

When it has reached its third year the humpbacked animal is counted old
enough to begin its life of labor. The trainers then take it in hand.
They teach it to kneel and bear burdens, which gradually they make
heavier and heavier, until their charge is supposed to have come to the
full strength of camel maturity. This is not until it is about eight
years old.

If the camel can rise with the load on its back, this is proof positive
that he can carry it throughout the journey, although it sometimes
happens, if the journey be only a very short one, the patient beast is
loaded so heavily that it must be helped on to its feet by means of bars
and levers. In some places camels cry out against this excessive loading
in a most piteous and distressing manner--the cry resembling that of a
very young child in pain, and being a most dismal sound to hear; but in
other parts of the world they will bear their burden, however heavy,
without complaining.

[Illustration: THE CAMEL AND HIS RIDER.]

An ordinary camel's load is from seven to eight hundred pounds. With
this weight on their backs, a train of camels will cross thirty miles of
desert during a day. Those used to carry dispatches, having only the
light weight of the dispatch-bearer, of course are expected to travel
much faster, however, and will easily accomplish two hundred and forty
miles in the same length of time.

Ungainly, awkward, repulsive-looking as these creatures are, with their
great projecting harelips and their hairy humps, they have the
compensation of being most priceless treasures to all those who "dwell
in tents" in the vast sandy plains of Egypt, Arabia, and Tartary.

Their stomachs are so formed by nature that they are capable of being
converted into a set of water tanks, a number of small cells filled with
the purest water being fastened to the sides of each, and when all food
fails, it makes little difference to a camel or dromedary--at least for
a time.

Their humps are composed of a fatty substance. Day by day the hump
diminishes, and the fat is absorbed into the animal's system, furnishing
nourishment until food is forth-coming.

Thus, with these stores of water and fuel on board, the "ship" can go on
for a fortnight, or even a month, absolutely without eating or drinking,
while things that other creatures--unless, perhaps, it be some bird of
the ostrich tribe--would never dream of touching, will furnish forth a
sumptuous meal for a camel. Off a handful of thorns and briers he can
make an excellent breakfast, and I believe he will not disdain anything
apparently so untempting as a bit of dry wood.

Provided that at certain periods of the year a short holiday is allowed
the camel for pasturing, quite at its leisure, to recruit its strength
and fill that store-house on its back with fuel, it will serve its
master, on such meagre fare as I have mentioned, for full fifty years.
Still, all work and no play is as bad for camels as it is for boys.

Even with plenty of fuel on board, the desert-ship owners are wise
enough not to impose too long journeys upon their heavily laden fleets.

A camel's foot is of a peculiar formation. It is wide-spreading, and is
provided with fleshy pads or cushions; and if after a certain march rest
were not given, the skin would wear off these pads, the flesh become
bare, bringing consequences direful indeed. Probably the suffering
creature would kneel down, fold its long legs under its body, and
stretching out its long neck on the ground, calmly announce in camel
language that it would go no further. It is no use whatever to try to
make a camel go against his will.

If it once refuses, you have but two ways open to you: you may quietly
lie down beside it until it is ready to move, or you may abandon it
forever. Other course there is none.

It is a curious fact that, notwithstanding the softness of the camel's
foot, it can walk over the sharpest stones, or thorns, or roots of trees
without the least danger of wounding itself, and that what this strange
beast most dreads is wet and marshy ground.

We read that "the instant it places its feet upon anything like mud, it
slips and slides, and generally, after staggering about like a drunken
man, falls heavily on its side."

The use of the camel to the various peoples of the East is almost
incalculable. Many an Arab finds his chief sustenance in the cheese,
butter, and milk of the mother camel. The flesh of young camels is also
often eaten.

The Roman Emperor Heliogabalus is said to have reckoned camel's feet one
of the daintiest dainties of his sumptuous banquets, and he considered a
portion of tender camel roast a thing to be by no means despised. To
this day, indeed, camel's hump cut into slices and dissolved in tea is
counted a relish by the Tartar tribes.

Camel's skin is made into straps and sandals, while brushes and ropes,
cloth and tents, sacks and carpets, are made entirely from camel's hair.

Every year toward the beginning of summer the camel sheds its hair,
every bristle of which vanishes before the new hair begins to grow. For
three weeks this bare condition lasts. His camelship looks as if he had
been shaved without mercy from the tip of his tail to the top of his
head, and during this shaven season he is extremely sensitive to the
cold or wet, shaking in every limb if a drop of rain falls, shivering
painfully in the chilliness of the night air.

By-and-by the new hair begins to grow--fine, soft, curly wool that
gradually becomes long, thick, soft fur; and after this, the rain may
rain as much as it likes, the night air may be as chilly as it will, the
camel will not care a grain. In that armor of nature's providing he will
not shiver or shake any more.

The hair of a camel, on an average, will weigh about ten pounds. It is
said to be sometimes finer than silk, and longer than the wool of a
sheep. In the course of my reading, a short time ago, I met with an
account of a camel market in a town of Tartary especially noted for its
trade in that species of live stock.

In the centre of Blue Town, it seems, there is a large square, where the
animals are ranged in long rows together, their front feet raised upon
mud elevations constructed expressly for the purpose, the object of
which is to show off the size and height of the ungainly creatures.

The confusion and noise of this market are described as something
frightful and "indescribable," with the continual chattering of the
buyers and sellers disputing noisily over their bargains, in addition to
the wild shrieking of the camels, whose noses are pulled roughly to make
them show off their agility in rising and kneeling.

Nature has given the camel, you must remember, no means of defense
except its prolonged piercing cry, and a horrible sneeze of its own,
whereby the object of its hatred is sometimes covered with a mass of
filth from its mouth.

It can not bite its tormentor, and--at least the Tartar camel--seldom
kicks, or if it does, as seldom does any harm with that fleshy foot of
which I have told you already.

Can you wonder, then, that the air of Blue Town is made hideous with the
shrieking of the camels as, to test their strength, they are made to
kneel while one thing after another is piled on their backs, and made to
rise under each new burden, until they can rise no longer?

"Sometimes while the camel is kneeling a man gets upon its hind-heels,
and holds on by the long hair of its hump; if the camel can rise then,
it is considered an animal of superior power"--according to the writer
above quoted.

"The trade in camels is entirely conducted by proxy; the seller and the
buyer never settle the matter between themselves. They select different
persons to sell their goods, who propose, discuss, and fix the price,
the one looking to the interests of the seller, the other to those of
the purchaser. These 'sale-speakers' exercise no other trade. They go
from market to market, to promote business, as they say. They have
generally a great knowledge of cattle, have much fluency of tongue, and
are, above all, endowed with a knavery beyond all shame. They dispute by
turns furiously and argumentatively as to the merits and defects of the
animal, but as soon as it comes to be a question of price, the tongue is
laid aside as a medium, and the conversation proceeds altogether in
signs."




A LITTLE GIRL'S ASCENT OF VESUVIUS.

BY KATIE C. YORKE.


One beautiful morning we took a carriage and started from Naples on a
trip to Mount Vesuvius. We drove along the bay for several miles, and
when we reached the foot of the mountain we began to ascend through vast
fields of lava, which had flowed there during previous eruptions. I
always imagined that lava was white and smooth, but this was of a
grayish-black color, and very ragged.

The carriage-road ends at the Observatory, which is a building where a
scientific man resides, being appointed by the government to watch the
state of the volcano. He can tell when there is going to be an eruption,
and always notifies the people.

There we found guides and men with saddled horses waiting to take us to
the foot of the cone. After a short ride we reached it, and dismounted,
and started up. The cone is so steep, and covered with cinders, that
people that are unaccustomed to such walking can't get up it without
assistance, because every step you take you slide back several inches.
We thought we would be pulled up by the guides, but the rest of the
party got tired, and had to be carried on their shoulders. I managed to
walk nearly all the way, and when I got tired my guide carried me too.

About half way up we stopped at a cave where some men were waiting to
sell us some new Lacrima Christi wine. We drank some, and rested, and
went on to the top. When we reached it we were nearly four thousand feet
above the level of the sea, and had a beautiful view of Naples, the bay,
the islands, the villages, and the surrounding mountains.

We enjoyed the view very much, but every little while the wind would
blow a cloud of sulphurous vapor from the crater, and nearly suffocate
us. We walked to the edge of the crater and looked down, but we couldn't
see much, because of the vapor. One of the guides went down into it a
little way, and brought us up some pieces of sulphur. The cinders were
so hot they burned our feet, and when we poked sticks into some cavities
they caught fire.

The thick vapor annoyed us so that we soon decided to go down. Just as
we were starting, the mountain gave a low, deep growl, and trembled
under us, so we were very glad to leave. It was great fun going down,
because the cinders were so loose that at each step we would slide a
long way. Part way down we caught a pale yellow butterfly that was
almost stifled by the sulphurous fumes.

When we reached the foot of the cone, we found we had been only twenty
minutes coming down, although it took us an hour and a half to go up. No
sooner had we arrived at the Observatory than we were surrounded by
crowds of ragged, beggarly looking men and boys, who insisted on
blacking our shoes, or pretended they had been guides, and tried to make
us pay them for things they had never done at all. We ordered them away,
but they kept on tormenting us, so we jumped into the carriage, and
drove off as fast as we could, leaving them all behind, shouting,
screaming, and wildly gesticulating.

Since I was there they have built a railroad up the mountain, but I
should not think it would be half so much fun to go up in the cars.




A LETTER FROM INDIA.


  LUCKNOW, INDIA, _June 20, 1880_.

My Dear Friends,--My auntie has sent me several copies of HARPER'S YOUNG
PEOPLE, and I thought maybe you would like to know a little how we
children in India live. I don't know anything about your life except
what I read, and my mamma tells me, because I was born here. I am nine
years old, and in a little while we are going home. I say home because
mamma and papa do, but the only home I know is here, where it is so hot
sometimes it seems as if I should die. Last night mamma had to get up
and take a towel as wet as it could be, and rub my sheets with it,
before I could get to sleep at all, and if the punka stops a single
minute, it wakes me right up again. I read my letter to mamma so far,
and she says you won't know what a punka is. That is funny to me; but I
will tell you. They are very stiff cloth things fixed on frames, and
fastened to the ceiling so that they move, and by fanning the air keep a
breeze in the room all the time. There are holes in the wall, and ropes
put through the holes, and a man outside on the veranda pulls the ropes,
and keeps the punka moving. One night I was so hot I got up and went out
on the veranda, but the boards of the step burned my feet; so I slipped
on my slippers, and tried again. There sat the punka wala nodding, fast
asleep, but keeping his arms moving all the time. It looked funny, I can
tell you.

We have good times in the winter, though. Christmas-day we always have a
picnic. The children of the native Sunday-schools and English schools
join together, and have a good time in some grove. And all through the
winter we play out under the trees, just as mamma says you do in the
summer. But here in summer we can only go out very late in the afternoon
or very early in the morning, because if the mid-day sun touches us, it
will make us very sick, and perhaps we will die. Theo Carter, a girl I
know, when she was real little got away from her nurse, and ran out in
the sun without her hat. It was in the morning, too; and now every time
she gets warm or tired she has the most dreadful headache, and mamma
says she don't believe she will ever be strong, even if she goes to
America. But I guess she would, because everybody that gets sick here
goes to America, else England, and when they come back they are ever so
much better; but sometimes they don't come back, and mamma says people
die even in America.

There are lots of thieves in this country. One night last week they got
into our house. The servants would keep shutting the bath-room
window--the bath-room is between mamma's room and mine--and we wanted it
open for air, and mamma told them so; but they said the thieves would
climb in from a fig-tree near by. But mamma said if they did, they would
be welcome to all they could get. They did get in, and took the clothes
Bertie and I had worn through the day. Baby woke, and they were probably
frightened, and snatched the first thing they could, which was a box of
homoeopathic medicine mamma brought from home. We laughed in the
morning, because they thought, no doubt, it was something valuable, and
it will be worse than nothing to them; but papa says we will cry when we
are sick, and have to take bitter medicine instead of little sugar
pills.

Last week there was a big procession--something about the
government--and one of papa's friends asked us to go to see it, and ride
on an elephant. I was real glad, for I never rode on one but once, and
then I was so little I don't remember much about it. We had a nice ride.
Papa had one elephant to himself, but mamma and I and Mrs. Carter and
Theo rode on another. We could see into the up-stairs rooms of people's
houses, and it was a delightful view we had of the procession. We had a
real good time until our elephant became frightened at a loud noise they
called music, and trumpeted dreadful loud. We wanted to get off, but our
elephant wouldn't kneel, and the man couldn't make him. Papa came, but
mamma said if we tried to get off 'twould only frighten him more. I was
real scared, and ready to cry; but mamma took hold of my hand, and spoke
just as pleasant as if we were at home, and I didn't think till
afterward how white she looked, nor about that man whose elephant ran
away with him last winter and killed him; but I guess mamma remembered
all the time, for pretty soon the noise passed by, and the men were able
to quiet the elephant, so he kneeled, and let papa help us down. And
when he took mamma, she fainted, and everybody said it was the fright;
but I didn't know she was frightened a bit. I must stop now, because the
Home Mail is going very soon; but if you like this, some time I will
write you again.

  JENNIE ANDERSON.




LITTLE COUSIN RANNA.

BY MRS. LUCY MORSE.


"Will and Almida Handly were rather sorry when they learned that their
little cousin Marianne Joy was coming to make them a long visit.

"She won't know a bumble-bee from a butternut," said Will. "City
children don't know anything, and she'll be awfully in the way. Won't
she tag after you and me, though, Almy?"

"Oh dear!" said Almy, in a complaining tone; "we'll have to keep her
every speck of washing and baking days."

"I wish they'd leave her where she belongs," said Will.

The children were silent awhile, and then Almy heaved a sigh, and said:
"I s'pose that's just the trouble, Will. If her mother has--has _died_,
where _does_ she belong? Where would you and I--"

"I know it," exclaimed Will, gruffly. "Come on, if you want me to help
fix up your old baby-house for her."

The day after Marianne came the children's feelings were altered.
Walking down the lane all together, the little cousin was dazzled by
buttercups, and ran hither and thither gathering them in such wild
delight that she came upon Dowsabell, the cow, unexpectedly. Dowsy only
raised her sleepy nose from the grass to sniff at the buttercups, but
Marianne dropped the whole bunch, with a cry of terror, and ran like
the wind to Will for protection. She flung herself upon him with such a
pretty confidence that Will took her right into his big boyish heart,
and wished on the spot that Dowsy was a raging lion, or, to say the
least, Neighbor Stethaway's cross bull.

"After all," he confided to Almida, "she's only a poor city child: what
can you expect? _I_ don't mind seeing to her."

"Laws, no," said Almida, with a matronly air. "And if her father's gone
to Europe, and every day is baking, or washing, or mending, or
something, who is there besides you and me for her to look to, I'd like
to know? Only you needn't think you're going to have more than just your
own half of the care-taking, Will Handly."

The mother looked on in silence, and understood perfectly the very
things which her children thought she had not noticed.

"At first I was troubled lest Will and Almy wouldn't notice the child,"
she said, one afternoon, to Mrs. Stethaway, as they watched the three
children crossing the opposite field. "Next I thought they would
tyrannize over her, and that Will would tease her to death."

"And now," said Mrs. Stethaway, "it looks as if they would neglect
everything just to follow her bidding. What are you going to do about
that?"

"Well," said Mrs. Handly, smiling after the children as they disappeared
among the daisies, "it isn't always that old folks know the best turn to
take. I'm going to see what the little one's course will be. It seems
very much as if my own two children were in the way of getting some
lessons in gentleness and self-forgetfulness from the poor little
motherless child, which I don't know so well as she does how to teach
them."

The children went through the field, the orchard, and over the bars into
the lane, through which Ria Bell was just driving the cows.

"Quick! quick! Oh! oh!" screamed Marianne, as soon as she saw the cows.

"Not that way; you're running right into the face of the enemy, Ranna,"
said Will, laughing, and taking hold of her as she was trying to climb
the bars.

But Ranna struggled, crying, "Get me over! get me over! I ain't 'fraid
of tows; it's the birds;" and was so excited that Will on one side and
Almida on the other lifted her into the lane as quickly as possible.

"Oh, goodness!" screamed Almy, as Ranna made a dive, right under
Dowsabell's very nose, toward a little mound of leaves. Crouching down
and spreading her arms over it, she looked up at Dowsy so savagely that
Will exclaimed, much amused: "Thunder and lightning! what has poor Dowsy
done? I thought you were afraid of her, Ranna, and now you look ready to
take her by the horns, and are frightened at two poor little robins
flying overhead."

"No, I ain't. Nor I won't mind Teazle even if he is going to bite
my--my--my head off," cried Ranna, pale with fright, as the dog ran his
nose into her face.

Will called Teazle away, while he and Almy tried very hard not to laugh.

"What have you got under the leaves?" asked Will, while Almy stooped
over Ranna, and said, tenderly,

"Show us your treasure, darling, and we won't tell Teazle, nor Dowsy,
nor anybody a word about it."

[Illustration: THE FALLEN NEST.--DRAWN BY S. G. MCCUTCHEON.]

Ranna sat up, brushed away the leaves, and took from under them a pretty
little nest full of young robins. "They're my own baby birds, and I
thought Dowsy would step on them," she said. "I found them just before I
ran to bring you, only the nest was in a great, ugly, dark bush, where
the poor little birdies couldn't feel any sun shinin', and I brung them
here, and tovered them with leaves, so the chittens wouldn't frighten
them while I was gone. What are those big birds flying round me for?
Tover my birdies up again; they are crying 'cause they are frightened."

"Hi! ho! hum! Harry!" exclaimed Will. "Those two birds are the excited
and anxious parents of your baby birdies, Ranna, and they feel just
about as comfortable as your father and mother would feel if a great
giant--" But Will remembered suddenly that poor little Ranna had no
mother, and, blushing fiery red, said: "I'm a good-for-nothing old
blunderbuss. You tell her, Almy; it's girl's talk, anyway."

Almy, with her arms around her little cousin, explained the situation.
Ranna eagerly pointed out the exact spot from which she had taken the
nest, and when Will had carefully restored it, watched with great
delight the old birds return to it.

"I'll never touch another nest in my life," she said; and holding one
arm tight around Almy's neck, she beckoned to Will with the other.
Putting it around him, she drew his head close down to Almy's, and
whispered: "_I_ don't think you're a _bundlefuss_, Will. I think you and
Almy know just as well how to take care of little birds when their papas
and mammas can't find them, as you do of little girls when their mammas
is--is--is lost. And I'm going to tell all the children in the world
that when they lose their mammas, the best thing they can do is to find
my cousin Will and my cousin Almy."




[Illustration: "I'S LEARNING TO SWIM, MAMMA."]




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.]


We wish to express to our young correspondents our sincere regret that
our limited space compels us to simply acknowledge so large a number of
the pretty letters which reach us daily from every part of the United
States. Do not think, because your letters are not printed, that we do
not consider them as well written or as interesting as those that are.
We are very sorry not to print all your little histories of your pet
dogs, and kittens, and birds, and other little domestic creatures, or
the excellent descriptions many of you write of the beautiful natural
scenery surrounding your homes; but if there is no more room in Our
Post-office Box, your letters can not be printed. We thank you heartily
for the pleasure you express in "Across the Ocean," "The Moral Pirates,"
"Miss Van Winkle's Nap," and other stories and poems; and the eagerness
with which you "run to meet papa when he brings home YOUNG PEOPLE" is
very gratifying. We trust you will continue your pretty favors to us,
and we, in return, will print all of your letters that we can possibly
make room for, and will promise to give you more and more pleasure with
every new number of YOUNG PEOPLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CAMP CARLING, WYOMING TERRITORY.

     I have wanted to write to the Post-office Box for a long time, but
     mamma said there were so many children writing that my letter
     would not be printed.

     We live in a camp, and see many curious things. When we look out
     of our windows, we see the _aparejos_, which are the saddles put
     on the mules when they are loaded. The saddles are arranged in
     long rows, with pieces of tent cloth thrown over them. Every day
     we see a great many mules going out and coming in. Then there is
     another queer thing. It is the "condemned heap." Almost every day
     my two little brothers go down to the pile and find a great many
     treasures. Every month lots of things from the warehouses are
     condemned, and brought to the heap to be burned. There are sixteen
     warehouses here, filled with government stores.

     A great many of the men who were in the first Ute fight under
     Major Thornburgh went from this camp, and we know some of those
     that were wounded.

     Every night and morning we hear the bugle-call that tells the
     soldiers when to get up, when to go to work, when to stop work,
     when to change guard, and when to go to bed. We always feel safe
     here, because we are guarded by soldiers.

  EDNA S. B.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEEDY, OREGON.

     I like to read the letters in the Post-office Box of YOUNG PEOPLE
     so much that I thought I would write one from 'way out here in the
     backwoods of Oregon. I live in the Willamette Valley, where we can
     see Mount Hood any time when the weather is clear. It is a
     glorious sight, especially in the evening just before sundown. In
     the winter and spring the mountain is hid behind clouds more than
     half the time. Sometimes the top of it will peep out above the
     mist. Then it looks so strange. It is considered to be nearly
     12,000 feet high.

  ESTELLE M.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA.

     It is so nice to have a new YOUNG PEOPLE every week. My papa is an
     artist, and I am going to be one too. I draw a picture from YOUNG
     PEOPLE almost every day, and I read about Rosa Bonheur, and Miss
     Thompson, and all the great painters.

     I have been to the Zoological Gardens. I rode the donkeys and the
     elephant, and I have made their pictures. I have a little Zoo in
     our back yard. I have a nice cat, two rabbits named Jack and Jill,
     and a turtle, and a fish in an aquarium that eats flies from my
     hands. My bird died, and papa painted its portrait. I called the
     picture "The Burial of the Dead Bird."

  M. ELECTA F.

       *       *       *       *       *

  OTTAWA, OHIO.

     I am nine years old, and for my birthday present mamma gave me one
     year's subscription to YOUNG PEOPLE, beginning with the first
     number. I like "The Moral Pirates" very much, and I was just
     wishing for a serial with girls in it, and the very next paper had
     the beginning of "Miss Van Winkle's Nap." I was delighted with it.
     I think the stories about Mr. Martin and Miss Pamela Plumstone's
     piano are so funny.

     As Fourth of July came on Sunday this year, we had no public
     celebration, but some of the children in our neighborhood got up a
     celebration of their own at our house. Mamma made the oration, and
     played the national airs on the piano, after which we had a
     parade. We all had paper caps, and we had a flag and a
     drummer-boy. My little two-year-old cousin Gordon brought up the
     rear of the procession, with a paper cap on, and as gay as any of
     us.

  BERTHA K.

       *       *       *       *       *

  JERICHO, LONG ISLAND.

     I am a little girl ten years old, and I have a sister one year
     younger. We have very nice times together.

     About a week ago my papa found a poor little bird with its wing
     broken. We took it home and fed it, and we thought it was getting
     better, but it died.

     I have seen some letters from the children about little turtles.
     Once we had one, and we used to dig worms for it to eat. It was in
     a globe, and once when we did not dig worms enough it ate the tail
     of one of the gold-fish.

     We tried Sadie McB.'s recipe for candy, and it was a success.

  M. J. L.

       *       *       *       *       *

  LOCKPORT, NEW YORK.

     I saw some letters in Our Post-office Box asking for remedies for
     songless canaries. We have used "Sheppard's Canary Powder, or Song
     Restorer," for our canary, and found it very beneficial.

  ALICE.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BRIDGEPORT, CONNECTICUT.

     My mamma raised four canaries this spring. The first one mamma had
     to feed, and it is very tame. We are training it to do tricks.
     When our birds are sick and do not sing, mamma gives them "Dr.
     Gunning's Universal Bird Tonic," and it always restores their
     song.

     I have two gold-fish. I did have three, but one died, and I buried
     it in the yard, under the Madeira vines.

  BLANCHE T. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA.

     I tried Louisa W.'s recipe for Everton taffy, only I added half a
     tea-cupful of water. I like it very much.

     Here is a recipe for white candy: Two cups of white crushed sugar;
     three-quarters of a cup of water; one table-spoonful of cream of
     tartar. Boil quickly, trying a little in water occasionally until
     it crisps. Then add half a tea-spoonful of soda. Pour it in a
     buttered pan until it is cool enough to pull. I am ten years old.

  MAY J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I love YOUNG PEOPLE very much. Soon as papa brings it home I read
     it to my two little sisters. We are very much interested in "The
     Moral Pirates." I am ten years old, and I go to school every day.
     Can any one tell me if the flamingo is of any use?

     Here is a recipe for the cooking club. Marble cake--light part:
     One and a half cups of white sugar; half a cup of butter; half a
     cup of sweet milk; the whites of four eggs; two and a half cups of
     flour; half a tea-spoonful of soda; one tea-spoonful of cream of
     tartar or one tea-spoonful of baking powder; beat the eggs and
     sugar together, mix the cream of tartar with the flour, and
     dissolve the soda in the milk. Dark part: One cup of brown sugar;
     half a cup of molasses; half a cup of sour milk; the yolks of four
     eggs; two and a half cups of flour; half a tea-spoonful of soda;
     half a tea-spoonful of clove and of cinnamon. Put a layer of the
     dark batter in the pan, then a layer of light, until the pan is
     full.

     I should like to exchange pressed flowers with any little girl in
     California.

  MYRTA GATES,
  Clarion, Wright County, Iowa.

Everything has its uses in the great economy of nature, and although we
can not always see why it is necessary for certain things to exist, we
may be sure that they were all created for some purpose. The flamingo,
however, is useful as an article of food. In certain parts of Egypt and
the East roast flamingo is considered very delicate eating, and in
ancient times a stew of flamingo tongues was a royal dish. It is also a
very beautiful bird. Travellers say there is no sight more magnificent
than a flock of scarlet flamingos wading in the green waving water
grasses, hunting for their breakfast in the morning sunlight. The
flamingo, if it could speak, might answer your question in the words of
Mr. Emerson, the poet:

  "Tell them, dear, that if eyes were made for seeing,
  Then beauty is its own excuse for being."

       *       *       *       *       *

  PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I am nine years old, and I wish to send the cooking club a recipe
     for "one-two-three-four cake": One cup of butter; two cups of
     sugar; three cups of flour; four eggs; half a cup of milk; the
     grated rind of one lemon; a pinch of salt; one tea-spoonful of
     royal baking powder.

  CLARA S. A.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEW YORK CITY.

     I have taken YOUNG PEOPLE from the first number, and I think it is
     a very nice paper. I like to read about the pets of the other
     children, and I will tell them about a pet cat I had when we lived
     in Chicago. Her name was Daisy, and as she was black and white, we
     thought it a pretty name for her. My little brother Jack had a
     pair of bantam chickens. One day when Daisy was asleep in the yard
     the rooster flew on her back and picked her left eye out. Grandma,
     who was in the yard at the time, told the cook to bring Daisy in,
     while she went for her feather and goose-grease, and put some on
     the wounded eye. The next day it was healed, but the sight was
     gone. Once when Daisy had some little kittens she put them in a
     hen's nest. When the hen came into the nest she would keep the
     little things quiet by pecking them on the head if they cried. The
     kittens and chickens grew to be great friends. They would eat out
     of the same dish, and when night came they would all go to the
     chicken-coop together. The kittens slept in the nest, and the
     chickens on the roost. Were they not a happy family?

  BESSIE G.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.

     I am very sorry I forgot the flour in my recipe for apple-cake in
     Post-office Box, No. 37. There should be enough prepared flour
     added to make a stiff batter. It is better to bake it in a shallow
     pan.

  L. GRACE P.

       *       *       *       *       *

  KEENE, NEW HAMPSHIRE.

     I think "Across the Ocean" was a splendid story. I read it all.
     But now I like "The Moral Pirates'" the best.

     I have forty-six pet rabbits. They all have black eyes and black
     ears. And I have two kittens which are very pretty. Their names
     are Tiger and Malt.

  WALTER H. P.

       *       *       *       *       *

     My sister and I have just tried Kitty G.'s recipe for
     butter-scotch, and found it very nice indeed.

     We are making a collection of postage stamps, and would like to
     exchange with any correspondents of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

  ALFRED HUSSEY,
  23 Hawthorn Street, New Bedford, Massachusetts.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange birds' eggs with any one living in the
     South or West.

  F. NOBLE,
  Milldale, Connecticut.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Lula Barlow can preserve eggs by piercing a small hole at each end
     of the egg, and blowing out the inside. Eggs can be sent safely by
     mail in a box filled with cotton.

     I would like to exchange postage stamps of different nations with
     any of those correspondents asking exchange, or with any other
     readers of YOUNG PEOPLE.

  HARRY DUBBS,
  229 West Chestnut Street, Lancaster, Pennsylvania.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange specimens of woods indigenous to this
     climate for those of other climates, specimens to be about three
     inches long by three-quarters of an inch thick, and to have a knot
     in them if possible. I have cypress, magnolia, mimosa, Cottonwood,
     althea, prickly ash, fig, crepe myrtle, sweet-gum, and black-gum.
     Correspondents willing to exchange will please send me a list of
     what woods they can obtain, and their full address.

  BERY C. BROWN, Jun.,
  P. O. Box 870, Little Rock, Arkansas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I am collecting postage stamps, and would be glad to exchange with
     any of the readers of YOUNG PEOPLE. I also have a collection of
     bugs.

  VERNON L. KELLOGG, Emporia, Kansas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have made the acquaintance of several boys who read YOUNG
     PEOPLE, through the Post-office Box, as I am collecting postage
     stamps. If others who have not yet written are doing the same, I
     would like to exchange with them. I wrote to Sidney St. W., but he
     has not yet answered me. I am eleven years old. My younger
     brother, Charlie, is collecting postmarks, and has already eleven
     hundred and seventy-five. He would like to exchange with any of
     the boys.

  LEWIS S. MUDGE,
  Princeton, New Jersey.

       *       *       *       *       *

     We have YOUNG PEOPLE, and like it very much. I would like to tell
     some of the boys and girls who live far away something about my
     home and pleasures. The name of my home is Baywood Lodge. It is
     within a stone's-throw of a beautiful sheet of water known as
     Hempstead Bay. We sail, row, swim, and fish, and we have horses,
     and enjoy riding horseback too.

     There is a camp very near us, in the woods. There are about thirty
     people, and they have five tents, and their horses.

     I would like to exchange foreign postage stamps with any boys who
     read YOUNG PEOPLE.

  ARTHUR LAWRENCE VALK,
  Baywood Lodge, Port Washington, Long Island.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I am making a collection of postage stamps, and I would like to
     exchange with any of the readers of YOUNG PEOPLE in Canada. I will
     exchange United States stamps for Canadian stamps.

  J. M. WOLFE, P. O. Box 423,
  Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania.

       *       *       *       *       *

H. P. C.--The quail builds its nest on the ground, among bushes or tall
grass. The nesting-time is early in June, and when you find ten or more
little white eggs, you may be sure the bird has commenced setting. The
eggs are about the size of a pigeon's egg, and pointed at one end like a
boy's wooden top. When the little birds are hatched they are as strong
as little chickens, and the mother bird takes them off to ramble about
the thicket in the same way as a hen leads her brood. The quail is a
plump grayish-brown bird, speckled with black and white. Its peculiar
whistle may be heard anywhere in the country all the long summer day.
Children often imitate the sound, and imagine that the quail is always
screaming "more wet"; and in truth the quail's note does resemble those
words, with a short, quick accent on the last sound, as if the bird was
constantly entreating nature for a refreshing summer shower.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. S. DAGGETT.--You do not need cards to play the geographical game. If
you wish, you can get blank cards, and write them yourself; but the game
is made more lively and instructive by leaving the answers to the
geographical knowledge and quick memory of the players.

       *       *       *       *       *

EDITH H. THOMAS.--Write directly to the correspondent you wish to
exchange with.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANNA M. R.--Many thanks for your description of the curious things
exhibited at the Nashville Centennial. We are sorry it is too long to
print.

       *       *       *       *       *

WAT H. T. M.--We acknowledge with thanks the account you send us of
Washington's birth-place, near which historical locality you live.

       *       *       *       *       *

Favors are acknowledged from Charles S. R., Rena and Frank Stearns,
Bessie Clark, Romeo and Juliet, W. W. Eaton, Charles L. B., Thomas H.
Van T., Katrina, Charlie D., Leila Mackay, Gracie D. Ely, Charley J.
Kennedy, Louis L. G., Mary W. W., V. Fannie L., Susie Mulholland, John
B. Maxwell, Asa M. Steele, Arthur McKeen, Lulu E., Charles C. M., Belle
Matteson, Annie H. R., John Leeper, Carrie B. Thompson, Albert Smith,
Eddie M., Freddie Hyers, Mary E. P., Alice Green, Carrie E. Riley,
Hallie S. Morgan, Louie Van A., Thad. B. Tobey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles are received from Alice Grady, "North Star,"
Benny W. L., Ermie Garden, Allie Mason, Eddie A. Leet, Ernest G. Young,
Fred Haswell, Marguerite Bucknall, Willard H. Francis, Willie and Henry
Western, Fred J. Purdy, Leon C. Bogart, Hugh Downing, Alson A. G., Clara
L. Kellogg, Sarah B., Willie T. B., Alice Williams, Willie C.,
"Dominus," Bessie Guyton, T. L. Drew, Mary L. McVean, George L. Osgood,
W. V. Fowler, K. R., Albert and Laura Ellard, Alfy G. Dale, Rebecca
Hedges.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

ENIGMA.

  One-third of sun, one-fourth of none,
  One-fifth of weary, one-sixth of dreary,
  One-third of oak, one-fifth of broke,
  One-fourth of kite, if read aright,
  And placed in line correct and true,
  Will give a city's name to you.

  A. B.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

DOUBLE ACROSTIC.

A beast. A chain of mountains in Asia. An eatable. To observe. Something
used in ancient warfare. Answer--Two wild beasts.

  H. F. P.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

NUMERICAL CHARADE.

  I am a large island lying far away toward the south pole, and am
    composed of 14 letters.
  My 9, 6, 4, 13, 3 is not small.
  My 10, 8, 12, 7 is food for beasts.
  My 1, 14, 11, 5 is a journey.
  My 10, 2, 13 is a fruit.

  KATIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

DIAMOND.

In leopard. Something all creatures do. A flexible substance. A number.
In tiger.

  W. D. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5.

WORD SQUARE.

First, congealed vapor. Second, a number. Third, formerly. Fourth, a
division of time.

  M. E. N.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 6.

ENIGMA.

  My first is in laugh, but not in cry.
  My second is in tall, but not in high.
  My third is in fig, but not in plum.
  My fourth is in speak, but not in dumb.
  My fifth is in yours, but not in his.
  My sixth is in been, but not in is.
  My seventh is in tame, but not in wild.
  My eighth is in infant, not in child.
  My ninth is in village, not in town.
  My whole was a general of renown.

  ADA.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN NO. 37.

No. 1.

Shark, hark, ark.

No. 2.

Diamond.

No. 3.

  D A S H
  A R E A
  S E A L
  H A L O

No. 4.

      T
    R A T
  T A R R Y
    T R Y
      Y

No. 5.

  C  hatha  M
  A  ncon   A
  S antande R
  P  otsda  M
  I  salc   O
  A    y    R
  N icaragu A

Caspian, Marmora.

No. 6.

Oliver Goldsmith.




ADVERTISEMENTS.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be issued every Tuesday, and may be had at
the following rates--_payable in advance, postage free_:

  SINGLE COPIES                     $0.04
  ONE SUBSCRIPTION, _one year_       1.50
  FIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS, _one year_     7.00

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY ORDER or DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

ADVERTISING.

The extent and character of the circulation of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
will render it a first-class medium for advertising. A limited number of
approved advertisements will be inserted on two inside pages at 75 cents
per line.

  Address
  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




PURE CIDER VINEGAR.

Steam Heating in Combination. Merchandise Broker. Ask for information.
=160 Fulton St., S. W. Corner Broadway, N. Y. A. ANNAN.=




OUR CHILDREN'S SONGS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Children's Songs. Illustrated. 8vo, Ornamental Cover, $1.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is a large collection of songs for the nursery, for childhood, for
boys and for girls, and sacred songs for all. The range of subjects is a
wide one, and the book is handsomely illustrated.--_Philadelphia
Ledger._

Songs for the nursery, songs for childhood, for girlhood, boyhood,
and sacred songs--the whole melody of childhood and youth bound in
one cover. Full of lovely pictures; sweet mother and baby faces;
charming bits of scenery, and the dear old Bible story-telling
pictures.--_Churchman_, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

HARPER & BROTHERS _will send the above work by mail, postage prepaid, to
any part of the United States, on receipt of the price_.




Harper's New and Enlarged Catalogue.

With a COMPLETE ANALYTICAL INDEX, and a VISITORS' GUIDE TO THEIR
ESTABLISHMENT,

Sent by mail on receipt of Nine Cents.

HARPER & BROTHERS, FRANKLIN SQUARE, N. Y.




ELEMENTARY EDUCATION.

Books for the School and Family.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENGLISH LANGUAGE.

SWINTON'S LANGUAGE PRIMER. Language Primer: Beginners' Lessons in
Speaking and Writing English. By WILLIAM SWINTON. A.M. 12mo, Half
Leather, 30 cents.

SWINTON'S NEW LANGUAGE LESSONS. New Language Lessons: an Elementary
Grammar and Composition. By WILLIAM SWINTON, A.M. 12mo, Cloth, 40 cents.

FOWLER'S ELEMENTARY ENGLISH GRAMMAR. An Elementary English Grammar for
Common Schools. By WILLIAM C. FOWLER, LL.D. 16mo, Half Leather, 53
cents.

FIRST LESSONS IN NATURAL HISTORY AND LANGUAGE. Entertaining and
Instructive Lessons in Natural History and Language for Primary and
Grammar Schools. 12mo, Cloth, 35 cents.

READING AND SPELLING.

READING WITHOUT TEARS. Reading without Tears; or, a Pleasant Mode of
Learning to Read. Illustrated. Small 4to, Cloth. By Mrs. ELIZABETH
MORTIMER. Two Parts. Part I., 42 cents; Part II., 53 cents; complete in
One Volume, 88 cents.

WILLSON'S PRIMARY SPELLER. The Primary Speller. A Simple and Progressive
Course of Lessons in Spelling, with Reading and Dictation Exercises, and
the Elements of Oral and Written Composition. By MARCIUS WILLSON.
Illustrated. 18mo, Half Bound, 15 cents.

WILLSON'S SPELLER AND ANALYZER. The New Speller and Analyzer. Adapted to
Thorough Elementary Instruction in the Orthography, Orthoepy, Formation,
Derivation, and Uses of Words. By MARCIUS WILLSON. 12mo, Half Bound, 34
cents.

WILLSON'S PRIMER. The School and Family Primer. Introductory to the
Series of School and Family Readers. By MARCIUS WILLSON. Illustrated.
12mo, Half Bound, 15 cents.

WILLSON'S FIRST READER. The First Reader of the School and Family
Series. By MARCIUS WILLSON. Illustrated. 12mo, Half Bound, 26 cents.

WILLSON'S SECOND READER. The Second Reader of the School and Family
Series. By MARCIUS WILLSON. Illustrated. 12mo, Half Bound, 37 cents.

WILLSON'S THIRD READER. The Third Reader of the School and Family
Series. By MARCIUS WILLSON. Illustrated. 12mo, Half Bound, 60 cents.

WILLSON'S FOURTH READER. The Fourth Reader of the School and Family
Series. By MARCIUS WILLSON. Illustrated. 12mo, Half Bound, 75 cents.

WILLSON'S FIFTH READER. The Fifth Reader of the School and Family
Series. By MARCIUS WILLSON. Illustrated. 12mo, Half Bound, $1.05.

HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY.

SCOTT'S (HARPER'S) SMALLER SCHOOL HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES. A
Smaller School History of the United States. By DAVID B. SCOTT. With.
Maps and Illustrations. 16mo, Half Leather, 60 cents.

DICKENS'S CHILD'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND. A Child's History of England. By
CHARLES DICKENS. Illustrated. 2 vols, in one, 16mo, Half Leather, 80
cents.

HARPER'S INTRODUCTORY GEOGRAPHY. Harper's Introductory Geography. With
Maps and Illustrations, prepared expressly for this Work by eminent
American Artists. Half Leather, Small 4to, 60 cents.

BONNER'S CHILD'S HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES. A Child's History of the
United States. By JOHN BONNER. A New Edition, Revised and Enlarged, and
brought down to the Close of the Rebellion and the Inauguration of
President Johnson. Illustrated. 3 vols., 16mo, Cloth, $3.75.

BONNER'S CHILD'S HISTORY OF ROME. A Child's History of Rome. By JOHN
BONNER. Illustrated. 2 vols., 16mo, Cloth, $2.50.

BONNER'S CHILD'S HISTORY OF GREECE. A Child's History of Greece. By JOHN
BONNER. Illustrated. 2 vols., 16mo, Cloth, $2.50.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




[Illustration: PLEASANT FOR JIM.

SMALL BOY. "Oh-ow-ow! Look out, Jim--here is a great b-b-b-big Bull-dog
coming at us!"]




MORE MIRTHFUL MAGIC.

BY W. B. BARTLETT.


THE BOOK PUZZLE.

The player agrees to let any person in the room turn over as many books,
one at a time, as desired, while he is out of the room, and promises to
tell you, upon his return, which book was turned over last. He goes out,
and comes back when the person who turned the books says, "Come in."
When he opens the door, he says, "You must stay outside while I find
out, so no one will suspect us of being in league with each other." The
one who turned the books is then shut out, and the other selects any
thin book, and leans it against the door, and says, "Come in." As the
door is opened, of course the book is turned over on the floor, and the
victim is told, "That is the last book you turned over."


THE NEWSPAPER TRICK.

Take a common newspaper or handkerchief, and request any one of the
company to place it on the floor so that two persons can stand upon it
at the same time, and neither be able to see or touch the other.

_Answer._--Place it across the door-sill, and let one stand upon it in
the entry. Then close the door, and ask the other to step upon the other
end in the room, and neither can see nor touch the other, for the door
prevents.


THE COW PUZZLE.

Tell the company that seven cows were walking in a straight line into a
narrow door, and say to them, "If you should ask the last cow, 'How many
pairs of horns are before you?' what would she reply?"

Some will answer, "One pair," and some, "Seven pairs," but after
puzzling them for a while, you can reply, "In the opinion of most
scientists, she would not say anything, for she could not speak, poor
thing!"


ANOTHER COW PUZZLE.

[Illustration]

Draw a square with a lead-pencil, and say, "Suppose this field was
inclosed with walls fifty feet high, without opening or possibility of
digging under, and a cow was in there, how could you get it out?"

_Answer._--Rub it out.




CHARADE.


  As by the fire the lovers sit,
  On rosy wings the moments flit;
  One little word confirms their bliss,
  And seals it with a loving kiss.

  That bliss they never could sustain
  Without my second's golden grain;
  Yet if it does attend their feet,
  Their daily walk is incomplete.

  My whole leaps forth from out the flame,
  Airy and light, but still the same;
  Showing a hard and common thing
  Made pure and white through suffering.




THE USEFUL SUNFLOWER.


In Southwestern Russia, between the Baltic and the Black seas, the
sunflower is universally cultivated in fields, gardens, and borders, and
every part of the plant is turned to practical account. A hundred pounds
of the seeds yield forty pounds of oil, and the pressed residue forms a
wholesome food for cattle, as also do the leaves and the green stalks,
cut up small, all being eagerly eaten. The fresh flowers, when a little
short of full bloom, furnish a dish for the table which bears favorable
comparison with the artichoke. They contain a large quantity of honey,
and so prove an attraction to bees. The seeds are a valuable food for
poultry; ground into flour, pastry and cakes can be made from them; and
boiled in alum and water, they yield a blue coloring matter. The
carefully dried leaf is used as tobacco. The seed receptacles are made
into blotting-paper, and the inner part of the stalk into a fine
writing-paper; the woody portions are consumed as fuel, and from the
resulting ash valuable potash is obtained. Large plantations of them in
swampy places are a protection against intermittent fever.




[Illustration: A NAUGHTY LITTLE DOG.

"You bad dog, you's done gone tore my bes' bunnit mos' to pieces. I's a
big min' to gib you a whippin' that you'll 'member. Yes, I has."]





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, August 3, 1880, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, AUG 3, 1880 ***

***** This file should be named 29066.txt or 29066.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/0/6/29066/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
