The Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoranda Sacra, by J. Rendel Harris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Memoranda Sacra

Author: J. Rendel Harris

Release Date: June 10, 2009 [EBook #29096]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORANDA SACRA ***




Produced by Al Haines










Memoranda

Sacra


BY

J. RENDEL HARRIS



FOURTH EDITION



HODDER AND STOUGHTON

LONDON

MCMVII




TO MY BELOVED IN CHRIST JESUS

It pleased God, in the days when we used to meet together in Cambridge
for His worship and for personal help, to draw us unitedly very close
to Himself, so that few of us are likely to forget the seasons of
refreshing which we enjoyed from His presence; and if, by His good
providence, any of us meet in these later days, one of the readiest
sentences to rise to our lips is the word, "Do you remember?"  The
papers which make up this little volume were originally designed to the
same end, the remembrance of one another, and of the truths which God
taught us.  How often were the pencilled notes of one and another put
into my hand after some bright and happy meeting, that a few copies
might be made and circulated!  It is more than fourteen years since
this was first done, and the latest fragment of this book is more than
ten years old.  You can see the creases of time in them, and, indeed,
they were never properly rounded.  Take them, however, collected and
reprinted, as a token (the only token I can give) that the moth and
rust of time have not eaten away the affection which I had for you all,
and that those two thieves, Change and Death, which were so early busy
with us, have not been able to undermine the house of our Love, nor
abstract the treasure of our common Faith.

J. RENDEL HARRIS.




CONTENTS


    I.  GOD THE GOD OF THE LIVING
   II.  BELIEVING AND BECOMING
  III.  GLEAMING AS CRYSTAL
   IV.  HEART ENLARGEMENT
    V.  HE RESTORETH MY SOUL
   VI.  ADDITION AND MULTIPLICATION
  VII.  A CONFERENCE ON DEATH
 VIII.  CHRIST WILL TAKE ALL
   IX.  STRONG CRYING
    X.  THE SENTINEL OF THE HEART
   XI.  THY FATHER IN SECRET
  XII.  TESTS OF FAITH, LOVE, AND RIGHTNESS
 XIII.  THE ETERNAL IDEA
  XIV.  MORE LIGHT
   XV.  OVER-OVERCOMING




GOD THE GOD OF THE LIVING



I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up.

Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He
also Himself likewise took part of the same; that through death He
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and
deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject
to bondage.

Who is like unto Thee, O most mighty LORD, for verily Thy truth is on
every side.  Whither shall I go from Thy Spirit, or whither shall I
flee from Thy Presence?  If I climb up into heaven, Thou art there.  If
I go down unto the dead, Thou art there also.  If I take the wings of
the morning and remain in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there
also shall Thy hand lead me, and Thy right hand shall hold me.
Therefore when I sleep in the grave, I am in Thy cradle; and when I
shall arise up and awake, behold around me are Thy everlasting arms.

  So not alone we land upon that shore:
  'Twill be as though we had been there before;
      We shall meet more we know
      Than we can meet below,
  And find our rest like some returning dove,
  And be at home at once with our Eternal Love.



I

GOD THE GOD OF THE LIVING[1]

"Now that the dead are raised, even Moses shewed at the bush, when he
calls the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob.  He is not a God of dead men, but of living men, for all live
unto Him."--LUKE xx. 37, 38.


It is very likely that some of us may have been perplexed in the study
of this passage at the answer which the Lord Jesus gave to the
Sadducees, and doubtful as to whether their difficulties and questions
were fairly met by the text that He quoted.

Certainly if we had been told to search the Scriptures for passages
bearing on the Future Life and the doctrine of the Resurrection, this
is about the last text that we should have thought of adducing; we
should never have detected in these verses a key that would unlock the
closed doors between two worlds and make sunlight be where previously
all was dark.

And even if we had been pointed to this passage containing the
revelation of God at the bush, we should probably only have seen in it
another of the magnificent affirmations of the Divine self-existence,
another of the grand "I Am's" which sound forth at times from the mount
of cloud and vision.  We might even have gone so far as to see how much
more wonderful it is to have a faith in which, with wonderful
simplicity, God says "I Am," than merely to have a religion which
affirms "He is," and we should have been glad that at any time there
were men to whom God spoke for Himself.  But we should not have
supposed that the statement had any bearing on our life and existence,
or that it solved, or put us in the way of solving, some of the
questions that perplex us.  Perhaps the principal reason for this lies
in the words of Jesus Himself: "Ye do not understand the scriptures nor
the power of God."  And yet ought we not to be aware of this, that
every revelation of God involves a revelation about the creature, just
as the earth is affected by every potency and virtue in the sun?
Revelation is not merely information about God, without relation to our
own life and being.  For instance: both the Spirit and the Scripture
combine to assure us that God is Love.  Is that merely a piece of
theological information about God of which the universe is independent,
or does He not in the revelation spread His wide pinions over all
creatures that He has made and gather them together as a hen doth
gather her brood under her wings?  Out of such a revelation the willing
soul discerns the New Jerusalem descend as a bride adorned for her
husband; the eager soul receives, the wayward soul returns, the
sorrowful soul is comforted.  No revelation of God is possible that is
simply information without a bearing on my history, my existence, my
future.  And so with our text we may say the "I Am" of God involves the
"I shall be" of the creature.  If one comes to me and says, "I was your
father's friend," it may be either (i.) that my father is dead, or
(ii.) that there has been a change in the affection of the person
speaking; but if he comes to me and says, "I am your father's friend,"
he implies two things: the existence of my father and the permanence of
his own love for him; and the one just as much as the other.  So when
God says, not "I was the God of Abraham," but "I am," etc., He is not
merely asserting His own existence and providence, but the continued
life of the faithful of ancient days.  And so the "I Am" of God
proclaims the "I am" of the creature; the soul looks down the sloping
years and says of its prospect, "God is, and I am."  And Christ's
answer to the Sadducee comes to this: "You are inconsistent in denying
the future life; you ought first to have denied the being of God; but
as long as He is, beat His saints small as the dust, scatter them to
the four corners of the earth, yet He will send forth His angels and
gather His elect again from the four winds, and lo! they are sitting
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God: for He is
not the God of dead men, but of living men; and all live unto Him!"

Those who believe in God can easily take heart to look through the
mysteries of life and death and to discern glory through the gloom; but
the Sadducee did not stand in the line of the sunbeams that come from
the other world; no wonder it was dark to him.

Not but what our life is full of mysteries: birth and death alike
perplex us; the "Whence" and the "Whither."

He who has studied well his coming and his going, has written out two
books of his Bible: the Genesis and Exodus of his book of life.

Birth and death are alike mysterious; they are something like the vails
of the ancient tabernacle, each curiously wrought of purple and scarlet
and fine twined linen, but the vail of the most holy place had in
addition cunning work and tracery of cherubim.  So with our birth and
dying--we may learn much from either; but death has the greater wonders
traced upon its vail, if we could but get into the right light to read
them.  There is this difference, too, that, while the first vail is
moved aside that we may enter, and closes behind us so that we may not
tell from whence we came, the second vail is not drawn back but rent
from top to bottom, so that we do not lose our sight of the world that
is when we are made a part of the world that is to come.

It is through this rent vail that we are looking to-day.

It has pleased God that the first-fruits of our meeting should be laid
upon the altar; He has called our dear Arthur Neale to Himself.
Already it has been said over him, "Ashes to ashes and dust to dust";
it remains for us to take up our testimony and say, "and soul to soul."

Dear Arthur Neale! it has been said that "one cross can sanctify a
soul," and he had many crosses; chiefest of all the fear of death.  He
was something like Bunyan's Mr. Fearing, only his fear was physical,
and not produced by doubts as to his final acceptance.  But it was
grand to see how, at the last, this fear of death, which is, in its
very nature, a solicitude for self, was transformed to care for others;
just before he passed away, he turned to the dear one watching beside
him and asked if she was afraid to see any one die.

Now let me read you a little about Mr. Fearing.

"When he was come to the entrance of the valley of the shadow of death,
I thought I should have lost my man; not for that he had any
inclination to go back: that he always abhorred; but he was ready to
die for fear....  But this I took notice of, that this valley was as
quiet when he went through it as ever I knew it before or since.  I
suppose these enemies had a special check from our Lord, and a
commandment not to meddle until Mr. Fearing was passed over it....
When he was come to the river, where was no bridge, he was again in a
heavy case.  And here, also, I took notice of what was very remarkable:
the water of that river was lower at this time than ever I saw it in
all my life.  So he went over, at last, not much above wet shod....  I
never had any doubt about him; he was a man of very choice spirit, only
he was always kept very low, and that made his life burdensome to
himself and troublesome to others."

He has sent us his last message: being asked if he had any word for
friends, he said, "Tell them all, it's all right."

It comforts me sometimes to believe that, as we advance in the Life,
the way becomes easier.  I believe this to be the case not only with
one who has death at his back, but with every one who walks faithfully
with God.  Jesus says, "My yoke is easy and My burden is light"; and I
think to those who follow Him faithfully He says, "My yoke is easier
and My burden lighter every day."

We learn to live with God until it becomes impossible to live without
Him; we learn to lean on Him, until we acquire an instinctive
abhorrence of all broken reeds.  We begin with cherubim and a flaming
sword that turns every way to keep the way of the tree of life; but we
end with the same flashing armoury turning us from every path except
that which leads to glory and honour and immortality and the city of
God.  We begin with "He shall give His angels charge against thee," but
we end with this, "He giveth His angels charge concerning thee, and in
their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy
foot against a stone."  Such guidance and keeping is heaven; such, too,
is heaven on earth.


I have kept a few of his letters from which I should like to read you a
few sentences:--


23_rd December_ 1878.

... Thoughts seem to go almost instinctively from the cold weather to
the apparent state of spiritual life in the congregations of which I
have been a very unwilling member (_i.e. pro tem., D. V._)--the latest
invention is a system of feeding souls on historical facts dressed up
in flowery English--perhaps this sounds harsh and resentful; perhaps
others have not found it such bad food after all.


9_th January_ 1879.

... I do not know that I can tell you anything more than is contained
in two sentences from the Chronicles of the Schoenberg-Cotta Family: "I
feel an atom--but an atom in a solid, God-governed world, where truth
is mightiest; insignificant in myself as the little mosses which
flutter on these ancient stones; but yet a little moss on a great rock
which cannot be shaken--the rock of God's providence and love."  "God's
common gifts are His most precious; and His most precious gifts--even
life itself--have no root in _themselves_; not that they are _without_
root: they are _better_ rooted in the depths of His unchangeable love.
Henceforth let me be content with the only security Dr. Luther says God
will ever give us--the security of His presence and care."  "I will
never leave thee."  And yet one longs to be less than moss, to be a
part of the rock itself; that it may not be I that live, but Christ
that liveth in me--that death might be swallowed up of life.


7_th March_ 1879.

... It seems that I'm beginning to learn that it is little use
expecting to get messages for others, or be able to help them or speak
a word in season unless "we make mention of them _continually_ in our
prayers," and give up trying to monopolise the Holy Ghost for
particular times; _i.e._ the Holy Ghost objects to being a respecter of
persons at any time.  It remains therefore to pray for you strongly
that you may be filled with a knowledge of His will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding quite up to the mark of "rejoicing alway," for
this is the will of God concerning us....  The verse that brings me
soonest to the self-despair point is this: "Herein is love with us made
perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, _because as
He is, so are we in this world_"; the standpoint of "workers together
with God" is a strong one--"it lifts, it bears my drooping soul."  To
do the will of God, surely this is to abide for ever....


8_th February_ 1880.

He begins with two Scripture quotations: one from the Septuagint--"the
Lord preserveth the infants," in the English "the Lord preserveth the
simple"; the other--"Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven."


It has been an experience of the past week, which I am now beginning
dimly to recognise, that the child and the child-spirit are necessary
elements of the presence of the kingdom--as necessary as they are for
_entrance into_ the kingdom.

And the kingdom consists in the keeping; in conscious, clearer, simpler
on-leading in the life of Christ.  I am kept because I am a child--when
I cease to be kept it is because I become a rebellious child; and of
this kingdom and peace there has been no end to-day--there is therefore
no hindrance (save a divided will) to its continuance, and thus one is
led into the faith of the Son of God--that _our brothers are not
orphans_, and that prayer and work must in this faith overcome the
world.

The grace of the Lord Jesus be present continually to energise in us
this faith, and to work in us all the good pleasure of His will.

----------

And so, beloved friends, with these words of his own we conclude our
testimony to him; we keep this Memorial of the Blessed Dead, not
sorrowing, as those do who have no hope; if we grieve at all, it is
that our love was so sparing of the spikenard wherewith we should have
anointed him to his burial.

----------

Requiescit in pace.

"Thou has made him most blessed for ever, Thou has made him exceeding
glad with Thy countenace."



[1] _In Memoriam, Arthur George William Neale, B.A. (St. John's
College), who passed through the veil 1st July 1880.  Aged 22 years._




II

BELIEVING AND BECOMING

"To as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons
of God, even to them that believe on His name."--JOHN i. 12.


John soon gets away from abstract theology and takes the soul up into
the mount of contemplation, from which it may discern the length and
breadth of the land of promise and privilege.  He knew that our faith
was not only "Emmanuel, God with us"; but that if we had the skill and
could read the word backwards, we might say,--"and we also with God."
He begins his Gospel, "the Word was with God "; he goes on, "the Word
was with man"; and then he completes the triangle by saying, "and man
also with God"; for "to as many as received Him, He gave power to
become the children of God."  And again, later on, in the seventeenth
chapter, we have the thoughts, "I in them," and "Thou in Me," and "they
also in Us," until one is left in a delightful perplexity as to the
nearness of God to His creatures, and obliged to say that--

  God is never so far off
    As even to be near;
  He dwells within, the spirit is
    The home He holds most dear.

His faith was not merely that the Word became flesh that He might bring
God to us, but the Word living and suffering that He might bring us to
God; His religion not merely the humiliation of the Creator, but, in a
very real sense, the exaltation of the creature and practical union
with the Lord of the spirits of all flesh; not only that He for our
sakes became poor, but also, that we through His poverty might be made
rich.  It is into this riches of our inheritance that we want to look
this evening.

Do we know what it is to have not only a heaven in prospect but also
one in possession, and to see in Christ a High Priest of good things
present as well as of good things to come?  It seems to me that in this
passage the Religion of Jesus is presented to us in two lights: (i.) as
believing and receiving; (ii.) as believing and becoming.  Some people
stop short with believing and do not receive.  But our faith is
certainly an appropriative faculty; a sort of hand of the soul that can
be stretched out to take hold of God's offered gifts; or to link itself
on to God's hand outstretched to guide us.  Of what use would a hand be
that never grasped anything?  Perhaps some promise stands out before
us, telling us His Mind, or it may have been impressed upon us by His
Spirit.  Even from a weak faith we can obtain promises; because faith
apprehends the nature of God; and as soon as we begin to apprehend
that, we see that certain things ought to happen, and ere long these
things shape themselves into definite promises which faith applies.  So
the life is one of believing and receiving; and as our faith pleads the
promises, and the appropriative power of the soul is exercised, we find
the kingdom of God come to us not in word but in power.  But our
religion is also believing and becoming; "that as many as received Him
might become the children of God, even those who believe in His name."
Much of our faith, so-called, is only a beating of the air, and not
really an advancement of the soul; we profess a great deal which has no
practical bearing on our own lives.  Yet all true believing is
becoming, and a man cannot be a follower of the Lamb, in the real sense
of the term, without his becoming moment by moment a different man; he
alters his stature, not indeed by taking thought thereunto, but even as
the lilies grow; and adding together the receiving and the becoming, we
find that we are the children of God.

Hence it appears that our faith is not a single definite act, done, and
done with; but one done and gone on with.  And our faith is to be not
only definite, but progressive and increasing, leading us from grace to
grace, from strength to strength, and from glory to glory.

If we take a stranger to view the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge, it
is possible that he will say that the outside is the finest part of it,
and that it looks best from a distance; or he may say that the
entrance-hall, with its display of coloured marbles and polished
granite, is the best part of the museum.  Certainly there are many that
look at Christianity in this manner; thinking it perhaps a magnificent
ideal of life, especially as seen in history; or perhaps as seen at
some distance, as we view Sunday from the other days of the week.  And
others there are who think that the entrance of the Christian life is
the best part of it, who say honestly from experience that the
beginning of the life was the best for them.  The reason being that
they stopped there; otherwise people never could think that the
happiest part of the life was that immediately consequent on
conversion; for in reality the path of the just is a shining light,
that shines more and more unto the perfect day.  It is not like one of
those ancient Egyptian temples of which one reads, in which we pass
from daylight to shade as we enter, and into deeper gloom as we
approach the secret shrine.

The life of faith--progressive, increasing faith--is a motion in a
straight line, and not in a closed curve; it is not like an Irish
penance around a sacred well where one makes progress with the final
result of being where you started, and, perhaps, ready for another
revolution, as, indeed, it must appear to some Christians whose circle
is a week and whose starting-point a Sunday.  Neither is it like the
pilgrimage up Pilate's staircase at Rome, in which the pain of going up
on one's knees is only varied by the discomfort of coming down again
and finding ourselves just about where we were before, as it must
appear to some good people who live the up-and-down life.  It is an
upward and onward life; on our knees, if you will, but upward and
upward and, like the stairs in Ezekiel's vision, still upward.  And the
Scriptures encourage us forward, bidding us leave the word of the
beginning of Christ and go (not crawl) on unto perfection.

"He gave the power to become the children of God"; the margin suggests
"right" or "privilege."  Theologically this seems a high calling; but
we are not to deny things because they are high.  "The devil's darling
sin is the pride that apes humility," and this affectation of humility
is one of the ways in which souls are constantly kept out of blessing;
it has been so throughout the history of the Church.  In the matter of
the forgiveness of sins, it is not so long since people said that if a
man knew his sins were forgiven, it would make him conceited; and some
people still hold it to be a presumption; at other times that eternal
life, which consists in the knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ whom
He has sent, is denied; because it is presumptuous for a man to say
that he knows God in the same simple matter-of-fact way that he is
acquainted with a friend.  And nowadays this spiritual affectation
takes the form of the denial of holiness, because, if you were kept
from sin, you would be sure to be proud of it; as if God were likely to
humble a man and make his heart a temple of His own, and then suffer
him to be lifted up over the fact.  They do not seem to see the
contradiction.  The Lord is pretty sure to humble us a good deal before
He gives us anything to be proud of.  People say it is presumptuous to
be "blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke," and more
humble--to be something else.  Humility is one of those things that lie
right in the line of our obedience; or, as a dear friend once said to
me,--"the righteousness I am striving after, includes humility."

It is a false humility that refuses those good things which God has
laid up for those who love Him.  The true humility says, when the Lord
has made a feast and bidden His guests, "I shall go and take the lowest
place"; but the affected humility says, "Oh! it's too good for me; I
shall sit down outside"; and so, practically, it becomes numbered
amongst those of whom it is said, "They shall not taste of My supper."
We need to be like Paul, ready to take our place amongst the saints,
though less than the least of them; or it may be among the apostles,
though not worthy to be called an apostle.

God gives us power for what He wants us to be; _i.e._ power for the
next step; and all our future life is conditioned upon that.  We say,
"Increase our faith," and He says, "Exercise the faith you have."  We
must exercise the lower power before we attain to the higher.  Suppose
there is a powerful steam-engine which is able to do for you a year's
work in a day: it is a reservoir of power, but the power is conditioned
upon the exercise of a lower power; you must bring coals and fetch
water and make up fire, and by and by the power becomes accessible to
you.  He that is faithful in least is faithful also in much; we must be
faithful to the light already given us, faithful to our powers of love,
thought, and obedience, if we are to be brought to the reception of the
power in which saints have walked.

Using the marginal suggestion, we have the _right_ given us to be
children of God.  We hear much nowadays of people standing on their
rights,--on rights real and rights imagined; we have our rights against
the enemy of souls; oh! that we would insist on them, and that we would
realise how the powers of darkness fly when we look to God bravely and
confidently for the promised help.

What is involved in thus becoming a child of God?  Well, for one thing,
God is pledged to love us just as much as He loves Christ.  We
sometimes get the idea into our minds that God loves us in a sort of
afterthought manner, as a superfluous or unnecessary part of creation.
I have found out that He loves us just as much as He loves Christ;
Jesus Himself said--"Father, Thou hast loved them as Thou hast loved
Me."

Was Christ's consciousness of the love of God a mere wavering thing,
perhaps known only at critical times; or was it not rather His vital
breath and native air?  "I will that they also whom Thou hast given Me
may be with Me where I am"; and "the only-begotten Son is in the bosom
of the Father."

Another side of this privilege is that we may be kept from sin.  Three
passages I call to mind in which the children of the Highest are spoken
of: one is in Matt. v. 45: "That ye may be the children of your Father
which is in heaven."  It goes on--"Be ye therefore perfect, even as
your Father in heaven is perfect."  Another is in 2 Cor. vi. 18; "I
will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be My sons and My daughters,
saith the Lord God Almighty."  It goes on--"Having these promises,
dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord."  The
third is in 1 John iii. 1: "Behold what manner of love the Father hath
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God"; and the
best reading continues--"and we are so"; it continues with "purifieth
himself as He is pure," and "he that abideth in Him sinneth not."

Finally, does it seem a contradiction in terms to talk of becoming a
child?  it is indeed hard to turn the streams of life backward and make
them return to their source: a long way back, too, for some of us;
again we take comfort from the Scripture, and remember that "when he
was yet a great way off, his father ran and fell on his neck and kissed
him."




III

GLEAMING AS CRYSTAL

"And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, gleaming as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb."--REV. xxii. 1.


If we are to understand the New Jerusalem properly, we almost need to
have been citizens of the _Old_.  On this subject, even more than in
the general interpretation of the Scriptures, we are entitled to answer
the question--"What advantage then hath the Jew?" with an unhesitating
expression of "much every way"; for unto them pertained the city of
God.  For example, when we read, in Galatians, the passage in which St.
Paul speaks of the old Covenant, under the terms "Agar" and "Mount
Sinai in Arabia," who but those who had felt the galling of a foreign
yoke, and the insolence and exaction of Roman tyranny, could have
realised the pathos of the words "and correspondeth to Jerusalem, which
now is, and is in bondage with her children"; and what citizen of the
New and Spiritual City, who had not also dwelt within the ancient and
outward walls, could have felt the full contrast expressed in the
triumphant thanksgiving that "Jerusalem, which is above, is free"?  In
the same way, if one would understand the magnificent passage in which
the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews describes the New Jerusalem,
one would need to have worshipped within the courts of the Old.  How
else can one see the lines traced in the picture, and mark the analogy
between the multitude of white-robed priests and the innumerable
company of angels; or see the general assembly of folk gathered for
festival from all parts of the land? here, too, are the consecrated
eldest-born, and here the rolls in which their names are entered; and,
passing within the veil, even in ancient days, one might say, in some
sense, "We are come to God the Judge of all, and to Jesus the Mediator
of the covenant, and to the Blood of sprinkling."  So you will
understand that the best place to view the New Jerusalem from is the
ruins of the Old.  It is in this spirit that we want to study the
gleaming waters "that make glad the city of God."

Observe, then, that the ancient Jerusalem was not situated, as most
cities, on the banks of some river, or the shore of some sea.  It stood
in a peculiar position, at some distance from either: it was badly
watered; we read of a pool or two, of a little brook, of an aqueduct
and some other artificial water-structures.  Bearing this fact in mind,
you will understand how forcible an appeal to the imagination would be
contained in the verse of the 46th Psalm, which tells of a river that
should "make glad the city of God."

In evidence of the foregoing you may notice the following remark of
Philo on the verse quoted (_de somniis_, ii. 38); "The holy city, which
exists at present, in which also the holy temple is established, is at
a great distance from any sea or river, so that it is clear that the
writer here means figuratively to speak of some other city than the
visible city of God."  It is evident, therefore, that the mention of a
pure, fresh stream flowing through the midst of Jerusalem was a figure
of a very striking nature; and we say, that the basis of this
magnificent description in the Apocalypse lies in the insufficiency of
the water-supply of the ancient city.  God takes our outward
necessities and uses them as figures by which to make us alive to the
facts of our inward neediness, and of the abundant power that there is
in Him to satisfy us.  The Bible is full of promises as outwardly
impossible as that a river should flow through the midst of Jerusalem.
The streams of life, the floods of holy influence, the manifestations
of Divine grace, shall be for you like that imagined river; and however
difficult it may be to believe such a heaven on earth as that indicated
to be possible--

  Faith, mighty faith, the promise sees,
   And looks to that alone;
  Laughs at impossibilities,
   And cries--"It shall be done."

The life of the future, and by that we mean heaven on earth as well as
heaven, shall be as different from that which you are now realising as
the water-supply of Jerusalem would be if a river flowed in the midst,
from what it is now with merely Kidron and Bethesda and Siloam and
Solomon's Pools.  So we say (i.) that the Life is not a half-stagnant
pool, like Siloam; nor (ii.) an intermittent fountain, like Bethesda;
nor (iii.) an artificial construction, like Solomon's aqueducts; nor
(iv.) a poor weak puny stream, defiled by the city through which it
passes, like the brook Kidron.

(1) It is not a standstill life: no one can stand still who lives with
God.  If God is the fountain of your life, there will be no green
mantle on the surface telling how long you have been in one place.
Neither in earth nor in heaven do we stand still or stay where we are.
Take up the anchor and the ship follows the tide, and in God the tide
always sets one way.  You cannot stand still without anchoring to the
creature.  There must be fresh discoveries of truth and duty every day;
and fresh inquisition made into the heights and depths of Redeeming
Love.  Abandonment to God must mean advancement in God.

  They who love God cannot love Him by measure,
  For their love is a hunger to love Him still better.


(2) Neither in earth nor in heaven is the Life to be an intermittent
one.  Some have said that the pool of Bethesda was connected with one
of those intermittent springs that one sometimes comes across, and have
explained by that means the periodical disturbances in the waters.
There is one of these springs pointed out on the road from Buxton to
Castleton in Derbyshire, but it showed no signs of anything
extraordinary when I was there.  However, whether Bethesda is of this
nature or not, it is certain that the spiritual life of many believers
is too much of the character of an intermittent spring.  I want to tell
you that there should be no such word as "revival" in the dictionary of
the Christian Church: we want "life," not "revival."  You hear people
saying of certain religious movings--"They are having quite a revival";
alas! and were they dead before?  Indeed, I am sure this intermittent
fountain expresses only too accurately the lives of many of us.  The
best that God can do with us is to make us an occasional blessing--a
sorrowful thing to confess when there are suffering ones around waiting
and watching the surface of our hearts to see whether there is any
moving of the water.  I think, therefore, to tell you the secret of the
intermittent spring.  Every such spring is fed from an inner chamber in
the rock in which the rains accumulate; but it is only as long as the
water is above a certain level that the outward flow is maintained.  If
the inner chamber be kept full, the outward supply will be constant.
And we know, apart from our figure, that when the inner life is renewed
day by day, the outward is no longer an intermittent spring, but an
overflowing cup.

Neither in earth nor in heaven has a Christian a right to go below
"par" in his spiritual life.  I have been trying to imagine what it
would be in heaven if angels were to neglect the influx of vital force
that comes from the throne of God and of the Lamb; if at any time they
were to feel not up to singing-mark or service-mark, what a strange
heaven it would presently be; and what strange music with notes
wanting,--sometimes in the air and sometimes in the bass.  We know,
however, that the real character of their life and service is not
intermittent, but is expressed in the words, "They rest not day nor
night, saying, 'Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts.'"

(3) It is not a life for which the world is too strong, and which
cannot therefore be kept pure.  It is not figured by a little brook, as
Kidron, defiled with all the impurities of a city, and that an oriental
city.  And yet how many lives there are of which we have to say, "The
world is too strong for them"; well-intentioned people, but feeble in
grace, and who have received but little of the Life of God.  The cup
was indeed put into their hands, but they were afraid to drink deeply,
though the voice by their side was saying, "Drink abundantly, O
beloved."

They drink down to the level of forgiveness, and, perhaps, grace; but
not down to glory and the receiving of the Spirit; they do not realise
that "he that drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never
thirst"; they do not overcome the world; one has almost to make a fresh
text for them,--"This is the defeat wherewith they are worsted, even
their little faith."

(4) It is not a humanly-devised life, as Solomon's aqueducts.  Our
faith stands not in human structures; not in the Westminster
Confession; not in the XXXIX. Articles.  It stands not in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God.  The Divine Life is not sect, and it is
not system.  What is your sect?  A pipe whose power of supply is
limited by its diameter; whatever we can learn from the maxims and
traditions of men, is but a little compared with what we may learn from
God directly.  The channel of a sect! it is a pipe that bursts when the
tide of life rises beyond a certain point.  The channel of a system! it
is an aqueduct through which, if one stone be taken out, the water
ceases to reach you.

  Our little systems have their day;
   They have their day and cease to be;
   They are but broken lights of Thee;
  And Thou, O Lord, art more than they.

If one travels on the continent, one can see (I think it is at Avignon)
the ruins of the ancient Roman aqueduct; but the Rhine and the rest of
the rivers of God flow on still, full of water.

  Let names and sects and parties fall,
  That Jesus may be all in all.

As we learn to live the life of dependence upon the Lord, we must not
be surprised if a great deal of our early theology drops off: it does
not always sit down with us in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
Instead of Solomon's pools and aqueducts there is given to us a pure
river of water of life, gleaming as crystal, proceeding out of the
throne of God and of the Lamb; and I think we may say of those who
receive the life of God in this immediate and wonderful manner, that
"not even Solomon, in all his glory, was so well supplied as one of
these."

Finally, we may say, that the Life is one of absolute dependence, and
is conditioned on the sovereignty of God and of the Lamb.  Grace and
the Holy Ghost are the portions of the dependent soul: they only flow
from the throne of God and of the Lamb.  I am amazed to find how much
of true religion may be resolved into that one word "dependence."  I
can remember the time when I could not enter into the Psalm, "Lord, my
heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise myself
in great matters, nor in things too high for me"; nor sing the verse,
"I would be treated as a child, and guided where I go."  Now it is, I
hope, different.  Moreover, we are sure that this spirit of dependence
is one of the main features of the angelic life; we cannot imagine it
otherwise; for the source of the river is the throne.

We sang in our hymn the lines--

  I know Thou hast my heart,
   And I have heaven;

but we can only sing the second line where we have said or sung the
first.




IV

HEART ENLARGEMENT

"I will run the way of Thy commandments, when Thou shall enlarge my
heart."--Ps. cxix. 32.


If we were to study the names of the different sects and parties that
make up the "Ishmael" of God, we should find them to be singularly
unsuggestive of such a thing as the existence of a spiritual life; nor
could we easily infer from the nomenclature of so-called Christendom
that "there is a spirit in man, and that the inspiration of the
Almighty giveth him understanding."  Now, this is a very curious fact;
for one would have expected that about the first thing suggested by the
appellations of Christian bodies would have been some phase or other of
the inward life.

But we are not going to spend our time to-night in discussing sects, or
deploring their divisions, although we cannot altogether refrain regret
when we contemplate the seamless robe of Christ rent into more than
twain, and dabbled in blood worse than Joseph's coat was when his
father said, "Some evil beast hath devoured him"; and although it does
seem to us sometimes, as we contemplate the havoc of schisms and strife
of sects, as if some convulsion from beneath had shaken down the towers
of the New Jerusalem, and streams from the nether fires had coursed
down the channels of the river of life.  What we want to do is to think
a little about the true Broad Church; not that branch of Christianity
which commonly goes under the name, and which makes one of the
instances referred to of the unsuitableness of names applied to
religious schools and parties, but the spiritual Broad Church, which is
the church of enlarged hearts.  The school we want to belong to is the
school of spiritual free-thinkers, who are at liberty to learn all that
God has to teach them.  The true Broad Church is that in which an
enlarged obedience to God's commandments is brought about by an
enlarged experience of His love; and His commandments and His love are
both of them exceeding broad.

All true spiritual life must widen the soul; the more we live with
Jesus, the more impossible will it be for any of us to be narrow.  Our
littleness takes refuge with God, and His greatness makes its abode
with us; we bring Him our unworthiness and He imparts to us His
righteousness; we offer to Him our hearts barren of sympathy and
deficient in affection, and presently we find the love of God shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost that is given to us.

Thus, when acquainted with God we cannot be really narrow; they might
as well call the Lord Jesus Christ narrow.  We want to be as broad in
our sympathies and in our views as He was; and neither broader nor
narrower.

True spiritual life will widen the soul in its _possessions_, its
_perceptions_, its _will_, and its _love_; it will extend our powers of
_having_, of _knowing_, of _willing_, and of _loving_; and, in one or
other of these four, most of our life is included.

(1) How very little we possess, both in outward and inward things.
This is one of the points in which we are disposed to agree with the
saying that the circumference of our circle is very near to the centre.
We can grasp very little.  Our hands are small and the world is large.

"Tell me how I can make my broad acres more broad," is the request of
the rich man.  "Tell me how I can make my narrow holding less narrow,"
is the cry of the poor.  But a life in God makes us rich, for "all
things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or
life, or death, or things present or things to come;--all are yours;
and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's."  "Blessed are the meek; for
they shall inherit the earth."  "There is no man that hath left house,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands, for My sake and the Gospel's, but he shall receive an
hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world
to come eternal life."

And Madame Guyon says, "Have I not infinitely more than a hundredfold,
in so entire a possession as Thou my Lord hast taken of me, in that
unshaken firmness which Thou givest me in my sufferings, in a perfect
tranquillity in the midst of a furious tempest that assails me on every
side, in an unspeakable joy, enlargedness, and liberty which I enjoy in
a most strait and rigorous captivity?"

(2) How trifling is our knowledge!  Yet fewer people will assent to the
lack of knowledge, for many think they know a good deal.  As in the
times of Socrates, it is only the wise man who knows he knows nothing.
And yet how little we know!  We know but little of things in this
world, with all our sciences and study, and we know much less about
God, and glory, and immortality, and the spirits which live outside the
tent of this mortal flesh, or of any of those things which "eye hath
not seen, nor ear heard."  And with all our books of theology and
treatises on spiritual life, we are almost obliged to say that "all is
less than nothing and vanity."  But we believe that for those whom God
enlarges, there is an unspeakable increase in the perceptive powers of
the soul: they are taught things that no one else knows anything about,
and that are hidden from the wise and prudent.  There is knowledge for
the simple and lowly ones; for those who, in the spiritual strength
they have derived from God, run in the way of His commandments.
Looking into the Father's face, and into the Saviour's heart, the soul
can say, "This is life eternal, to know Thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent."  And with the knowledge there comes
the aspiration that we, "being rooted and grounded in love, may be able
to comprehend with all saints," and to beseech for all souls, "the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of
Christ, which passeth knowledge."  And again it is said, "Ye have an
anointing from the Holy One, and ye know all things."  Is this a little
knowledge?  All things are possible to you in possession and in
perception.

(3) How little is our _will-power_.  We often want to do right, and the
force of habits or of grooves is too strong for us.  We have not enough
momentum to carry us out or enough moral force to deny the past and to
assert the future.  Constantly rises up in judgment the days that have
been; and when looking at the blessed vision of God of the days that
shall be, the past rises up and says, "It is not for you"; and we have
not power to deny this, and to believe in God that He will work all the
good pleasure of His will in us.  It seems almost impossible for us
ever to become saints.  When we get to understand a little about
righteousness and holiness, we do feel utterly inadequate to choose
such a righteousness, or to compel ourselves to live out such a
holiness.

The only remedy is the Divine enlargement of heart which comes from the
visitation of the Spirit.  We carry our brokenness to God; we put our
helpless will at His feet, and He energises it, and sends us back from
the altar-steps, or from the glory where we have met with Him, able to
say, "I _delight_ to do _Thy_ will, O my God."

And although for each one of us there will be a Gethsemane, "a place of
tears," as there was for the Master, yet we shall come through with our
will unbroken, because it will be the will of God strong within us.

(4) How small is our capacity for loving or forgiving.  Many think they
have capacity for an infinite love, and would be able to exhibit it if
they could find a worthy object.  But I believe our love is a strictly
measurable quantity, and dependent on the state of grace we are in.
Only those who have the Spirit within them, energising them, can truly
love at all.  Again, we fall at the Lord's feet, and tell Him we have
no power even to be civil to some people, much less to love them;
scarcely power to put up the weapons of revenge against some; and even
to those whom, like the publicans and Pharisees and sinners, we love
because they love us, we have not been able to make an adequate return
for the love they have lavished upon us.  Then God teaches us that
there lies in Him the power of enlarging the human affections, and He
enlarges our hearts that we, "being rooted and grounded in love,"--not
only in the experimental realisation of His love to us, but also in the
experimental living out of our love to Him, and to all that He has made
and given us,--are able to "run the way of His commandments."  For that
is His new commandment, "that we love one another."  Our practical
state will depend on the enlarging of our hearts.  We talk of
large-hearted people, but they are not so by nature in the sense God
wishes.  It needs a Divine operation and a definite Divine experience
to enable us to live out the law of the New Testament.

Thus to _do_ more, we must first of all _be_ more.  This is the Gospel
way all through.  God never teaches us that we are to _do_ and
afterwards to _be_.  What preachers tell you about dead works means
simply that it is a mistake for us to try to do before we have learned
to be.  You may see a little child trying to lift a heavy weight, and
you tell it that it must wait till its muscles are stronger: it must
wait till it has _become_.  This was the way at the beginning in
conversion: "dead works" means that in us there does not dwell force or
power to lift the great weight of the commandment or righteousness of
God; hence they are useless or stupid works.  When you find in your
heart your inability to fulfil the Divine commandment, and have not the
strength and power you want, though all day trying to lift the heavy
weight, you come to God and say, "It is plain that, as I am, I cannot
live out this righteousness, and I come for a new life to live it out.
I must have Thine own strength."  Then we understand our Lord's saying,
"Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God."

You have lived this out in some way since you were converted; but you
have not realised enough the more blessed life; you know a little of
walking in the way, but running in the way brings you face to face with
something outside your strength and power.  It is no use to try and do
work which needs a stronger man, unless we can become stronger men.
Many make a mistake here; they are trying to live out holiness before
they have got the heart-enlarging.  But it is no use our trying to be
holy, until God makes us holy.  We try to take the first part of the
verse alone, and then we break down.  "My heart breaks down: I can
never be a runner."  You are trying to live out His commandments,
without having the visitation of the enlarged heart; you must get on to
definite dealings with God for a visitation of the Spirit; when He has
come, you will have the strength and peace of God with you.  It seems
to me painfully sad to hear people sorrowing: "I know it is my
privilege, but I cannot make it real; and although one can sometimes do
little acts of mercy, or even attain to humble acts of faith, the life
does not flow on naturally and simply."  And _it will not_, unless you
have an experience at the back coming out of His visitation.

To do more we must be more; get a new master, be a new man; get a new
experience, and you will be a new Christian.

All writers who have spoken of the advanced spiritual life have taught
that there is an enlargement of the soul, and they use the strongest
language possible.

So we find Madame Guyon saying:--

"This vastness or enlargedness which is not bounded by anything,
however plain and simple it may be, increases every day; so that my
soul in partaking of the qualities of her spouse, seems also to partake
of his immensity."--_Madame Guyon_, vie. ii. 4.


And Philo:--

"Having broken the chains by which it (the soul) was formerly bound,
which all the empty anxieties of mortal life fastened round it, and
having led it forth and emancipated it from them, he has stretched, and
extended, and diffused it to such a degree that it reaches even the
extreme boundaries of the universe, and is borne onwards to the
beautiful and glorious sight of the uncreated God."--_Philo_, de
ebrietate, 37.


So in Dr. Cudworth's sermon, which was printed some time ago:--

"When we have cashiered this self-will of ours, which did but shackle
and confine our soules, our wills shall then become truly free, being
widened and enlarged to the extent of God's own will."--_Cudworth_,
Sermon before the House of Commons, p. 21.

"There is a straitnesse, slavery, and narrownesse in all sinne; sinne
crowds and crumples up our souls, which, if they were freely spread
abroad, would be as wide and large as the whole universe.  No man is
truly free but he that hath his will enlarged to the extent of God's
own will, by loving whatsoever God loves, and nothing else....  He
enjoys a boundlesse liberty and a boundlesse sweetnesse, according to
his boundlesse love.  He enclaspeth the whole world within his
outstretched arms, his soul is as wide as the whole universe, as big as
yesterday, to-day and for ever.  Whosoever is once acquainted with this
disposition of spirit, he never desires anything else; and he loves the
'life of God' in himself, dearer than his own life."--_Id._, p. 56.


And finally in the _Imitatio Christi_:--

"They that willingly and freely serve Me shall receive grace for grace.
But he who desires to glory in things out of Me, or to take pleasure in
some private good, shall not be grounded in true joy, nor be enlarged
in his heart, but shall many ways be encumbered and straitened....  And
if heavenly grace enter in and true charity, there will be no envy nor
narrowness of heart, neither will self-love busy itself.  For Divine
charity overcometh all things and enlargeth all the powers of the
soul."--_De Imitatione Christi_, iii. 9.


We conclude, then, that self can never measure the length and breadth
of the Divine love, and run in the way of His commandment.  We need God
to make us understand God; we must be in union with Him in order to
obey Him.  Distances on the earth may be measured by a foot-rule or a
surveyor's chain, but to measure the spaces between the stars we must
have a base-line in the sky.  Only by being partakers of the Divine
nature can we live out the Divine life; and no man knoweth the Father
save the Son, and He to whom the Son will reveal Him.




V

HE RESTORETH MY SOUL

"So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of
Jonas, lovest thou Me more than these?  He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord;
Thou knowest that I love Thee.  He saith unto him, Feed My lambs.

"He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest
thou Me?  He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.
He saith unto him, Feed My sheep.

"He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me?
Peter was grieved because He saith unto him the third time, Lovest thou
Me?  And he saith unto Him, Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest
that I love Thee.  Jesus saith unto him, Feed My sheep."--JOHN xxi.
15-17.


The whole story contained in these verses carries us back in thought to
the time when Peter denied the Lord.  They contain the first recorded
words which passed between Christ and Peter since the latter had said,
"I know not the man," and the Lord had "turned and looked upon Peter."
He had his special token of lovingkindness at the Resurrection in the
message which the woman brought: "Tell His disciples and Peter," in the
witness given to himself, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared
to Simon," and in his participation in the blessing when the Lord stood
in the midst and said, "Peace be unto you"; but these are, I think, the
first recorded words addressed directly to Peter.

Peter had professed to be faithful above others; and now the Lord asks
him, "Lovest thou Me more than these?" and the question thrice repeated
can scarcely fail to remind us of the triple denial.

If we consider what must have been the state of Peter's mind after he
had denied the Lord, we shall see that the circumstances recorded
indicate a crisis in his life-history.  How the enemy must have come in
like a flood! what desolation of spirit he must have experienced during
those lonely moments that followed the look of the Lord, when he went
out, and wept bitterly! the enemy was come against him in full force,
and legions of evil spirits had arisen to destroy his faith for ever.

One would say to him, "Thou hast sinned against special warnings; the
Lord said to thee particularly that Satan had desired to have thee that
he might sift thee as wheat.  A little later on He said, 'Pray that ye
enter not into temptation;' and a sin against special warning is more
than twice a sin; and it was that sin which of all others thou didst
think to be so great that it was impossible for thee to commit it."

Then another spirit would say, "Thou hast sinned against special
promise; for thee the Saviour prayed; but now it is clear that thou
hast outsinned the Mediator's grace and the Intercessor's prayers"; and
at the thought black despair and utter hopelessness would enter his
soul, as if to make it their eternal abode.

Then a third spirit would suggest the thought, "I said, 'I know not the
man!'  Dost remember, Peter, how He Himself said, 'I will declare unto
you, that I never knew you;' and again, 'Whosoever denieth Me before
men, him will I also deny before My Father in Heaven!'  No word of
Christ shall be broken; yea, thou thyself hast in past time established
thyself on the faithfulness of His truth!"

Again would come the thought, "By thy words shalt thou be justified,
and by thy words thou shalt be condemned; and of every idle word that
men shall speak they shall give an account in the day of judgment--how
much more then for a _deliberate_ word, affirmed, and reaffirmed, and
affirmed again."

It was as if a judgment-seat were already set up in his soul, and the
spirits were pleading him outside mercy; not one would speak in his
behalf.  Even the promises and the threatenings were against him; the
first saying, we strengthened him; and the second, we warned him.  Then
some voices would testify against him on a side where one would think
nothing would have been said, "Thou hast injured the faith; thou hast
weakened the brethren; thou hast been infidel against love, and for
such there is no repentance; thou hast sold thy Lord at a cheaper rate
than Judas!"

"Dost thou remember, Peter, that tree which the Lord cursed, because,
when He had a right to expect fruit from it, it bore none?  Was there
ever a time when the Master expected so much from thee as this? and now
He has come, and found 'nothing but leaves.'"

Then, perhaps, one ray of hope would gleam into his darkened soul--"But
the Lord did pray for me, and He never prayed in vain.  He said,
Father, I know that Thou hearest Me always; and He prayed for me."

And then the spirits would answer, "But the Lord prayed for thee that
thy faith might not fail, and _it has failed_; where now is the power
of the Lord's prayer?  And if that has failed what remains for thee
unless it be a certain fearful looking-for of judgment.  If even He who
said, 'Father, I thank Thee that Thou hearest Me always,' has been
refused in His petition; even God is against thee, and the stars in
their courses rule thee down, Simon, son of Jonas."

Another bitter shaft enters his heart: "Dost thou remember, Peter, how
the Lord said of His own followers, 'I have kept them in Thy name, and
none of them is lost but the son of perdition'?  Thou hast not only
made vain the Lord's prayers, but denied the Lord's faith, and caused
Him to appear before heaven and earth as a false witness.  Would He
speak like that now, if He were beginning His intercessory prayer
again?  Would He not have to say, 'None of them is lost, except the
Sons of Perdition, the Denier and the Betrayer'?  So that even Christ's
words failed to meet his case."

"And now, Peter, the high priest is asking Him of His disciples and His
doctrines; what thoughts must be in His mind about thee when He takes
up His testimony concerning those for whom He has lavished His life!
The question will wring His heart anew into great drops of blood."

"Moreover, thou hast sinned against the strongest light and the highest
privilege; it was given to thee to be with Him at the most solemn and
sacred times: thou wast with Him at the transfiguration in the Holy
Mount; and if ever heaven could strengthen earth, thou shouldst have
been a strong man.  Thou wast with Him at times of special Power, when
only two or three were privileged to see the grace and glory flow down
upon the suffering and the dying.  Will not the greatness of thy
privilege be the greatness of thy condemnation?  He always chose thee
to be with Him in special times when He went apart for prayer: to whom
much is given, of them will much be required.  Oh! how hast thou
fallen!" and the spirits away in the darkness would say, "Thou art
become even as one of us."

Then he would remember how in his own family, almost in his own flesh,
he had received special mercy; and that work of healing would rise up
to condemn him.  Sin against mercy is sin without mercy; a thousand
times thou art condemned, having sinned against such light and
privilege and grace.

Then some spirits would whisper, "Dost thou remember how when many were
leaving the Lord, because His doctrines were hard to receive and His
steps hard to follow, He asked the question, 'Will ye also go away?'
Who was it that answered so readily, 'Lord, to whom shall we go?'
Would it not have been better to have denied Him at the first than to
have waited till the light had grown as clear as it has been, and to
have deserted Him when He needed thee most?  Better to have denied Him
then, when evidence was feeble, than to disown Him, known as thou hast
been privileged to know Him!"

We are not told one word about what Peter did or where he went, except
that he went out weeping.  When the morning came and they were leading
Jesus away to crucifixion, John was there, but no mention is made of
Peter.  And yet I think I know where he went, and can see him taking
his way across the brook, which so lately he had crossed with Jesus, to
the garden of olive-trees.  He would say to himself, "Here is the place
where the Lord came and found me sleeping"; and "Here He said to me,
'Pray, pray, that ye enter not into temptation.'"  Going a little
farther, he would come to the place where the Master Himself had
prayed.  He would kneel and pray there too; in the place where there
were still lying on the ground great drops of blood, the earth still
wet with the strange sorrow of the Lamb.  There, in his despair, he
would kneel; and yet even in his despair would be turned towards God.
His heart would be turned, even when he thought it never would be
turned again; he would be there, without comfort, and yet God
comforting him.  Maybe, for him, too, there were strengthening angelic
ministries; for there are more of these heavenly messengers with us
than we think.  Perhaps some words of ancient promise might be brought
to his mind by God, as he was kneeling there; such as, "My soul
cleaveth unto the dust, quicken Thou me according to Thy word!"  "A
bruised reed He will not break, and smoking flax He will not quench,
till He bring forth judgment into victory."  "He restoreth my soul, He
leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for His name's sake."  But
whatever means were adopted, we believe that God was with
him--comforting, restoring, saving, strengthening him.  All this
prepares us for the scene by the Lake.

This must have struck Peter as very like another passage in the
intercourse between him and Jesus.  Strange scene! we are back in
Galilee; we experience again a night of fruitless toil.  This was my
place of consecration at the first; and these nets, which I borrow now,
were then my own; and it was in the morning that the Lord was standing
on the beach, as He did even now.

There is no mere repetition in this story: to a soul in Peter's case
the one impossible thing would be that he should ever regain the place
from whence he fell.  And the Lord was going to convince him, by means
of these similar circumstances and the miraculous draught of great
fishes, that there was for him, even for him, such a thing as a fresh
start; and that he should not mourn because there was "no returning
upon his former track."  When the boat had been brought to land, the
Lord questioned Peter, not saying, "Thou didst deny Me," but "Dost thou
love Me?" and finally repeats in his ears the old word with which He
moved him to tread the heavenly way at the first--"Follow thou Me."

There were now no boats or nets which Peter could leave for the Lord,
but the whole drama of consecration is acted over again.  "Follow Me,
Peter; what thou hast missed shall yet be given thee; formerly there
was a point beyond which thou couldst not follow Me; but now thou shalt
tread in My footsteps, even to the cross which thou didst fear at the
first, and to the shame from which erewhile thy soul recoiled."
"Another shall carry thee whither thou wouldest not: this spake He,
signifying by what death he should glorify God."




VI

ADDITION AND MULTIPLICATION

"He that lacketh these things is blind and short-sighted, and hath
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins."--2 PETER i. 9.


The chapter from which these verses are taken describes two
arithmetical processes, the working out of one of which belongs to us,
and of the other to our Father in heaven.  The first is an addition
sum: "Add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to
knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience
godliness; and to godliness brotherly-kindness; and to
brotherly-kindness love."  Writing down the figures of the sum, and
computing the total, we have it set out fair and clear,--"Ye shall
never fall."  The other is God's multiplication sum:

"Grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of God and of
Jesus our Lord"; and the result of the working comes out,--"Ye shall be
made partakers of the Divine nature, having escaped the corruption that
is in the world through lust."  I suppose it means that if we are
willing to go on at an arithmetical progression, God would work in us
at a geometrical one; and so, patiently persisting in holiness, and
hungering after righteousness, we shall be in heaven before we know
where we are.

But such passages trouble some folk who don't like to think that a
Christian has anything to do in the matter of his own salvation; who
say "It is finished" over a work that is only begun in them, and "Jesus
paid it all," when a voice within is saying, "How much owest thou unto
thy Lord?" or, perhaps, if they do not put it quite so strongly as
that, they are, to say the least, gravely suspicious of the existence
of a creaturely activity in the spiritual life.

Let us settle, then, in the beginning, that God never requires us to
exercise ourselves to win His favour, nor calls us to work for One in
whom we have no faith.  He never says, "Add to your darkness grace; and
to grace mercy; and to mercy peace."  That would be impossible; for
grace, mercy, and peace are experienced in the Divine operation; and it
is because we have so received them that we are able to fulfil the
commandments given to us.  God sets us this sum to work, but He gives
us a clean slate on which to work it; He cleanses that inward tablet on
which we have been working out quite a different sum, whose total is
given in the words,--"The wages of sin is death"; He purifies it, that
there may be written thereon the steps and the summation of the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus.  Now, some one will say, "Does
every one have to go through a process of development of virtues such
as is indicated in this epistle, and must every one have them all, and
produce them in the same order?  May we not develop just a few of them,
by a sort of spiritual selection, as flowers have their own colours,
and the creatures their own forms and features?"  To this we answer
(i.) that if you are to be a saint, as God has called you to be, you
must have the qualifications and nature of a saint; (ii.) we ought not
to recoil from this sum, as if the casting of the figures were
necessarily a long process.  No, not long! how long does it take one to
reach love?  Why, we commonly use the expression "falling in love"; and
when the heart is awakened to the sense of the universal presence of
the Father, it is not difficult to love men for His sake.  As for the
virtues, we must have them all.  Shall we imagine an impatient saint,
called to follow Him who when reviled, reviled not again; an ignorant
saint, a partaker of Him in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge; an intemperate saint, to follow Him who was living at a
cheaper rate, for a man, than the foxes or the fowls; an unloving
saint! into whose heart have been breathed the words, "Love is the
fulfilling of the law," or, which is the same thing, "Christ is the end
of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth"?  Yes, we
must have them all.  What, will you complain, like little children,
because your Teacher has been giving you too many rows to add up? will
you say, "Lord, you overrate my powers; you think too highly of the
grace that you have given me; I know you, that you are a hard man, an
austere man"?

Does it matter in what order we ascend our virtue-scale?  Not at all.
An addition sum comes to the same thing whether you put it 2 + 3 or 3 +
2.  For myself, I would like to begin the addition from the bottom row,
starting with love; but it does not matter, so that all the figures are
included.  The Apostle goes on to speak of the effect of such a chain
of experience upon the perceptive powers of the soul; he who has these
things, well; his eye shall see the King in His beauty and the land of
far distances; he who has them not, he is blind and short-sighted; or,
as Luther and the Vulgate render it, is blind, and gropes with his
hands.  Spiritual short-sightedness is the result of the neglect of the
pursuit of the prize of the high calling of God in Christ.  An
indistinct vision may result from one of two causes: a fault in the
eye, or an obstruction in the atmosphere.  If you cannot make out a
distant object while other people can, they will say to you, "How
short-sighted you are!" but if no one can discern it, the probability
is that something external has made vision impossible.  Now, in the
things of God, it is almost always the first defect that mars our
perception; and the main reason why "eye hath not seen" is in our own
nature, and not because God has not prepared nor revealed such things
for our perception.  To them that love Him, He reveals; wherefore let
us add to kindness love, and we shall know.  There are many things to
which we are blind, because we have not practised ourselves in looking
for them, nor do we know in what direction to look.  I remember, when
in the Isle of Arran, watching through a mist for the coming of the
steamer from Glasgow; our landlady found it long before we could detect
it, because she was more used to the quest; her eyes were keener, and
she knew the direction in which to look.  And the soul that ardently
believes and hopes, knows well how to lift up its eyes to the hills
from whence its help shall come, and to discern the help when it
appears.

There are some people who seem ignorant of the fact that God has given
them spiritual faculties suited to the observation of spiritual
realities.  They are like folks who, if they were put down ten miles
from home on a clear night, would never be able to tell you on which
side of the sky the sun would rise; because they never exercised their
powers in the observation of the way the skies go round.  And not only
may we discern spiritual realities, but more than that, it is written
that the pure in heart shall see God.  For God has not given up
revealing Himself to men yet; but this is an age in which, while there
are many who know Him a little, there are few who know Him much.  He
spake to the fathers.  He is speaking still.  Enoch was not the last of
whom it should be said, "He walked with God, he pleased God"; Isaiah
not the only one who could say, "I beheld the Lord sitting on a throne
high and lifted up"; Paul not the only one who should be privileged
with rapture to the third heaven; George Fox not the only one to whom
it was given to say, "I was come up, through the naming sword, into the
Paradise of God."  Many there are who have known "the Most High God no
vision, nor that One who rose again."

  God, who at sundry times, in manners many,
  Spake to the fathers and is speaking still,
  Eager to find if ever, or if any
  Souls will obey and hearken to His
  Who that one moment has the least descried Him,
  Dimly and faintly, hidden and afar,
  Doth not despise all excellence beside Him,
  Pleasures and powers that are not and that are.
  Aye, amid all men bear himself thereafter,
  Smit with a solemn and a sweet surprise,
  Dumb to their scorn and turning on their laughter
  Only the dominance of earnest eyes.
  Whoso has felt the Spirit of the Highest
  Cannot confound nor doubt Him nor deny;
  Yea, with one voice, O world, though thou deniest,
  Stand thou on that side, for on this am I.


Yes! things that were seen of old may be seen again; voices that spake
to prophets and seers be revived in the innermost soul of God's
faithful children; God is not dead; the Lord Jesus has not been raised
from the grave to be placed in an inaccessible limbo, far from the
sight of believing eyes: the Holy Spirit still speaks, as of old time,
by holy men; He has not left the world yet, He dwelleth with you, He
shall be in you.

Suppose I were to say to you that if you were to go down to Hastings
you would be able to see the French coast clearly and distinctly, you
would say, "Impossible even to the longest-sighted person; it is more
than fifty miles away"; and yet, as you may see in the Philosophical
Transactions for 1798, the coast of France was so visible, without a
telescope, from Calais to St. Vallery, with the fishing-boats, and the
colour of the houses clearly perceived.  When you hear this, you say,
"Well, if it is in the Philosophical Transactions, it must be true, and
if it happened once, it may happen again."  Good enough reasoning; and
the Scriptures are the Spiritual Transactions, the record of God's
dealings with and revealings to men of old time.  If they are true, He
has unveiled the hidden mysteries not once or twice to waiting souls;
and what He has done, He not only may do again, but will do, wherever
He finds a truly humble heart in which to work and rest.  If He stood
by Paul, saying, "Fear not," just as really and maybe as evidently will
He stand by you: If He guided him in his work, restraining him from
preaching here, and calling him to service there, He will give you also
leadings just as certain and maybe as distinct.  But, do you say, "Are
we then to seek for signs and wonders, to fast and pray, ardently
longing for the Divine revelation, until the vision dawns?"  I do not
say so; but rather add unto your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge;
and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to
patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to
brotherly kindness love: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall,
and an entrance shall be abundantly ministered unto you into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.




VII

A CONFERENCE ON DEATH

"And, behold, there talked with Him two men, which were Moses and
Elias, who appeared in glory, and spake of His exodus which He should
accomplish at Jerusalem."--LUKE ix. 30, 31.


We shall not attempt to explain the whole subject of the
Transfiguration, but let us consider for what Jesus went up into the
mountain.  The common opinion is that He went up to enjoy Himself--in
search of some spiritual ecstacy.  But in this case there would have
been no transfiguration.  Spiritual rapture comes after earnest labour
through eager prayer--it is not found by seeking--we have not to look
for feelings or ecstacies; we need "to know the will of God, and to do
it."

Jesus went up into the mount to pray about death--the subject which had
a little before been borne in upon His mind--for we read in Matt. xvi.
21, in the narration of events just preceding the Transfiguration, that
"from that time forth began Jesus to show unto His disciples, how that
He must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and
chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third
day."  When the devil took Him up into a mountain, he showed Him "all
the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, and said unto Him,
'All these things will I give Thee, if Thou wilt fall down and worship
me.'"  When the Spirit of God took Jesus up into the mountain, He
showed Him the cross, the shame, the suffering,--the spear and the
crown of thorns, and said, "All these will I give Thee."

The highest experiences of the Christian life are close bound up, in
the Divine will, with suffering.  Jesus went up into the mount to get a
better view of His approaching sorrow.

The Transfiguration is slightly apprehended and seldom discussed.  Very
few sermons are preached, or great pictures painted, or hymns sung, on
the subject.  Almost the only verse one knows about it--

  When in ecstacy sublime
  Tabor's glorious steep I climb,
  At the too transporting light
  Darkness rushes o'er my sight,

implies that it is a subject beyond human understanding.

We have hymns on His Incarnation and Advent, His Divine Glory and
Worship, His Mediatorial Character and Titles, Passion, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession and Reign, and the Second Advent,
but none specially referring to the Transfiguration.  Yet it contains
many wonderful lessons we all need to know.  We have felt, perhaps,
that it was an experience peculiar to Christ--with which we can have
nothing to do--but the Scriptures say otherwise; the word here rendered
"transfigured" is the same as that translated "transformed" in Romans
xii. 2, "but be ye transfigured by the renewing of your minds," etc.,
and "changed," in 2 Cor. iii. 18, "are transfigured into the same image
from glory to glory."  We want so to look at the glory of Jesus, that,
at the same time, we may see His sorrow as well--and be "transfigured
into the same image; for if we suffer with Him, we shall also be
glorified together."

There is no man who understands the Transfiguration like John Ruskin.
He says: "We are afraid to harbour in our own hearts, or to utter in
the hearing of others, any thought of our Lord as hungering, tired, or
sorrowful, or having a human soul, a human will, and affected by the
events of human life as a finite creature is: and yet one-half of the
efficacy of His atonement and the whole of the efficacy of His example
depend on His having been this to the full.  Consider therefore the
Transfiguration as it relates to the human feelings of our Lord.  It
was the first definite preparation for His death....  What other hill
could it have been than the southward slope of that goodly mountain,
Hermon, which is, indeed, the centre of all the promised land, from the
entering in of Hamath to the river of Egypt; the mount of fruitfulness,
from which the springs of Jordan descended to the valleys of Israel.
Along its mighty forest avenues, until the grass grew fair with the
mountain lilies, His feet dashed with the dew of Hermon, He must have
gone to pray His first recorded prayer about death; and from the steep
of it, before He knelt, could see, to the south, all the
dwelling-places of the people that had sat in darkness, and seen the
great light, the land of Zabulon and of Naphthali, Galilee of the
Gentiles: could see even with His human sight, the gleam of that lake
by Capernaum and Chorazin, and many a place loved by Him and vainly
ministered to, whose house was now left unto them desolate: and, chief
of all, far in the utmost blue, the hills above Nazareth, sloping down
to His old home; hills on which the stones yet lay loose that had been
taken up to cast at Him, when He left them for ever.  'And as He prayed
two men stood by Him.'"

"Among the many ways in which we miss the help and hold of Scripture,
there is none more subtle than our habit of supposing that, even as
man, Christ was free from the fear of death.  How could He then have
been tempted as we are?--since among all the trials of the earth none
spring from the dust more terrible than that of fear.  It had to be
borne by Him ... and the presence of it is surely marked for us enough
by the rising of those two at His side."

It was Christ's first preparation for death--and, therefore, to
understand His Transfiguration we must understand His Crucifixion too;
to see Hermon, we must go to Calvary; to discern how the fashion of His
countenance was altered, we must witness that other time in the garden,
when "His sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down on the
ground"; to fathom how the three disciples slept through the glory, we
must remember how they slept through the sorrow too.

The word rendered decease is a strange one.  It is literally
_exodus_--"going out."  They spake of this exodus which He should
accomplish at Jerusalem.  The same word occurs in the second epistle of
Peter: "I will endeavour that ye may be able after my exodus to have
these things always in remembrance"; and it is worthy of notice that
the verses which follow are a reminiscence of the Transfiguration.

We have conferences on many subjects--on peace, on holiness, on
temperance: who ever heard of another conference (as this was) on
_death_?

A listener might have heard some such words as these:--

First Moses might speak: "I, too, know what it is to want not to die.
I did not fear the act of dying, but the manner--away out of the
Promised Land.  But when I saw the will of my God in all its beauty,
then even this bitter disappointment seemed bearable, and the kiss of
my God at the last made up for all.  Death is only a kiss to those who
love God; and if I had not followed the will of my God in this, what
had I not lost?  I had missed burial at the hands of the sons of God,
and my feet would not now be standing in His presence."

Then Elias might say: "I had no fear of death: nay, I even prayed for
it, saying, O Lord, take away my life, for I am not better than my
fathers.  It was not death that I feared so much as the fashion of
dying when I fled from the face of Jezebel.  But to-day I am thankful
that my dying was not left to my choosing; if it had been so, I had
missed the fiery chariot by which I climbed up to the Presence of my
King,--the swift seraphic march that brought me home."

And then Jesus might say, perhaps, something like these words--

  I wish to have no wishes left,
  But to leave all to Thee...
  And yet two wills I find in Me
  When on My death I muse;
  But, Lord, I have a death to die,
  And not a death to choose.


Then Moses might speak again: "Let us call God's providences by their
sweetest names: death is not death to those who love God.  Thou, O
Sinless One, call it not death, call it exodus.  It was my lot once to
lead the people of God out of slavery and degradation, out of heavy
labour, out of the furnace of iron; and yet methinks that will be the
true exodus when Thy people pass over, O Lord, Thy people, whom Thou
hast redeemed, when Thou by Thy dying lips dost proclaim deliverance to
the captive, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;
when, through the deep sea of Thy sorrows, a passage is made by which
the ransomed shall return.  Call it not death; call it an exodus--a
mighty deliverance of the people of God."

Then Elias: "O Son of God, right well do I know that the strength of
one man may be made the strength of many; and the triumph of many may
spring from the victory of one.  I myself have stood alone in the face
of an opposing people; yet by the strength of God I came off conqueror,
and many were persuaded to cry, 'The Lord, He is God; the Lord, He is
God,' and the power yet remains in which I stood; it glows, and grows
within thee; it floods the air; it streams down thy garments.  Fear
not! thou shalt bring many souls, not merely to assent to the truth,
but to the Truth itself.  And especially standing conqueror over death,
thou shalt deliver them who were all their lives in bondage through the
fear of the same.  The love of God shall uphold thee; the strength of
God be thine."

Then Jesus: "In the volume of the book it is written of Me, I delight
to do Thy will, O My God."

Then Moses might continue: "Death is our best friend--he strengthens
our eyes to behold the glory which in the flesh it would blind us to
see.  Once I was afraid to behold the glory of God.  I stood in a cleft
of the rock, covered, as He passed by--but now, now, I can bear to
stand and gaze in the presence of my King."

Then Elias would reply: "I too knew what it was to be afraid of His
glory; in the mountain I wrapped my face in my mantle, but when His
swift messengers came to bear me home, I cast my mantle behind, in
token that I would never need it to shroud my face again.  It is the
same for Thee--already that glory smites upon Thy forehead, and gilds
Thy garments, and floods Thy face with light, but beyond, beyond, Thou
shalt be crowned with glory and honour."

And Jesus would say, "Thy will be done--Thy will be done."

Then Moses once more: "A mother has two kisses for her child: one, a
daybreak kiss, wherewith she draws aside the curtains of the soul; and
one a good-night kiss, sometimes given in the dark.

"And so hath the Eternal His two loves: the love in the light, which
now encircles us; and the dark love on which our souls lean back to
sleep.  Those who have felt God's daylight kiss can trust Him for it in
the dark.  For thee to die will only be to lie back in the Everlasting
Arms."

Then Jesus: "Father, into Thy hands I commend My spirit."

"And behold there talked with Him two men, which were Moses and Elias,
and they spake of His exodus which He should accomplish at Jerusalem."




VIII

CHRIST WILL TAKE ALL

"All that the Father giveth Me shall come to Me."--JOHN vi. 37.


If one were left to determine from our English Bible the meaning of
this passage, it would be difficult to avoid the admission that it
gives countenance to that form of doctrine commonly known as
Calvinistic; for does it not present to us, in language sufficiently
clear and obvious, the Divine Sovereignty as shown in Electing Grace?
Must we not admit that there are those who by a Supreme Deed of Gift
are allotted to the mercies of the Son; over whom He exercises the care
of a good Shepherd; and is it not difficult to resist the conclusion
that, as there are some who are the objects of special solicitude and
care, so there are those who in some degree lie outside the sphere of
the Divine Benevolence?

Again, if we were to look at the 39th verse of this same chapter, and
read the words, "This is the Father's will which hath sent Me, that of
all which He hath given Me I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up again at the last day," should we not say that the natural meaning
of the passage is that there is a Doctrine of Final Perseverance,
linked on to that of the Election of Grace, and a necessary corollary
to it?

But when we turn to the Greek, we notice that in the first of the
verses quoted the word _all_ is in the neuter gender, and so does not
necessarily apply to persons at all, and we are more likely to catch
the true meaning of the words by reading it as follows: "Everything
that the Father hath given Me shall come to Me"; and in the other
passage a similar correction must be made, as is otherwise evident from
the last part of the passage, "I will raise _it_ up at the last day";
"Of everything which the Father hath given Me I should lose nothing."

Viewed in this light, the words that were supposed to imply election
teach consecration, and instead of final perseverance we read full
possession.  And this we do not say with any idea of refuting
Calvinistic doctrine, having no "isms" of our own and little time to
spend in attacking those of other people.  Likely enough, our rendering
of the words may be incorrect, and in any case we ought carefully to
compare similar passages in the Gospel; but be that as it may, the
truth is not affected that the Sovereignty of God and the Love of God
demand the full subjection and surrender of our being; and we are
assured that where these conditions are fulfilled, the Divine
Possession and Protection become an intense and abiding reality.

Now, in confirmation of our rendering, we will examine the manner in
which the passage is quoted by John Bunyan; and certainly we may say
that if there was a Calvinistic meaning to be got out of a passage,
John Bunyan was not the man to miss it; and moreover, since he was
totally ignorant of Greek (and I suppose of Latin, too, there being
only, as far as I know, the solitary expression in the _Pilgrim's
Progress_ "de carne et sanguine Christi," accompanied by the marginal
modesty, "the Latin I borrow"), he is not likely to fall into the
mistake to which we may be liable, of evading the plain meaning of
words by reference to the original tongue.  Turning, then, to the _Holy
War_, we shall find the following, giving an account of terms proposed
by Diabolus for the surrender of the town of Mansoul; the offer of
submission being made through his ambassador, Mr. Loth-to-Stoop.  "Then
Mr. Loth-to-Stoop said again, 'Sir, behold the condescension of my
master!  He says that he will be content if he may but have some place
assigned to him in Mansoul as a place to live in privately, and you
shall be lord of all the rest!'  Then said the Golden Prince, 'All that
the father giveth me shall come to me, and of all that he giveth me I
will lose nothing, no, not an hoof or an hair.  I will not, therefore,
grant him, no, not the least corner in Mansoul to dwell in.  I will
have it all to myself.'"  It is a little singular, to say the least,
that he should have apprehended both the passages that we quoted in
their right sense; and we had better attribute his accuracy to a touch
of true inspiration.

Now, passing on from this point, we may think of the Lord Jesus in a
twofold character:--

1. As the Receiver appointed to collect debts due to God.

2. As the Almoner of gifts from God to men.  He can come to us and say,
"My Father has appointed Me the heir of all things; He has put His
affairs into My hands, so that debts to Him are debts to Me; how much,
therefore, owest thou to thy Lord?  For, all that the Father giveth Me
shall come to Me."

He can come to us again and say, "The Father hath given Me authority
over all flesh, that I should impart as well as exact; that I may give
eternal life and eternal blessing, and Holy Ghost to as many as
believe; that I should manifest His name to you, and give to you His
word and His Glory, and all things I have received of Him; that I
should give unto you rest and My own joy, and, by way of legacy in a
will which the enemy cannot dispute, should leave peace with you;
finally, ascending up on high, should send gifts to men, even to the
rebellious, that the Lord their God might dwell among them.  For He
that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for you all, how
shall He not with Him also freely give you all things.  How much,
therefore, hast thou received from thy Lord?"

And if we look at it rightly, He speaks but little of the dues, and
much of the gifts; for God only exacts from us that He may be able to
impart to us; there is no tyrant seated on the throne of the universe,
but only a Father waiting to give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him;
and the uttermost farthing that He demands from us is only in order
that He may have the right to save us to the uttermost, if we could but
believe it.

We may say next, that if our ultimate condition must be that of entire
subjection and surrender to and harmony with the Divine Will, how sad
it is that our consecration is so slow, so protracted, so ungracious;
that we take so much time to reach the point where we are altogether
the Lord's.  People can read the mystery of conversion in the parable
of the dry bones in Ezekiel; but there is consecration in the story,
too.  Little by little we see the dead man coming into the place of
blessing; bone to bone, sinew to sinew, nerve to nerve; and when there
is the complete structure of a man, comes the vivifying breath from the
four winds.  Not before, for God must have a man to quicken; He does
not inspire skeletons or fragments; as at the first, when a man stands
before Him, He breathes into him the breath of life and he becomes a
living soul.

We may well be ashamed when we think of the way in which consecration
to God is made.  We are like the man who, because he was irritated at a
claim made upon him for a sum of money, went and paid the bill in
farthings.  So we pay our dues to God, giving as little as we can, and
taking as long about it as we list.  Perhaps it is because we treat Him
that way, that God is obliged to appear exacting and talk to us about
uttermost farthings at all.

Perhaps we shall be right in concluding from the 39th verse, that there
is something in the resurrection contingent on the consecration: "I
will raise _it_ up at the last day"; of one thing we may be very sure,
that the life to come is not only conterminous with but continuous with
the life that is.  Death changes our surroundings but not our
characters.  There is no more breach of continuity in those than there
is in an algebraical curve that goes to infinity.

We may, indeed, get dying grace, and hold a consecration meeting upon
our dying beds, but it is not death that consecrates, nor the grave
that sanctifies and cleanses from all sin.  We shall begin the next
life pretty much where we left off in this.  We were singing a little
while ago--

  Let the veil become more thin,
  Let the glory pierce between;

but, mark you, that veil does not become more thin by pulling out a
thread here and a thread there; remember how at the Crucifixion the
veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; the
veil that is on your heart will go like that, when the day comes for
things to appear which now are numbered amongst things not seen as yet,
and for you to apprehend and participate in the things which God has
laid up for those who love Him.




IX

STRONG CRYING

"The energised prayer of a righteous man is of great force."--JAMES v.
16.


It is strange that we understand so little about prayer: with most
people, including the greater part of the professedly religious, it is
regarded simply as a sort of spiritual safety-valve, adapted to relieve
the soul from strain and over-pressure; is any afflicted, they say, let
him pray; and as for us, who are merry, we will sing psalms.

Now, if we were looking at a steam-engine, and meditating over the
motive power of it, we should scarcely direct our thoughts to the
safety-valve, or say of it, "What a mighty power is stored up in this
little lever."  On the contrary, our attention would be fixed on the
piston and the steam at the back of it, and on the laws which govern
its production, expansion, and condensation.  And we need scarcely say
that there is not much in common between those who regard prayer simply
as an emotional safety-valve, and those who look upon it as one of the
great moving forces of the spiritual world.  It happens often enough
that there are forces in the world of which people generally are
ignorant, or of which they have an idea that is totally inadequate.
As, for instance, we have known cynical politicians deride the
expression of public opinion, as being only valuable as a political
safety-valve, and useful to keep the "many-headed monster," the
populace, from more dangerous courses; but not once or twice have they
been awakened to find that there is nothing to stand before the rush of
a well-formed public sentiment.  So that we say rightly public opinion
is of great force.

And certainly the idea which the majority of folk attach to the word
prayer is but very incommensurate to the part which it occupies, not
only in the development of the life of the individual soul, but in the
life and lot of the world at large.

On the other hand, the force of prayer has been understood by the
really spiritual writers of every school and of all time.  They knew
that prayer is one of the secrets of life; that he who lives, prays,
and he who prays, lives; that he who prays works, and he who works
prays; and so large a part of the spiritual life is comprised in the
one word prayer, that we find them describing the soul's advance by the
character of the prayer which springs from it.

For instance, Madame Guyon, in her precious A B C of the spiritual
life, introduces her book with the title, "A Short and Easy Method of
Prayer"; St. Theresa describes the degrees of the soul's progress as
degrees of prayer, styling them Prayer of Quiet, Prayer of Union, and
so on; St. John of the Cross names his mystical way as the Ascent of
Mount Carmel, the meaning of which is evidently similar to the other.
And so, no doubt one might give other instances, confining ourselves,
of course, to the experimental Christians only, and letting the divines
and theologians alone.  May we not say that our dear Lord Himself was
careful enough both in example and teaching to lead His scholars along
this way, making them aware that a great part of the soul's education
was education in prayer?  He began by making them feel that they really
didn't know what prayer meant, though they had been taught to say
prayers almost since they could speak.  So He brings them to a point
where they say, "Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his
disciples": encourages them further by admonitions to ask, seek, and
knock; He tells them that if they ask for bread and fish, they won't
get stones and snakes (but doesn't say that if you ask for a snake,
your Father will be so good as to give it to you); leads them on until
they acquire the sense of the need of a larger faith; instructs them
that prayer is the function of an organ of the spiritual life, and must
be as constant and persistent as breathing or other natural functions,
so that men ought always to pray and not to faint, and that they should
keep awake at all times praying, if they are to be found worthy to
stand before the Son of man.  Finally, one of His last counsels, just
before the last great objective teaching of His own Life on the
subject, connects the force of their prayer with the state of their
life, saying, "If ye abide in Me, ye shall ask what ye will and it
shall be done unto you."

Now the verse which we quoted at the beginning speaks of certain
prayers as of great force; we infer that there are weak prayers as well
as strong ones--poor little wingless things that cannot rise into the
Celestial Audience-Chamber.

Hermas describes such when he says, "The prayer of a sad man has no
power to climb to the altar of God."  And it is of great importance
that we should know the reasons which contribute to the strength or
weakness of a prayer.  On such points we shall find the Apostle James
to be an authority; for he was the great intercessor of the early
Church, the man of whom they said that his knees were worn hard like
the knees of a camel.  And being in addition the most practical of all
the teachers, we shall find in his writing (in spite of the fact that
Luther called it an "epistle of straw") something far more valuable
than a merely speculative theology.  For instance, more than any one
else, he supplies us with conditions for the success of that great
experiment which we call prayer.  Prayer of the powerful, operative
sort, has its conditions.  We cannot disregard them.  I have seen a man
in the Cavendish laboratory attempt to make a magnetic measurement in
the immediate vicinity of some large iron pipes, and neither of us
could tell the cause which made the apparatus behave so unreasonably.
And prayers are often hindered in a similar way by unobserved
disturbing causes.  St. James supplies us with several hints:--

(i.) That a double-minded man need not expect to receive anything from
the Lord; a waverer, driven with the wind and tossed.

(ii.) That ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may
consume it upon your lusts.

(iii.) That it must be believing prayer, if it is to be effectual; let
him ask in faith; the prayer of faith shall save the sick.

(iv.) It is the prayer that springs from a rectified heart and life;
the prayer of a righteous man is of great force.

Hermas, too, a Christian father of the second century, whom we quoted
before, supplies us with some suggestions.  One would almost think, for
some reasons, that he had been one of St. James's immediate disciples,
for he is fond of using that same word double-minded (more exactly
double-souled), speaks of visiting the orphans and widows, etc.  Thus
we find in the ninth chapter of the book of Commands as follows (the
book being of a date immediately subsequent to the apostles): "He said
unto me, put away from thee all double-mindedness, and have no more
division of heart concerning petitions from God, saying in thyself, How
shall I be able to ask and receive anything from the Lord, having
sinned so greatly against Him?  Reason not on this wise, but turn to
the Lord with all thy heart, and ask from Him without hesitation, and
thou shalt know His large-heartedness, that He will certainly never
leave thee, but will fulfil thy soul's request.  God is not, as men
are, mindful of wrongs done to Him, but forgetful of them, and He hath
compassion upon His workmanship.  Do thou, therefore, cleanse thy heart
from all the vanities of this age, and from things spoken of before,
and ask from the Lord and thou shalt receive all things; and of all thy
petitions thou shalt not fail of one, if thou ask of the Lord with an
unhesitating heart.  But if thou doubtest in thy heart, thou shalt
receive none of thy petitions.  For they that are doubtful towards God,
are the double-minded men, and they shall obtain none at all of their
petitions.  But they that are perfectly sound in the faith ask for all
things in reliance upon the Lord, and receive them, because they ask
without hesitation and with no dividedness of heart.  For every
double-minded man, unless he repent, will scarcely be saved.  Cleanse,
therefore, thy heart from double-mindedness, and put on faith, for she
is mighty, and believe in God, that thou shalt receive all thy requests
that thou dost make.  And if ever when thou hast made request thou be
somewhat longer in receiving thy petition from the Lord, be not of a
double-mind, that thou didst not swiftly receive thy soul's request,
for certainly it is on account of some temptation or some sin that thou
art longer in receiving thy petition.  Therefore, do not cease making
thy request, and thou shalt receive it, but if thou faintest and art of
doubtful mind in thy petition, blame thyself and not Him who gives to
thee."  It amounts to this, that to have power in prayer is only
possible as long as and in proportion as we walk with God.

Looking at it in another light, observe that real prayer is connected
in a most intimate manner with the influences of the Holy Spirit.
Perhaps this is what is meant by the word rendered by us "energised,"
but "effectual and fervent" in the English Version.  Certainly in
almost every case where the word occurs, it has reference to the
operation of God or the devil.  And if this be so, the prayer must be a
possessed prayer, and the praying man a possessed person, and so again
we are brought face to face with the foundations of mighty prayer lying
in a holy life.  And what else is taught by the Apostle when he says,
"The Spirit maketh intercession _in the Saints_ according to the will
of God"?




X

THE SENTINEL OF THE HEART

"The peace of God, which exceeds all understanding, shall guard your
hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus."--Phil. iv. 7.


One of the best tests of the value of a religion, and of the degree of
the truth enshrined therein, is found in the nature and permanence of
the peace which it imparts.  For it is a fact that all religions, or
almost all, and especially those which have taken a wide grasp of the
hearts and minds of men, profess to bring peace to the worshipper.

The Roman Church, with its history unparalleled alike for saintliness
or sin, with its offers to resolve all doubts and to forgive all
iniquities, affords a haven and anchorage for those whose bark has been
torn by the stormy winds of private judgment.  It is not one or two who
have been brought within her pale in search of peace; and, indeed, the
bosom of Mother Church would be an attractive resting-place, if it did
not strike us on the other hand as being too much like the effort of
one baby to carry another of its own size.

What is true of the Roman Church is true of the religion which has
prevailed even more widely amongst the human race; if we ask the
Buddhist teachers what is offered to the inquiring soul in their sacred
books, or what is revealed as possible in the experience of those men
amongst them who have made the greatest progress in mind-and-spirit
lore, they would talk to you of Nirvana, or, as I think it was
understood by them at the first, the extinction of the individual, even
as a candle-flame is blown out.  And however perverted their belief may
have become, they seem in early days to have contemplated a real
destruction of self,--the flame of self-love and self-life being so put
out that it should never more be a flame, and should not long be a
spark.  For instance, their writings tell us such things as follow:--

"To him who has finished the path and passed beyond sorrow, who has
freed himself on every side, and thrown away all fetters, there is no
more fever of grief."  "Such an one remains like the broad earth
unvexed; like the pillar of the city gate, unmoved; like a pellucid
lake, unruffled."

"Tranquil is the mind, tranquil the words and the deeds, of him who is
thus set at rest and made free by wisdom."  "The heart, scrupulously
avoiding all idle dissipation, diligently applying itself to the holy
law of Buddha, letting go all lust, and consequent disappointment,
fixed and unchangeable, enters on Nirvana."

And so in many other features we may trace the doctrine of inward peace
as taught in the Buddhist religion.  A similar feature is to be traced
in the Mohammedan faith, if we are right that Islam means surrender to
the will of God, and the Mussulman a surrendered person; and certainly
there have been those in the great religion of the East who held
surrender in a higher sense than that of the fatalism which we
generally attach to the words.

Now, when we speak of different religions as in the foregoing, it is
not that we want to cultivate the science of comparative religious
anatomy; all we want to say is this, that just as a very rough
observation convinces us that corresponding organs in different
creatures imply corresponding uses and similar needs, so we discern
various methods of bringing peace to the soul of man in those religions
which have to the greatest extent prevailed in the world.

We are right to read these features carefully, for they are the
watermarks of the absolute religion (which we believe the religion of
Jesus to be), which is to gather in the men of every tribe and kindred
and nation, and to unite all the children of God who are scattered
abroad.

We are too much accustomed to look on these foreign religionists merely
in the light of compassion, as people for whom we must send the
missionary, make the regular collection and offer the periodic prayer;
and we make maps of the world in which we paint in all the religions
which differ from our own in black, or, if not in black, in other
colours only for the sake of distinction.  But, if we were wise, we
should see that, where we paint black, it should be black with streaks
of light; and we should learn, too, to see that our own faith would
need, if accurately represented, to be a white colour checked and
streaked with spots of the intensest black.  For not all that is called
Christianity is of Christ.

We say, then, that one of the characteristics of the absolute religion
is that it offers to the soul a real and permanent peace.  Here is a
test for us: a real peace; it must not be based on deceptive methods: a
permanent peace, which neither things present can disturb, nor life nor
death dispel.  And the Lord Jesus, who has spoken of the heart of man
as never man spake, made this one of the keystones of His teaching, as
it was the cornerstone of His living.

"Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy-laden, and I will rest
you."

"These things I have spoken unto you that in Me ye might have peace."

And thus we hear our blessed Lord whispering to the world of to-day, a
tired world from the first, but never so tired as now; through these
lips comes God's answer to the cry of five hundred millions of
Buddhists, of the millions of Islam, of the Romanist, the Mystic, the
Quaker--to all, in one breath, the message comes; yes, to me, even to
me Thou speakest when the word is of that hidden lasting peace which
Thou, Lord Jesus, canst bestow.  And if it was a marvel that at
Pentecost every man should hear in his own language the wonderful works
of God, much more is it a marvel to speak to all hearts than to speak
with all tongues.

And what is more than speech, even that which goes to the heart, is the
action by which Thou, Lord, hast proved Thy speech.  Thy life has given
Thee the right to speak of what Thou givest as _Thy_ peace.  So quiet
wast Thou that, but for the wrong-doers that crossed Thy path, Thou
wouldst have seemed to be passionless; yea, some have even spoken of
Thee as the "cold Galilean," because of the marvellous rest of Thy soul
in Thy Father's arms.

Not only is it a test of the truth of a religion whether it imparts a
real and permanent peace, but it is also a test of our attainment in
the true religion, when we find it, for us to examine the depth and
character of our peace.

We determine the religion of Jesus to be the Absolute Religion, because
it imparts the highest peace in the manner most suited to the soul of
man, and most consistent with the character of God.

We verify our own position in the Life by the simple test of the
experience of Peace which we enjoy.

It is easy to be tranquil under certain circumstances; and there are
times when most of us perceive the connection between quiet and
holiness.  But then circumstances change, and what becomes of the
peace?  Drake and his men cross the isthmus of Panama, and from a peak
they see below them the smiling ocean on the farther side; so fair and
still it looked that it received the name of the Pacific Ocean; but
then there were two things to be noticed: first, it was a fine day;
next, they probably thought the sea the smoother because of the height
from which they surveyed it.  And it is easy to talk of peace on fine
days, and when we are high up above trouble; but our test must be when
we are in the midst of the waters, when the waves thereof roar and are
troubled.  Is it Pacific Ocean then; or do we find, as may be those
early adventurers, that it was too hastily named?  Certain it is that
many Christians are disappointed because they do not always realise the
peace and blessedness of which sometimes they have glimpses and
enjoyment.

It is our practical every-day test of our standing in grace; a man who
is exploring an old well lowers a candle before him, knowing that where
that can live, he can live; the Christian's test-flame is the peace of
God; when that fails, he ought to know that it is safe to go no
farther.  This peace is like some magic mirror, by the dimness growing
on the surface of which we may discern the breath of an unclean spirit
that would work us ill.  As the Apostle says, "Let the peace of God
rule (_i.e._ be arbiter or umpire) in your hearts."  We may almost say
that for most of us it is true that what we can do quietly we can do
safely.  So we see more and more the importance of having the heart and
thought kept by the Peace of God.

Some render the passage, "The peace of God shall stand sentry over your
heart"; and this expresses it very well.  Where this sentry stands,
nothing forbidden can pass either within or without, except the watcher
be first destroyed.  If the thirst for wealth or fame enter into a
man's heart, it is over the slain body of the sentry; our peace is gone
when these things enter in.  And many such like things there are which
choke the word and destroy the peace.  Then we turn and look at it in
another light, passing on from thoughts concerning the Peace of God to
higher ones about the God of Peace, who has promised to sanctify us
wholly and to preserve spirit, soul, and body blameless unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ.




XI

THY FATHER IN SECRET

"Alone, and yet not alone."--JOHN xvi. 32.


Of all religious ideas, the grandest is that which lay at the root of
the monastic system,--that religion is the wedlock of the soul to God;
although the method in which this idea was exemplified was a faulty
one, or, at any rate, one which rapidly became corrupt, even if it was
not so at first.  The wonderful worship of the middle ages at least
taught men to serve God in retirement of life and unworldliness of
spirit, and gave demonstration of holiness and righteousness in men who
did their work in the world even though they lived out of it, and in
women who were content to view the busy, jocular, combatant,
pleasure-seeking community only from behind the bars of the house of
rest that they had chosen.  It was a noble object-lesson of the
spiritual life; and though the symbols used to express it may have
become valueless, the truth that they taught remains yet, that if a man
or woman seeks the highest good, there must be for such an isolation of
the soul from the ordinary course of life and thought in the world
around us; we must afford ourselves facilities for a sacred loneliness
with God.

It is interesting to notice that St. Luke, probably more than any other
evangelist, gives record of solitariness and vigil and secret
communion; and it may be that it was a line of experience with which he
was familiar; certainly he was careful to chronicle the lonely hours of
the Saint when God and the soul are at one, and it needs no prophet to
pray that the Lord will open the young man's eyes that he may see.
What a summary of experience is contained in those words which describe
the ministerial preparation of John the Baptist,--"He was in the desert
until the day of his showing unto Israel, waxing and growing strong in
spirit" (Luke i. 80).  Then he speaks of the Master, of His being led
by the Spirit into the wilderness (Luke iv. 1); of His departing and
going into a desert place (Luke iv. 42); of His withdrawal into the
wilderness for prayer (Luke v. 16); of His going out into a mountain to
pray, and continuing all night in prayer to God (Luke vi. 12).

Would it not be better, instead of making the commonplace assertion
that there was nothing of the ascetic about Jesus Christ, for us to
recall to mind His teaching at another time, that every disciple shall
be perfected as his Master (Luke vi. 40), and to inquire whether we
might not do well to love and covet retirement, even of an external
character, as a means to the attainment of that perfection?

Retirement with God is the only preparation for success, and the only
medicine for failure whether it be Moses wondering at the burning bush
in the mount of God, or Elijah eating angel's bread under the
juniper-tree.  We shall do well to observe also that it has been a
feature of all the great religions of the East; the secret of all
strong souls lies in those times of loneliness when they were bound
hand and foot as captives to the Everlasting Will.  We deride such
nowadays; call them mystic, contemplationist, fanatic.  George Fox,
sitting about in lonely places, reading his Bible in hollow trees, is
hard to understand.  But if it were anything but religion that was in
quest, people would not laugh.  Tell them of Demosthenes living in a
cellar, with head half shaved to prevent his appearing in public, and
there will be admiration; was it any wonder that he became an orator?
But let a man be as bent on becoming a saint; let him give up one
hour's frivolous talk in order to commune with his Father in secret;
then we suspect that such an one is becoming righteous overmuch.  Mind,
no one complains of a man being anxious to be wise overmuch, or rich
overmuch, healthy overmuch; he may burn the midnight oil and study,
watch the markets and scheme, frequent the gymnasium and develop his
muscle, and no one will find fault; but to spend time on what is at
least as important as wisdom, wealth, and health, and in a sense
involves them all,--this is fanatical, and not to be encouraged or
approved.  We miss much through our want of separation from the world,
and through our deficiency in insulation, or, which is the same word,
in isolation.  If we go into a science laboratory and examine the great
brass machines for holding electrical charges, we find that they are
all mounted on glass feet.  These are the insulators, and if it were
not for them, no electricity would remain on the surface; as it is,
electricity is hard enough to keep in charge, even with the best
insulators.  And we know sometimes what it is to have life and power
pass into us from above, but we don't know how to retain it, because we
have never learnt true retirement of heart and insulation of life.
There is good teaching in the following passage from one of Madame
Guyon's letters: "It is very desirable, and in the earlier part of your
ministry especially, that you should spend a portion of your time--and
that perhaps not a small portion--with God in retirement.  Let your own
soul be first filled with God's spirit, and then and not otherwise will
you be in a situation to communicate the Divine fulness to others.  No
man can give what he has not; or if a man has grace, but has it in a
small degree, he may in dispensing to others impart to them what is
necessary for himself."

Now if any one were to ask what is the especial strength of England as
regards other empires and commonwealths, the answer would be that it
lies in her insular position,--in the "silver streak" that parts her
from France; and the true Christian is girt round with separating grace.

We might draw two pictures to remind us how we may become strong for
God: one of the solitary vigil of the Great Shepherd keeping watch over
His flock by night; the other of the little company who waited with
joined hands and hearts in the upper room for the coming of the
Comforter; these two pictures representing the solitude of a single
soul and of united souls with God.

By such silent communion God will especially prepare us for service and
for suffering.

Some one spoke to John Nelson, making unfavourable comparison of John
Wesley with a prominent religious teacher of the day; and Nelson
replied, "He has not stayed in the upper room like John Wesley."  We
need our silent preparations for speech; to go forth, like Ezekiel,
into the plain to find the glory of the Lord; or like Daniel to the
river-side, where we may meet one like unto the Son of man; or like the
two who walked into the country whom Jesus met, and with whom He talked
till He made their hearts burn.

Especial preparation of this kind is necessary for the prosecution of
great enterprises.  We are reminded of this if we observe what followed
the all-night of prayer of the Lord Jesus,--how, when it was day, He
called unto Him His twelve apostles, and with them went down into the
plain to heal diseases and them that were vexed with unclean spirits.
Napoleon leaves his army, as they near the Russian frontier, and spurs
his horse until at last in solitary contemplation he sees before him
the river that separates him from the country that he is going to
invade: a striking picture, made more so by the thought of the luckless
termination of the enterprise.  And some of us, whom God will call to
great enterprises for Him that will not end in failure, will know what
it is to make a similar solitary advance; and in silent waiting upon
God to watch Him unroll before us the map of our journey, telling us
what we must do and what we must suffer for Him: and the silence makes
us strong when the voice of God has broken in upon it.  And we will not
marvel if to us, as to Saul of Tarsus, the answer to the question,
"What wilt thou have me to do?" should come in the form, "I will shew
him how great things he must suffer"; for our thoughts will turn again
to Him who said, "Rise and let us be going" from the solitude of the
upper room to the deeper retirement of the olive grove; who went a
little farther, even from those He loved most, as He prayed, "Not My
will but Thine be done"; and then took His way alone, and yet not
alone, to be the Redeemer and Reviver of the souls of men.




XII

TESTS OF FAITH, LOVE, AND RIGHTNESS

What are the experimental bases of our Christianity? and whereby shall
we know that we are of the truth and assure our hearts before Him?

Our answers to such questions may appear discouraging, but it is far
better that we should experience discouragement (not that we would
really wish to say a word to throw back the weakest believer from his
faith), than that we should attempt to fill ourselves with the formulas
that the Pharisees do eat.

Some time ago, in discussing the definite points and peculiar
characteristics of Christian life and experiences, we took as a
comparison the changes of state in a material body, from solid to
liquid, and from liquid to gaseous.  We observed that, just as in
nature the most important practical and theoretical investigations were
made upon bodies in the neighbourhood of those points where they
undergo a change of state, so it is also true in the world of grace
that our most valuable observations and inquiries relate to certain
critical points in the life--as conversion and sanctification; points
which may sometimes, like the freezing and boiling points of a material
substance, approach almost, if not quite, to coincidence, but which,
like them, may be very widely separated.

Suppose, then, to resume our figure, we were to propose to ourselves
the question, "How shall I know whether a body near the melting point
has passed from the solid to the liquid state?"  In some cases it would
be extremely easy to give an answer: with ice, under ordinary
circumstances, we should simply say that it becomes mobile; the word of
the Supreme Law having gone forth, the waters flow.  But our test would
not do for all liquids, because there are some that do not answer
readily to it, but are extremely sluggish in the neighbourhood of their
melting points, so that they seem almost solid even when liquid.  We
are obliged, then, to look for a better test, and we should probably
observe that the most convenient would be found in the fact that an
addition of heat produces a change in temperature in a body that has
passed its melting point.  Place a thermometer in melting snow, it
marks zero until the snow is really melted, and after that it rises.

Now, in a similar manner, we should find that many of the tests
popularly applied to discriminate spiritual life, are only partially
accurate; and since our method is a purely experimental one, we ought
to see that we apply proper methods of inquiry in an accurate manner.

Our question, then, is, "Whereby shall we know that we are of the
truth?" and we shall probably look to Scripture for an answer.  Indeed,
there is a School which tells us positively that we must try the
condition in which we are by the statements of Scripture, holding up
the Word of Life as a mirror before our lives, so that we may compare
the reflection with the Divine characteristics.

And provided this method be honestly applied, and not by the mere
selection of pet texts, it is probable that it is a correct one.  We
will, then, take the 1st Epistle of John, in which we find the most
definite assertions about personal experience, and try ourselves by it.

First of all, there is the simple and beautiful statement, "Beloved,
now are we the children of God"; most of us would quote it freely; but
our scientific method would at least require that we should harmonise
the supposed fact with the asserted consequences, "Therefore the world
knoweth us not, even as it knew Him not"; and if we find that the world
smiles on us in a way that it did not upon our Lord, then we must
either conclude (i.) that we were mistaken in the fact, or (ii.) that
while the word _we_ in the first part of the sentence is capable of
extension, the _us_ in the second is restricted in its reference to St.
John and the despised and rejected people with him--with, perhaps, a
possible reference to subsequent isolated instances, down to the
Salvation Army, and a few more in our own day!

Or, taking another simple assertion, "We know that we have passed
(crossed over, transmigrated) from death unto life."  We use the words
to convince people of the definite nature of conversion; we say it is
as real as a passage from death to life, and as truly marked; it is the
advent of a new life in the soul.  But can we honestly go on to base
the assertion on the fact of our own love to men, to--souls?  Would we
venture to stand or fall by this test, "I have loved, I love," and not
be afraid that our good angels would rise up to bear witness against us
as we said it?

A third passage comes before us; for some one will say, "We believe,
and is it not written that he that believeth hath everlasting life?"
and may we not rest upon the assurance conveyed by the present tense of
the verb employed?

Without going at present into the consideration of this passage from
the Gospel, let us say, roughly, that the test of the existence of a
spiritual life presented by St. John in the Epistle is of a threefold
character: it is--

([Greek: alpha]) A test of faith: he that believeth that Jesus is the
Christ is born of God.

([Greek: beta]) A test of love: he that loveth is born of God.

([Greek: gamma]) A test of righteousness: every one that doeth
righteousness is born of Him.

And if these are true criteria of the life within us, each of these
statements, with its necessary consequences, may be predicated of that
soul in which the Heavenly Life has been brought forth.

For instance: we must not take ([Greek: alpha]) and reject ([Greek:
beta]) and ([Greek: gamma]); nor must we disregard the consequences
which are a necessary part of our experimental verifications.

Of these three passages we should most probably elect to be tried by
([Greek: alpha]); for it is comparatively easy for us, especially at
the present day, to hold to an intellectual assent to a proposition.
In fact the difficulty is that the sieve is too wide; for almost every
one believes that Jesus is the Christ.  It must be evident then that we
have misunderstood the text or omitted the consequences which follow
from it.  Now the continuation of the statement is that whatsoever is
in this holy birth has victory over the world; and if we apply the test
of an overcoming life to our supposed faith, things look very
different.  Discouraged, we pass on to the second criterion; if not by
faith, let us be judged by love.

Since we all of us love something and some persons, we shall perhaps
find ourselves safe under this test.

But, upon examination, we perceive that he does not simply mean love of
God, or love of Jesus, or a merely selective human love; but love of
the brethren and of the children of God in a universal manner.  He
twists it backwards and forwards, saying at one moment, "He that loveth
God, let him love his brother also"; at another, "If he love not his
brother whom he hath seen, how _can_ he love God whom he hath not
seen"?  and again, "By this we know that we love the children of God,
when we love God," and, breaking off abruptly, "when we love God, and
keep His commandments."  Certainly if love is universal and coincident
with obedience, we shall scarcely be able to face this test.

So we pass on to the third criterion--that of righteousness; and here,
perhaps, we may expect some help, knowing how careful the Lord is to
judge us by the light we have, how generously He measures every effort
after holiness, and blesses every pang of the spiritual hunger.  We may
not be able to grasp the creeds which others recite so fluently; we may
not be able to give easy expression to the affections which thrill
within us; may, perhaps, wonder if we love at all; but at least we can
say this,--we want to be right.  But then we are confronted with the
difficulty that what God means is not that we should want to be right,
but that we should be right.  He explains and characterises the
spiritual birth by the words of the Apostle, "He that doeth
righteousness is righteous even as Christ is righteous."  "He that is
born of God doth not sin."  "Every one that is born of Him sinneth
not."  It almost seems as if the Apostle of Love had been
remetamorphosed into the Son of Thunder, and were calling down fire
from heaven upon us to devour us.  And do not let us say that this is
merely St. John's extravagant way of preaching holiness; for it is the
language in which the teachers of the time generally held and
transmitted the Christian doctrine.  Thus Ignatius, writing to the
Ephesians, adopts the three tests of faith and love and righteousness:
"No man professing the faith sinneth; nor does he who professeth love,
hate; the tree is known by its fruits; so, likewise, those who profess
to be Christ's shall be seen from their deeds."

And Polycarp presents the life-criteria in the same manner: "You shall
be built up in the faith which is given to you: before which is love to
God and to Christ and to the neighbour; for he who has love is far from
all sin."  And so we might multiply instances.

What shall we then say: Is a new Sinai set up on the square of the New
Jerusalem? or is it a sense of good things not seen as yet that makes
us cry, "Search me, O God; ... and see if there be any lack of faith or
love or righteousness in me, and lead me in the way everlasting"?




XIII

THE ETERNAL IDEA

"See that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed thee in
the Mount."--HEB. viii. 5.


When we speak of a pattern, we generally understand by it some
temporary or partial representation of an idea that is to be or has
been realised--such as the plan of a house, or the mould of a casting,
or, to take a more definite illustration, like the little silver models
of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, or the carved wooden lions which are
sold in the shops in the neighbourhood of the Lion Monument at Lucerne.
In these last two instances we see that the greater is made the pattern
of the less; and it is important for us to remember this; we are not to
suppose that God showed to Moses a diminutive tabernacle, a sort of
doll's house, in accordance with which he was to construct his house of
skins, or that He impressed upon him the nature of the priestly and
sacrificial worship by altars and offerings of a lower degree, of small
quantities.  It is more like what Philo explained it to be, that the
outer world is fashioned upon the model of the World of Ideas whose
centre is the Divine Word; or like Swedenborg's Doctrine of
Correspondence, by which we may learn

          Cup, column, candlestick,
  All temporal things related royally,
  And patterns of what shall be in the Mount.

But, to get a more simple and exact idea, let us observe the means
which those who have studied the heavens have taken to illustrate
astronomical facts.  There is an astronomical toy called the orrery,
which can be made, by proper mechanism, to represent, with tolerable
accuracy, the actual motions of the planets in their orbits, and which
can serve to illustrate the phenomena which from time to time occur in
the heavens.  Now the tabernacle of Moses is precisely like this; it is
a religious orrery, a means of representing religious truths and
bringing home religious facts to the consciousness of those who are
unable to study the skies and the lunar and planetary theories for
themselves.  But no one who wishes to be a real astronomer would be
content with winding up the orrery and watching the balls go round; he
would know that the heavens must be studied for themselves, if one was
ever to understand them accurately: and no one who wishes to be more
than moderately religious can remain satisfied with the meagre
assistance obtained by ritual and externalism.

We observe, too, that no one who wished to chronicle fresh facts would
go to the orrery to learn them.  He would, for instance, turn his
spectroscope on the sun, and not on the great ball which represents it
in the mechanism, if he wanted to determine the constituents of that
great luminary.  And let us remember that we shall never get at any
fresh religious truth by means of ritual; the proper destination of all
orreries, religious or otherwise, is the museum.  But meanwhile the
heavens still go round, which are the work of Thy fingers; and the moon
and the stars, which Thou hast ordained, can still be studied, even
when all the imitations of the universe have been swept away.  We
desire for ourselves an emancipation from all that is merely
traditional in the religious life; we would refer back our lives to the
original thought of God concerning them.  Our life needs emendation,
which can only take place satisfactorily by reference to the original
design.  We are often perplexed in our study of Scripture, by various
readings and incorrect texts, and we wish that we could attain to
something like the possession of an exact copy, if it were only of a
single gospel.  We read of Tischendorf finding the precious Codex in
the monastery on Mount Sinai, and cannot forbear wishing that, perhaps,
in some of the waste places of the East, there might be found a copy,
not of the fourth or fifth century, but, if possible, of the first.

Suppose, for example, that a copy of the Gospel of St. Matthew, signed
with his own hand, should come into our possession, in which it should
be stated that "I, Matthew, sometime a tax-gatherer for the Romans, and
now a collector of dues for the Almighty, and one of them that are set
to ask, 'How much owest thou unto my Lord?' have written this book, by
the aid of the Holy Spirit; wherein may be heard many voices of the
Lord; and lo! some of them have already come to pass, and the rest must
shortly be done.  And may the peace of him that wrote this book abide
also with them that read."  The supposition is not so very absurd, and
if it could be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the learned (a
people hard to persuade) that the Book and the hand were genuine, what
a number of questions would be settled.  An end would be made of all
glosses and emendations of the text over which there have been so many
disputes, and there would be an excision of all parts that have been
added by later hands.

But we must admit that the corruptions of the sacred text are
insignificant in comparison with the deviations that we find in our own
lives from the original thought of God concerning us.  Registered and
chronicled in heaven is the mind and will of our Father about us;
registered and chronicled also are the defects which have marred the
handiwork of God in the soul.  We do not always set out with the
intention of spoiling our souls, and of keeping them from being holy
books, in which he that runs may read; but as a matter of fact what
self writes in the margin soon creeps into the text; and what we write
between the lines soon becomes a part of the manuscript.

          Let who says
  The soul's a clean white paper, rather say
  A palimpsest, a prophet's holograph,
  Defiled, erased, and covered by a monk's--
  . . . . . . . we may discern perhaps
  Some upstroke of an Alpha and Omega
  Expressing the Old Scripture.


But if we are to undergo a real emendation, it must be by detecting
something more than an upstroke of the Divine Will; it must be by
reference to the original plan of God, and by a surrender to the same.

In the chapels at the back of the choir of Cologne Cathedral are
preserved the original parchments on which are drawn the plan of the
great minster.  All the centuries through which this building has been
raising, the men that have been working at it have had in reverence the
original thoughts of the master-minds at the first: and those who have
been chosen to the superintendence of the work have been men who were
reckoned the most conversant with the laws of the Gothic architecture.
One can imagine that Archbishop Englebert sleeps the more softly in his
silver shrine because of the completed work of to-day.  So we speak and
think of a great stone-temple, the working out of an idea whose details
were at first but scantily given, carried out in ages during which the
master-minds that planned it could no more be consulted.

And yet when a greater and more perfect tabernacle is in building, not
planned of mortal thought, and whose stones were too heavy to be moved
by mortal hands, how little reference there is to the plan of the
Founder, how few that are desirous of living according to the counsel
and will of God, and to see in that will, not a mere legal skeleton of
the structure, but a pattern, good and acceptable and perfect, with no
detail wanting for those who have eyes to see and ears to hear.  Alas!
that our lives should be lived so much at random instead of being so
fashioned that it might be said over the completed structure at the
last, "Whose architect and craftsman is God."  In Christianity the
ideal is to be the actual: there is to be no "shooting at the moon,
because by that means you reach higher than by aiming at a tree" (a
very doubtful statement even in mechanics); what God wants us to be
that we must be; and if He says, "Be ye perfect," then let us go on to
perfection and reach it.  The Christian is called upon by his Master to
live out and actualise God's ideal thought concerning him.  Upon the
map of his life is already marked out the road by which he is to reach
the heavenly city; if, at least, he reaches it, as God intends, by the
shortest way.  There are no roundabout roads marked on the map in the
Mount, and yet the Divine Plan of our life will be found inclusive of
the minutest necessary details, just as an Ordnance map will tell you
each feature of interest and importance as you go from place to place.
It is of the utmost importance that we should take counsel's opinion
about our lives, and that we should pray, "Lord, what wilt Thou have me
to do?" that we should, if need be, weep much, until the Lamb shall
take off the seals from that book of life, which, in the archives of
the celestial city, is entitled "The Life of ---- taken from the
Pattern in the Mount"; that we should learn to conform ourselves to the
Divine original, just as a manuscript, however deformed by glosses and
traditions, is accurately and certainly emended by the discovery of the
original text; that we should know, in some sense, as Christ did,
whence we come and whither we go; that, as He said, we also might feel
that for this end we were born and for this purpose we came into the
world, that we might bear witness to the truth; that, with Him, too, we
might in some measure be able to say, "The son can do nothing but what
he seeth the Father do"; and that at our ending it might be said, "He
lived out the secret thought and counsel of the Almighty."

But in thinking of the pattern in the Mount as a pattern of life, it is
important for us to see that, in the first instance, this thought was
presented to us in connection with that side of life which we call
worship; for there was to be a sanctuary made, etc., nor must we omit
to get, with regard to our worship, a glimpse into the thought of God
beforehand, consulting the oracle in advance as did men in the old
days.  We may not take voyage without the very best map that can be
had, lest we make shipwreck; nor, because we have not taken pains to
obtain the map, may we content ourselves with creeping round shores
that we know we ought to leave.

We must not separate the life from the worship; in fact they are one:
we learn that from the description of the ceaseless adoration of those
nearest the throne; they rest not day nor night saying, "Holy, holy,
holy."  Are we to suppose from this that their existence is occupied in
the mere repetition of an everlasting Trisagion; or that, as Beecher
once said, "they stand like wax candles round the throne, uttering an
occasional Hallelujah"?  Is it not rather God's way of showing us how
He is unceasingly glorified in those who live nearest Him, whose lives
worship Him?

The worship must be continuous with the life.  I have a thermometer
which has become perfectly useless because the air has broken up the
continuity of the alcohol; it is worth next to nothing as an index of
temperature.  And little can we learn from any soul in which the
continuity of the religious life is broken, and which has become life
streaked with worship.

Now let us learn one or two of the characteristics of a pure
life-worship.

Out of the worship according to the pattern in the Mount all
respectability has been differentiated: the Christian religion will not
hold caste in solution; it precipitates it to the bottom; its founder
died the death of a slave; how could they give the slave a back seat
after that?  On the contrary, they gloried in the name; Paul, a slave
and an apostle; a slave, and so eligible for the honour of crucifixion;
an apostle, and so sent with the good news of life.  Respect of persons
holds not in heaven; none there will criticise the clay out of which
the first raiment of your soul was made.  What need is there, then,
that we should leave off holding the faith of our Lord Jesus, with
respect of persons (there are few churches where the ministers dare to
preach on such a text as that).  Let us have done with such
classifications.  In Jesus Christ there is neither barbarian nor
Scythian, bond nor free, town nor university, but Christ is all, and in
all.

We know, too, that the life-worship to which God calls us consists in
abandonment and surrender to an animating, impelling spirit.  "The
Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy, and
thou shalt be turned into another man.  And it shall be, when these
signs are come upon thee, that thou shalt do as occasion serve thee,
for the Lord is with thee."  "Whither the Spirit was to go, thither was
their spirit to go."  The highest life is one in which we realise not
merely surrender to the Divine Will, but harmony with it, so that the
rails on which the life moves, the human and Divine wills, become
strictly parallel.

A surrendered life implies surrendered lips: this is the key of true
worship; every one having a psalm, an interpretation; ye may all of you
prophesy.  The ideal worship becomes the actual when heaven touches
earth, as on the day of Pentecost--they were all filled, and, by
consequence, they all ran over.  Who would venture to tell the woman
who had been a sinner, that it was not seemly that her life should
proclaim the _magnolia Dei_, the wonders of God; my lips, she says,
have touched His feet, and are consecrated for evermore.  Who shall
tell these prophesying handmaidens of the Lord that their place is in a
different spiritual order: "Are there two inner courts, they will
reply, to the New Jerusalem?"

  Whoso hath felt the Spirit of the Highest
    Cannot confound nor doubt Him, nor deny;
  Yea, with one voice, O world, though thou deniest,
    Stand thou on that side, for on this am I.




XIV

MORE LIGHT

"Ye are the light of the world."--MATT. v. 14.


There is a great stir nowadays about improved methods of lighting our
streets and houses.  Men began with torches and pine splinters; then
they advanced to candles and oil lamps; after that to coal gas; and now
we are coming to electricity.  In Paris they are experimenting with an
electrical system, and we shall have it in England before long, the
unmistakable cry of the natural world being "More light, more light."

A similar experience prevails in the spiritual life, whether we regard
that life in the isolated individual, or fix our attention upon the
dealings of God with the race of which we form a part.  We need, in
fact, an improved illumination.  It is plain that we do so.  The light
of Moses is not enough for us.  His face shines indeed, but with a
glory that fades away, so that he must put on a veil lest they should
detect its evanescence.  The prophets of old days are like the flight
of meteors across the sky--very bright while they last, but no settled
and abiding glory.  John the Baptist is a burning and a shining lamp;
but he says of himself, "I must decrease"; and with the words, "He must
increase," we are pointed on to Christ, the true Light of the world,
which if any man follow he shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life; who gives His own name and character to those whom
He receives as disciples, telling them, "Let your light shine."  And
the individual soul begins with the glimmer of grace and the spark of a
respondent love, and the operation of the Lord improves this little
fitful glimmer, and develops it, until it becomes a clear and strong
illumination, by which we may read something of the heart of God
towards us, and understand that in the spiritual world, as in the
natural, the order of this providence is, "More light, more light."
Light, that we may know our way more accurately; light, by which we may
work; light, by which we may read; light, by which we may help others
to walk and work and read; for "ye are the light of the world, and

  'Heaven doth with us, as we with torches do,
  Not light them for themselves.'"

God makes one man a lamp for another.  Every saint should be like a
cranny in the walls of heaven or translucent crystal in its
foundations, letting the glory through.  There is a glory within such a
one, because God has shined in his heart: there is a glory without him,
for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon him.  Not once nor
twice has the Church historian to record, "They beheld his face, as it
had been the face of an angel."

Now in any improved system of illumination we have a right to expect
that one of its characteristics will be its capability for a general
application.  It must not be as great a blaze as one's eyes can bear in
the principal thoroughfares, with thick darkness in the back streets
and lanes.  The improved light must become more sun-like, more
catholic, that is, more for everybody, must rise upon just and unjust;
and while it participates in the universality of the sun, it must share
also the steadiness of the stars.  Such, too, must be the better life
to which God calls us, not narrowing its sphere from day to day, nor
fitful, like a star of the first magnitude at one moment and of the
ninth a fortnight after, but burning with a steady patient zeal towards
all men that God has made.  The light of love will survive the light of
enthusiasm, as Christ outlasts John the Baptist; enthusiasm must be
swallowed up of love.

A lighted lamp is no respecter of persons; it shines in all directions
and upon all people and things, being an imitation, within its measure,
of the sun, concerning whom it is said, "There is nothing hid from the
heat thereof."  Is there this property of radiation about the light
that God has given you?  Have you learnt and practically entered into
the truth that the supreme love is also the universal love, and that
God is no respecter of persons?  "It gives light unto all that are in
the house": every soul truly won for God is marked with this token,
"For the sake of God and a perishing world."  But perhaps you will say,
"My light is so small that I cannot be a help or a witness to any; I
have not light enough to show any the right way."  Not so: a glow-worm
in the hedge can tell a man which way to walk, if it will only shine.
We may not all of us have the privilege of saying with John Wesley,
"The world is my parish."  Our parish may be small, and we may be
lights indoors, shining for only one neglected soul in the house, or
for young ones who have to be trained for the Lord, or for the men on
our own staircase in college, or with whom we walk in afternoons.

They say the problem about the electric light is the difficulty of its
subdivision, that is, of its multiplication; and in the spiritual world
the corresponding necessity is to multiply and reproduce the image of
God in Jesus Christ.  There was a similar difficulty in the early days
of photography; they could take one picture, but did not know how to
produce copies from it.  The Christian religion has in it the means of
producing not only one Light of the world but many--a church of men and
women of whom it may be said, as to the disciples at the first, "Ye are
the light of the world."  But will something within us object and say,
"Shining means burning up and burning out: the candle will grow
shorter, and the battery weaker"?  Now here we get at the root of the
matter.  Truly it is impossible to offer any real devotion to God, or
perform any real service to man, unless we are willing to pay the cost.
We are not to offer, either to God or man, of that which costs us
nothing.  The noblest thing in God's world is a lavished life; whereof
God has given us plain proof in this--that "He so loved the world that
He gave His Son"; and which Paul confirms as he says to some of those
to whom he had been the means of bringing light, "I will most gladly
spend and be spent for you."  "I will burn up for you, and then when I
am burnt out, I will be content with the mere candle-end of a life,
extinct for the love of Jesus."  And let us remember, too, that old
proverb, that "You can't burn a candle at both ends."  If our life has
been lighted at one end for God, we must not burn it at the other for
selfish enjoyments and ambitions.  The work that God has called you to
do is a burner that will take all the gas that you can supply.

Now suppose that every time a candle is lighted here, a star were to
shine out up yonder.  How eager we should all be to make the face of
heaven sparkle! we should take every candle and lamp that we could lay
hands on, light them up, and watch for the gleaming of the new wonder
in the sky.  Does that seem strange?  Did you never read that "They
that are wise shall shine as the sun, and they that turn many to
righteousness as the stars for ever and ever"?  The lamps and candles
in God's world do become suns and stars; the illumination that you will
have by and by will depend on the little candle that you are to-day;
and if you curtail your service for God and man down here, you will
clip the wings and shear away the strength of the angel that you hope
to be.

  O Lord, that I could waste my life for others,
    With no ends of my own!
  That I could pour myself into my brothers,
    And live for them alone!




XV

OVER-OVERCOMING

"We are more than conquerors."--ROMANS viii. 37.


The Apostle coins a word to suit his experience.  We should render it
exactly by saying, "In these things we over-conquer," imitating the
formation of similar words in our language, such as "over-master,"
"over-do."  More forcibly we might say, "In all these things we
over-overcome."  Coverdale gives the sense of it well in his
translation, "We conquer far."  Observe some of the ways in which this
excess and extravagance of victory may take place, for it is as if one
should win a victory over a foe in such a way as to prevent him from
ever troubling us again.  Our conquest over special sin is to be of
this character.  We are not to be content with winning the field while
the foe retires to some more secure position from which he will have to
be dislodged.  It is never meant that we should sin the same sin twice,
the Lord's purpose concerning us being shown in the Exodus of the
children of Israel: "The Egyptians which ye see to-day, ye shall see
them no more again for ever."  "Let him that stole steal no more."
"Neither do I condemn thee, go and sin no more."  There is a passage in
Miss Havergal's life which narrates how, after having been angry with a
servant, the word of comfort came to her through a friend: "Perhaps
this may be the last time that you will ever be so overcome."

And then our victories are to leave us stronger than before.  This will
seem quite contrary to the order of nature, in which seldom is there a
battle without garments rolled in blood, and where the victory often
costs as much to the victors as to the vanquished.  A great general has
said that nothing is half so terrible as a battle lost, except a battle
gained.  But to be more than conquerors! to rise the stronger for the
strife even while we strive! this is what is involved in the Christian
song of jubilee in the Eighth of Romans.

We over-overcome because of the completeness of the victory.  In most
campaigns it is by the balance of battles fought that the war is
decided.  Seldom does it happen that all the victory is on one side:
and even then there will be virgin fortresses that never have been
stormed, over which no alien flag has ever floated, which may be
yielded indeed by treaty, but not taken by force.  The over-conquering
Christian can say with the invading Israelites, "There was not one city
too strong for us: the Lord God delivered all unto us."

  And in the strength of this I rode....
    . . . . . . . .
  And brake through all, and in the Strength of this come victor.


The triumphant scenes of the Apocalypse are not all future; but even
now we know something of living and reigning with Christ in a
fellowship above sin and above sorrow.  For it was of sorrow rather
than of sin that the Apostle was speaking.  Our principle is one of
holy indifference--an experience far removed from mere apathy.  We do
not simply say with Buddha that sorrow drops off from him who has
finished the path, as water drops from a lotus leaf.  We are not sure
whether the sorrows always do disappear from the burdened life like
that.  But when they do not so pass away, the drop is turned to honey
in the cup of the flower; it is really the richer for its burden, and
so may well be content.

And now how do we come to this place of triumph?  By what means is it
granted us to enter so fully into the songs which shall one day resound
through the universe?  "Through Him that loved us."  It is alliance
with God that is the secret.  The three steps of the mystics are
_Purification_, _Illumination_, and _Union_; and simple as the
statement is, it is a better theology than many another of much larger
dimensions.  Many people do not understand this alliance in which we
are led into union with God, through the Holy Spirit.  They think it is
more like the old story of the dwarf and the giant, who went a warfare
together, in which expedition the dwarf lost his arms and legs, and was
only saved from imminent death in each conflict by the happy arrival of
the giant.  One can scarcely blame the dwarf for breaking up the
partnership.  We must understand that in Christianity the dwarf is the
giant, that the despised deformed puny child of faith is, when he
recognises his own weakness and leans upon his own God, big with the
force that rolls the stars along.  The might of God is in him: and
though he may have no armour nor sword to match the Philistine, he will
come home carrying his head for all that; for

  Man's weakness leaning upon God,
    Its end can never miss.




THE END




The Devotional Library


1. THE KEY OF THE GRAVE.  A Book for the Bereaved.
   By W. ROBERTSON NICOLL, M.A., LL.D.

2. MEMORANDA SACRA.
   By Professor J. RENDEL HARRIS, M.A.,
   Fellow of Clare College, Cambridge.



STUDIES IN MYSTICISM

AND CERTAIN ASPECTS OF THE SECRET TRADITION.

By ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE.


LITTLE BOOKS ON RELIGION.

Edited by the Rev. W. ROBERTSON NICOLL, LL.D.


1. CHRIST AND THE FUTURE LIFE.
   By R. W. DALE, LL.D.

2. THE SEVEN WORDS FROM THE CROSS.
   By the Rev. W. ROBERTSON NICOLL, LL.D.

3. THE VISIONS OF A PROPHET.  Studies in Zechariah.
   By the Rev. Professor MARCUS DODS, D.D.

4. THE FOUR TEMPERAMENTS.
   By the Rev. ALEXANDER WHYTE, D.D.

5. THE UPPER ROOM.
   By the Rev. JOHN WATSON, M.A., D.D.



WORKS BY THE REV. J. R. MILLER, D.D.


A MESSAGE FOR THE DAY.  A Year's Daily Readings.


DR. J. R. MILLER'S NEW YEAR BOOKLETS.

1. SECRETS OF A HAPPY HOME LIFE.

2. THE BLESSING OF CHEERFULNESS.



Dr. Miller's "Silent Times" Series.

1. MAKING THE MOST OF LIFE.

2. THE EVERY-DAY OF LIFE.

3. SECRETS OF A BEAUTIFUL LIFE.

4. SILENT TIMES.

5. WEEK-DAY RELIGION.



WORKS BY DR. JAMES STALKER.


THE TRIAL AND DEATH OF JESUS CHRIST.

A Devotional History of our Lord's Passion.

By JAMES STALKER, M.A., D.D.


IMAGO CHRISTI.

The Example of Christ.


THE FOUR MEN.


THE PREACHER AND HIS MODELS.

Yale Lectures on Preaching



LONDON: HODDER AND STOUGHTON.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoranda Sacra, by J. Rendel Harris

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORANDA SACRA ***

***** This file should be named 29096.txt or 29096.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/0/9/29096/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
