Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, August 24, 1880, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Harper's Young People, August 24, 1880
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: June 13, 2009 [EBook #29108]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, AUG 24, 1880 ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S

YOUNG PEOPLE

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.--NO. 43. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, August 24, 1880. Copyright, 1880, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

SOME QUEER RACING-CRAFT.


The illustrations on this page are of two varieties of sail-boats that
are very common in the vicinity of New York, and quite rare in other
parts of the country. They are boats built expressly for speed, and are
used almost entirely for racing.

The upper of the two pictures represents a regatta of swift sailing
craft that, as can be readily seen, would be totally unfit for a cruise
of any length, nor would they be of much use in ordinary
pleasure-sailing. They are very light of draught, have no cabin, are
apparently very much oversparred, and carry sails out of all proportion
to their size. Most of them are sloop-rigged, and the main-booms are so
long that, in order to control the sail at all, the main-sheet is
trimmed from the end of a platform that overhangs the stern of the
boat. Out on this is seated a skillful boatman, whose whole attention is
given to the main-sheet.

These boats have very large centre-boards, and in races carry crews of
from twelve to twenty men, whose duty it is to shift from side to side
the many sand-bags that are carried as ballast. Extraordinary speed is
made by these boats, and thousands of dollars are often wagered on races
between two or more of them.

Some of them have become so famous for speed that their names are seen
in the papers almost as often as those of noted race-horses. Among these
famous boats are the _Susie S._, _Brown_, _Nettle_, _Martha M._,
_Dare-Devil_, _Silence_, and many others, the names of which might be
mentioned if they could be recalled. The _Susie S._ and _Brown_ are now
known as the _Albertina_ and _Lady Emma_.

Quite a different-looking craft is that shown in the second picture on
the same page. It is a catamaran--a style of boat that has only been
known in New York waters during the past four years, and which is still
so rare as to excite much curiosity. A catamaran consists of two long,
narrow, canoe-like hulls, connected by strong wooden cross pieces, which
are fastened at the ends with ball-and-socket joints, so that each hull
moves up and down with the motion of the waves, independent of the
other. These hulls are air-tight as well as water-tight, and so buoyant
that they draw but a few inches of water. Upon the cross pieces
connecting them is built a light platform, surrounded by a wash-board.
This is deck and below-decks all in one, as it affords the only
accommodation for the crew that a catamaran can furnish: so you see that
it is not a very comfortable cruising boat either, though, to be sure, a
small tent might be carried, and raised over the deck when the boat came
to anchor for the night.

The speed attained by catamarans, with the wind free, is marvellous, and
with a good breeze many of them can beat the fastest steamers. A
catamaran has such a breadth of beam, on account of the distance between
the hulls, that it is almost impossible for it to capsize as ordinary
boats do, but it sometimes--though very rarely--turns a somersault, or
"pitch poles"; that is, buries its bows in the water, and upsets
head-foremost. This happened once to the first catamaran that was sailed
in New York Bay. She was sailing at a tremendous pace right before the
wind, when suddenly she buried her nose deep in the water, and turned
over so completely that her mast stuck deep in the mud at the bottom of
the bay, which was there very shallow. Her astonished crew, who had
never heard of such a performance, were thrown into the water far beyond
her.

The catamaran of New York Bay is merely a modified form of the famous
flying proa of the South-sea Islanders, who build the fastest sailing
craft in the world. The hull of the flying proa looks like half a
sail-boat that has been split in two, and had one side rebuilt straight
up and down. This straight side is always kept to leeward. From the
other side project stout bamboo poles, to the outer ends of which is
fastened a boat-shaped log of wood. This log, or outrigger, acts the
same part in the proa that the second hull does in the catamaran, and
practically gives the boat such a breadth of beam that it is impossible
to capsize her.

Sailing a catamaran is glorious fun, and the sensations are similar to
those felt in sailing an ice-boat; but it is a dangerous craft in
unaccustomed hands, and our boy-readers had better not undertake to
manage one of them without having been first carefully taught how to do
so. This is also a very good rule to apply to all kinds of sailing
craft, and, when followed, is the best known preventive of accidents.

A catamaran rarely carries a crew of more than two men, and of course
needs no ballast. Three of the most noted of these queer-looking boats
are the _Amaryllis_, which was the first one seen in New York waters,
the _Tarantella_, and the _John Gilpin_.




THE GOOD KNIGHT.


In the lovely country of Dauphine had lived for generations the lords of
Terrail, and there in the old castle of Bayard was born, in 1475,
Pierre, our "good knight." When a lad of thirteen, his father, finding
his health failing, and desirous of providing for his children's future,
asked each what he would like to be; and on Pierre's answering that he
was determined to be a soldier, told him he would try, through the
influence of his uncle, the Bishop of Grenoble, to place him as page in
the household of Charles, Duke of Savoy, where he could be properly
instructed. The request was granted, and Pierre was made ready to start.
His father gave him his blessing, and exhorted him to be valiant; but
his mother wept at parting with her young son, and, among other advice,
told him there were three things she commanded him always to do. "The
first is, you love and serve God, without offending Him in any way, if
it be possible to you. The second is, be mild and courteous to all; keep
yourself temperate in eating and drinking; avoid envy; be loyal in word
and deed; keep your promises; succor poor widows and orphans. The third
is, be bountiful of the goods that God shall give you to the poor and
needy, for to give for His honor's sake never made any man poor." Pierre
promised to remember his mother's advice (and his life shows that he
did); and giving him a little purse she had made for him, with some
pieces of gold in it, she kissed him, and they parted, never to see each
other again.

Charles, Duke of Savoy, was charmed with his page, and would have been
glad to keep him; but King Charles of France was so pleased with him,
when on a visit to the Duke, that he took him into his own service, and
when only seventeen Pierre accompanied the King in his expedition into
Italy. Here he gained great fame, and was ever after called "Bayard, the
good knight, without fear, and without reproach."

It would be impossible to tell of all his deeds, for "the loyal servant"
who wrote his life says of him, "The good knight was a very register of
battles, so that on account of his great experience every one deferred
to him," and until his death, save times, when laid up with wounds, he
was constantly battling for his King and country. Twice was he captured;
but so great was his fame both for prowess and goodness that both times
his enemies released him without ransom. Once he defended a bridge
single-handed against the enemy, and enabled the French army to retreat.
So great was his valor at the battle of Marignano that Francis I. of
France, after the field was won, craved the accolade at his hand. But
never, either in victory or defeat, did he forget the promise he made
his dear mother.

"Was he in possession of a crown, all shared it; the first thing he did
when he rose was to serve God; he was a great giver of alms; and there
was no man during his life who could say he had refused him anything
within his power to grant."

Once, when assaulting Brescia, he was severely wounded, and after the
town was taken was carried to the house of a nobleman who had fled,
leaving his wife and daughters, and Bayard protected them from pillage
and insult. When his wound was cured, for his kindness to them the
mother besought his acceptance of 2500 ducats, but bidding her ask her
daughters to come to him, he said to them: "You must know that military
men are not usually furnished with pretty toys to give to ladies. The
good lady, your mother, has given me this money, and I present each of
you one thousand ducats to aid you in marrying." Then, to the mother,
"Madam, I accept these five hundred ducats, to be distributed among the
poor nuns of the convents that have been pillaged; I give it to you in
charge for me."

When he was ready to mount his horse, the daughters each gave him a
present, one "a pair of bracelets delicately composed of fine gold and
silver threads, the other a purse of crimson satin most curiously
wrought." He told them the presents came from such good hands, he should
value them at ten thousand crowns. "He then put the bracelets on his
arms and the purse in his sleeve, declaring he would wear them as long
as they lasted for their sakes."

In the year 1524 he was sent to reduce Genoa; but the French were
unsuccessful, and were forced to retreat; and while passing the river
Sesia (April 30), Bayard was covering the rear of the army, when a stone
from an arquebuse shattered his spine. "_Mon Dieu!_" he cried, "I am a
dead man," and fell heavily from his horse.

His esquire, by his orders, set him against a tree, with his face to the
Spaniards, and taking hold of his sword by the cross-hilt, he kissed it,
confessed his sins, and then swooned away. His enemies, when they came
up and found him thus, were full of pity, and when he came out of his
swoon he found they had erected a pavilion over him, and placed him on a
bed. They mourned for him as sincerely as the French, their chief, the
Marquis of Pescara, declaring, "Never have I seen or heard tell of any
knight who could compare with you in all admirable qualities." He had
Bayard's body embalmed, and returned it to his friends, after having
solemn service for him two days; and the dead hero was carried home to
Grenoble. Half a league from the city the bier was met by all the
dignitaries of the place. He was buried in the convent of Minims, and
France mourned publicly for him for a month. Of all the vast sums he had
obtained from his prisoners by way of ransom he left none behind, having
dowered over one hundred orphan maidens, and succored the many widows
who appealed to him for aid.




CROCODILE TEARS.


  On the banks of the Nile an old crocodile
    Lay sunning himself one day,
  And he gently did croon an attempt at a tune,
    As he watched some small children at play--
              At play--
    As he watched some small children at play.

  He pondered awhile, and a hungering smile
    Revealed the extent of his jaw;
  He was twenty feet long, was uncommonly strong,
    And his teeth were arranged like a saw--
              Like a saw--
    And his teeth were arranged like a saw.

  He used every wile their hearts to beguile,
    As toward them he stealthily stole;
  He balanced each scale, and waggled his tail,
    Then gobbled those children up whole--
              Up whole--
    Then gobbled those children up whole.

  And such is the style of this old crocodile,
    He sheds bitter tears o'er his prey;
  He was filled with deep gloom when he thought of their doom,
    And he wept all the rest of the day--
              The day--
    And he wept all the rest of the day.




A FRESH WATER AQUARIUM.

BY A. W. ROBERTS.


Many fresh-water plants have a tendency to grow above the surface. When
this takes place, the leaves become so different in shape that they can
hardly be recognized as belonging to the same plant. Therefore care must
be taken to keep all plants submerged that are intended to supply air
for the fish.

[Illustration: MERMAID-WEED.]

One of the most common plants is the mermaid-weed (_Proserpinaca_). I
have drawn it submerged and out of water, to show the change in the
leaf. It grows along the margins of ponds that partially dry up in
summer.

[Illustration: WATER-THYME.]

Water-thyme (_Anacharis canadensus_) grows in slow-flowing streams. It
requires coaxing to establish it in an aquarium, but when once rooted,
is apt to grow too fast, requiring thinning out. Heap plenty of gravel
on the root ends. Do not tie the bunch with string, as it will cause it
to decay.

[Illustration: NITELLA.]

_Nitella flexis_ is almost a rootless plant, and will grow without any
care. It is found growing in shady parts of cool ponds, streams, and
lakes.

[Illustration: FONTINALIS.]

_Fontinalis antipyretica_ grows in springs and cool, shady ponds. It
resembles a very fine and long moss. In color it is of a beautiful light
green. I have often stored up quantities of this plant during summer (it
becoming perfectly dry), that I might have it for winter use, and when
placed in an aquarium it started out as fresh as ever.

[Illustration: DUCK-WEED.]

Duck-weed, or duck's-meat, is a small floating plant, covering the
surfaces of ponds and lakes in shady places. It is one of the best
surface plants for producing shade, or for cutting off light that enters
from the top of the water. Its thousands of rootlets afford
hiding-places for numerous small aquatic animals, such as the hydra,
crimson water-spider, and the brick-maker.

A small stone should be tied to each bunch of plants, to anchor them
till they take root.

After your aquarium has been in operation a few days, a green coating
will begin to form on the glass. This is a minute plant that is
developed by the action of light. It can be removed by means of a swab.
In all other parts of your aquarium allow it to grow, as it is the
favorite food of gold-fish and snails.

[Illustration: SNAILS.]

I have given drawings of the two best kinds of snails. One is shown with
its broad foot expanded, by which it moves along the surface of the
water, or on the glass when eating the green coating spoken of. Snails
also eat decaying vegetable matter.

For keeping the water very clear, introduce a small-sized fresh-water
mussel. Give him at least two inches of sand, in depth, in a corner of
the tank, to burrow in, but watch him well, for if he dies without your
knowledge your aquarium will be ruined.

[Illustration: CADDIS-WORMS.]

In the illustration are figured three kinds of caddis-worms. These worms
are useful for consuming decaying animal matter. When a "cad" has grown
too large for his house, he makes a little case of silk, which he covers
at each end with pieces of leaves, wood, or straw, biting them to the
right length; some fasten on small bits of stone and shells. However
rough the outsides of their houses may be, the insides are smooth, and
lined with silk. When he changes into a chrysalis, he crawls up a plant,
and closes up both ends of his house with a strong net-work of silk,
which allows the water to pass through, but prevents the entrance of
enemies. As he has taken care to place himself near the surface of the
water, he easily escapes when he comes forth a four-winged insect
resembling a small moth.

[Illustration: APPLE-SMELLERS.]

Apple-smellers, or merry-go-rounds, are very interesting. They are of an
intense shining black in color, and generally school together, moving in
circles, with great rapidity, on the surface of the water. They are
called apple-smellers on account of the strong odor they possess,
resembling that of apples or quinces, and merry-go-rounds on account of
their merry circling motions around one another. Young apple-smellers
live on the bottoms of ponds, and look like centipedes. When the time
comes for them to change into real apple-smellers, they climb up a
plant, and make small bags of gray paper, into which they fasten
themselves till they get their swimming legs and shining black new
clothes, after which they burst open the paper bags, and swim off to
join their friends gliding so merrily on the surface of the pond. When
an apple-smeller dives to the bottom of a pond to take a rest or to
feed, he attaches a globule of air to his tail (see cut); this he
breathes while under water.

[Illustration: STICKLEBACKS.]

The nine and the three spined sticklebacks are, without doubt, the most
wonderful fish for their size that are common to our waters. They will
live well in either fresh or salt water aquaria, building nests and
raising their young under all discouragements. The male builds the nest
for the female to lay her eggs in. The nest is composed of plants
cemented together with a glue provided by the male, who also carries
sand and small stones to the nest in his mouth, with which he anchors
it. During the breeding season the male assumes the most brilliant hues
of blue, orange, and green; previous to this season he is of a dull
silvery color. When an enemy approaches the nest, be he large or small,
he will attack him, inflicting wounds with his sharp spines. Nor will he
allow the mother of the young sticklebacks to come near, as she is so
fond of her babies that she often forgets herself and eats them up. When
the young "tittlebacks," as they are often called, swim too far from the
nest, the male takes them in his mouth and brings them back, throwing
them out with such force that they make many somersaults before landing.
Sticklebacks are the smallest known fish when first hatched out of the
egg, being nearly invisible.

[Illustration: DRAGON-FLY.]

Here is the dragon-fly, as he looks before he gets his wings. He lives
on the bottoms of ponds when he is young; but at a certain age he
ascends to the surface, and crawling out of his old clothes, comes forth
an unmistakable darning-needle. When he lived under the water he had
very large and long jaws, folded up on the under side of his head. If a
fish came within reach, he would dart out this curious trunk, and
seizing it, convey it to his mouth. He also has the power of taking in
and squirting out water from his tail; this action forms a current,
which draws small insects within his reach. The taking in of the water
is also his method of breathing, and the ejecting of it with force
propels him through the water.

[Illustration: BOAT-FLIES.]

Water-boatmen, or boat-flies, are so named from their resemblance to
tiny boats with oars. As they have to swim on their backs, they are
provided with large and very observing eyes. When they breathe they come
to the surface, and by a quick diving motion, and the assistance of
numerous stout hairs on the hind parts of their bodies, they entangle a
mass of air, which, as they descend, spreads, giving their bodies a
bright silvery color.

It is best to keep these aquatic insects by themselves, as they are all
voracious feeders, and fierce in their habits. They are not so beautiful
in form, color, and motions as fish, but possess a much greater interest
as they pass through their many transformations. As most of them can
fly, the aquarium should be provided with a close-fitting frame covered
with mosquito netting.

[Illustration: CRIMSON-SPOTTED NEWT.]

The crimson-spotted newt is one of the most inoffensive of all animals
for the aquarium, and is valuable from the fact that he does not breathe
water, but rises to the surface to breathe. Every few weeks he casts his
skin, which he swallows, seeming to relish it, after which he comes
forth more brilliant than ever.

[Illustration: TADPOLE.]

An aquarium without tadpoles, from which to obtain a supply of small
frogs, is not much of an aquarium; and as they are also surface
breathers, you can use them freely.

The rock-fish is a very safe fish for the aquarium, as it does not
breathe the water, but rises to the surface, and stores away a supply of
air, with which it descends to the bottom, remaining for half an hour
before it rises for a new supply.

All fresh-water fish (excepting the trout family) can be kept in a
fresh-water aquarium. Select the very smallest specimens; have all of an
equal size, to prevent their quarrelling; feed on shreds of raw beef, or
earth-worms that have been freed of all earthy matter by placing them in
damp moss or grass overnight. _Look out for food not eaten._




[Begun in No. 31 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, June 1.]

THE MORAL PIRATES.

BY W. L. ALDEN.


CHAPTER XIII.

The cruise up the Schroon was a delightful one while it lasted. The
river was so narrow that the trees on either side frequently met,
forming a green and shady arch. Although there was a road not far from
the river, and there were houses and small villages at a little distance
from its banks, the boys while in their boat saw nothing but the water,
the trees, and the sky, and felt as far removed from civilization as if
they were sailing on an African river. They saw nothing to shoot, after
their adventure with Joe's bear, and there were no signs of fish in the
water; but they delighted in the wild and solitary river, and were very
much disappointed when, at the close of the day, they reached a dam so
high that it seemed hopeless to try to carry the boat around it.

Before camping they walked some distance above the dam, and found that
the river was completely blocked up with logs, which had been cut in the
forest above, and floated down to the saw-mill. The men at the mill said
that the boys would find the river choked with logs for a distance of
nearly three miles, and that a little farther up it became a mere brook,
too shallow and rapid to be navigated with the _Whitewing_.

It was clear that the cruise on the Schroon had come to an end, and that
it would be necessary to hire a wagon to take the boat to the lake.
Having reached this decision, the boys made their camp, and being very
tired, put off engaging a team until morning.

When morning came, one of the men at the mill came to see them while
they were at breakfast, and advised them not to go to Schroon Lake. He
said that the lake was full of houses--by which he meant that there were
a great many houses along its banks--and that if they were to go there
they would find neither shooting nor fishing. He urged them to go to
another lake which they had never heard of before--Brandt Lake. It was
no farther off than Schroon Lake, and was full of fish. Besides, it was
a wild mountain lake, with only two or three houses near it. The boys
thanked him, and gladly accepted his advice. They had supposed that
Schroon Lake was in the wilderness, and were exceedingly glad to find
out their mistake in time to select a more attractive place. The owner
of the saw-mill furnished them with a wagon, and soon after breakfast
they started for Brandt Lake.

When, after a pleasant ride, they came in sight of the lake, they were
overjoyed to find how wild and beautiful it was. Steep and thickly
wooded hills surrounded it, except at the extreme southern point, where
they launched their boat. It was not more than two miles wide at the
widest part, and was about five miles in length, and they could see but
two houses--one on the east and the other on the west shore. They
eagerly hoisted the sail, and started up the lake to search for a
permanent camping ground; and after spending the afternoon in examining
almost the entire line of shore, they selected a little rocky island in
the upper part of the lake, which seemed made for their purpose.

There was a great deal of work to be done, for they intended to stay at
Brandt Lake for a fortnight. They had to clear away the underbrush and
cut down several small trees to make room for the tent. A small
landing-place had to be built of stones and logs, so that the boat could
approach the island without striking on the sharp rocks which surrounded
it. Then the stores were all to be taken out of the boat, and placed
where they would be dry and easy of access. The provisions had by this
time become nearly exhausted; but the boys had been told that they could
get milk, eggs, butter, bread, and vegetables at one of the houses,
which was not more than a mile from the camp, so they were not troubled
to find that of their canned provisions nothing was left except a can of
peaches.

Of course all this work was not done in one day. On the afternoon of
their arrival at the lake the boys merely pitched the tent, and then
went fishing, with a view to supper. Fishing with drop lines from a
large rock at one end of their little island, they caught perch as fast
as they could pull them in, good-sized pickerel, and two or three
cat-fish. That night they ate a supper that would have made a
boarding-house keeper weep tears of despair, and went to bed rather
happier than they had ever felt before.

Tom was to row over to the house for milk and other provisions in the
morning; but when morning came, the boat was gone. She had broken loose
during the night, not having been properly fastened, and had floated
quietly away. A faint speck was visible on the surface of the lake about
two miles away, which Harry, who had remarkably good eyes, said was the
_Whitewing_. Whether he was right or wrong, it was quite certain that
the boys were imprisoned on the island, with nothing to eat but a can of
peaches and some coffee and sugar.

The fish, however, were waiting to be caught, and before very long a
breakfast of fish and of coffee without milk was ready. The boys then
began to discuss the important question of how they were to get back
their boat, or to get away from the island.

It was a mile to the shore, and nobody felt able to swim that distance.
Joe proposed that they fasten one of their shirts to a tall tree, as a
signal of distress, and then fire the gun every minute. The objection to
this plan was that the nearest house was out of sight behind a little
point of land, and that no one would see the signal, or would understand
why the gun was fired. Then Tom proposed to build a raft, on which two
boys could paddle after the runaway boat. This was a practicable
suggestion, and it was at once put into execution.

It was hard work to cut down timber enough to build a raft, but by
perseverance the raft was finished before noon. It consisted of four
logs laid side by side, and bound together with handkerchiefs,
shoe-strings, green twigs, and a few strips from one of Harry's shirts,
which he said was unnecessarily long. It was covered with two or three
pieces of flat drift-wood; and when it was finished, a piece of board
was found, which was shaped with the hatchet into a rude paddle. Then
Tom and Harry proceeded to embark.

[Illustration: HARRY SETS OUT IN PURSUIT OF THE BOAT.]

The raft floated Harry very well, but promptly sank when Tom also
stepped on it. Either more timber must be added to it, or one boy must
go alone in search of the boat. Harry insisted upon going at once, and
as the lake was perfectly smooth, and he could swim well, there did not
seem to be great risk in his making the voyage alone. Bidding the boys
good-by, he paddled slowly away, and left his comrades to anxiously wait
for his return.

It was ticklish work paddling the raft. The logs were fastened together
so insecurely, owing to the fact that all the rope was in the runaway
boat, that Harry was in constant fear that they would come apart, and
was obliged to paddle very carefully to avoid putting any strain on the
raft. With such a craft speed was out of the question; and after an hour
of hard work the raft was only half way between the island and the boat.
Harry was not easily discouraged, however, and he paddled on, knowing
that if nothing happened he must reach the boat in course of time.

Something did happen. When, after paddling for more than two hours, the
_Whitewing_ was rather less than a quarter of a mile from the raft,
Harry missed a stroke with his paddle, and tumbled over. He struck the
raft with his shoulder, and went through it as easily as if it had been
fastened together with paper. When he came to the surface again he found
that the raft had separated into its original logs, and that his voyage
on it was ended. Luckily the _Whitewing_ was now within swimming
distance, so he struck out for her, and finally crept into her over the
stern, so much exhausted that he had to lie down and rest before taking
to the oars. Had the raft gone to pieces half an hour sooner, he would
have been in a dangerous position; for it is doubtful if he could have
clung to one of the logs long enough to drift to the shore without
becoming totally exhausted.

The boys on the island did not witness the end of Harry's raft, for it
was too far away when the accident occurred for them to see anything but
a little black dot on the water. They became, however, very anxious
about him as the hours went by and he did not come back. Tom was
especially uneasy, and blamed himself for permitting Harry to go alone.
He thought of making another raft and going in search of Harry; but
there were no more strings with which to fasten logs together, and he
did not quite like to tear up his clothes and use them for that purpose.
He did, however, resolve that, if Harry did not come in sight within
another hour, he would take a small log, and, putting it under his arms,
try to swim to the mainland and borrow a boat, if one could be found, in
which to search for his comrade. He was spared this hazardous
experiment; for toward the end of the afternoon Harry and the
_Whitewing_ came in sight, and were welcomed with a tremendous cheer.

Tom took the boat and went for provisions, and when he returned the
_Whitewing_ was not only dragged on shore, but fastened to two different
trees with two distinct ropes. The boys were determined that she should
not escape again; and when Joe proposed that somebody should sit up with
her all night, so that she could not cut the ropes and run away, Tom
seriously considered the proposal. The next day a snug little dock was
built, in which she seemed quite contented, and from which she could not
escape without climbing over a stone breakwater--a feat of which there
was no reason to believe that she was capable.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




THE TALL CLOCK.

BY MARY DENSEL.


One night our six tow-headed urchins were sitting round the table
chattering like so many magpies. The tall clock in the corner insisted
on talking too.

  "Tick-tock--tick-tock.
  'Tis eight--o'clock;
  Come, boys--cease noise,
  Quick tread--to bed;
  'Tis eight--o'clock.
  Tick-tock--tick-tock."

That is what it said.

Then it rang out eight clear strokes, and the jolly red moon, which for
two weeks had been slowly rising in the space above the clock's face to
show how the month was passing by, and which was now full and round,
like the real moon out-of-doors--this jolly red clock-moon seemed to
wink waggishly at the children.

"Hurry! scurry! Here it is eight o'clock, going on nine--next comes
ten--eleven--twelve. Half the night gone, and you not in bed yet."

How its eyes twinkled! It nearly burst its fat cheeks laughing at its
own joke.

Out the door, up the uncarpeted stairs, clattered the boys--Solomon and
Isaac, Elias and John, Philemon and Romeo Augustus.

They all gave a nod to the clock-moon. "Good-night, old fellow," they
said. All but Romeo Augustus. He did not like the clock. That is what
this story is about.

Solomon and Isaac marched off to their own chamber. They would not
condescend to associate with "the babes." Solomon and Isaac were twins.
They were, as I have told you before, ancient. They were fourteen years
old. Philemon and Romeo Augustus were only eight, and they knew no
pleasure equal to that of sitting bolt-upright in their trundle-bed
while Elias peered down at them over the foot-board of his bed, and told
them stories with gestures.

"Tell us about the clock," said Philemon, on this occasion.

But at this suggestion Romeo Augustus--poor little Romeo
Augustus!--quaked in his red flannel night-gown.

Elias always spoke in deep and dreadful tones when he alluded to the
clock.

"Persons don't live inside, but THINGS!" said he; and Romeo Augustus
quaked afresh. "Two of them hang in air. They haven't a sign of a head,
nor feet, nor arms, nor legs. They just dangle. And the other
THING"--here Elias's voice was awful--"the other THING writhes in agony.
It is never quiet; never, never, nevermore; not when we're asleep, nor
when we're eating our porridge. Forever and forever it writhes--_anon_."

That was a capital word to end with. No one knew what "anon" meant. It
was probably some especially horrible way of writhing.

Romeo Augustus shook with terror. He could hear that clock talking still
down stairs.

  "Tick-tock--tick-tock.
  'Tis nine--o'clock.
  Ro-meo--be-low,
  Come see--in me
  THINGS drear--ap-pear.
  'Tis nine--o'clock.
  Tick-tock--tick-tock."

That is what it said.

"How painful it must be to 'writhe anon'!" whispered Romeo Augustus to
himself. "I wouldn't care if it was _persons_--but THINGS!"

For some unknown reason the idea was ghastly to Romeo Augustus.

Now, my little readers, wait a moment before you laugh at him. Hear what
this eight-year-old boy did.

Once upon a time Solomon had composed the following somewhat startling
proverb, "It is a wise fellow who wrenches forth the serpent's fang."
Which dark saying, being interpreted, was, "If you are scared of
anything, just trot right up and wrestle with it."

"For," continued Solomon, in a speech to the other five, "that's the
only way to grow plucky. If you hear an odd noise, don't hide your head
like a hyena or an ostrich, whichever it is, but hunt it up. If you
happen to see a ghost, skip up and attack it."

Now the words of Solomon were always prized as gold. The boys reverenced
Solomon, who could repeat the whole of a Latin verb, and was, moreover,
"pitcher" on "the nine."

So the "babes" had made a solemn compact that if any one of them was
ever "scared," he should step boldly out and "wrench forth the serpent's
fang." Should he be too great a coward so to do, he should wear a huge
letter =C= pinned on his jacket for a fortnight, and be subject to all
the taunts which could be imagined at his expense.

No wonder the boys grew brave. They dared not be otherwise.

Philemon's special bugbear had been a dark cellar, filled to overflowing
with shadows. Down into this cellar he had gone with a beating heart,
and had forced himself to search out every crack and cranny, even to the
coal-bin. Of course he found nothing to fear, and now it was Philemon
who was always ready to go down for apples in the winter evenings, and
that too without even a candle.

As for Elias, he had stood in much awe of a grove over the hill, and was
obliged to spend the greater part of a whole month wandering solitary
among the trees before he could snap his fingers at their shadows.

And now Romeo Augustus's turn had come. His poor little heart was filled
with dismay when he found that he was in mortal fear of the clock. He
felt sure that he should have to search the matter to the very bottom.

For a week he had been trying to bring himself up to the pitch of
requisite boldness. More than once he had marched up to the enemy, and
then marched back again, vanquished. He dared not breathe a word to
Philemon. The big letter =C= was all ready to cling to his back, and how
could he bear such disgrace? No sympathy could he expect from any
brother. His work must be done, and done alone.

How loudly the clock called out from below! Could it be actually
stalking up stairs?--so sharply did its tones ring in Romeo Augustus's
wide-open ears.

  "Tick-tock--tick-tock.
  'Tis ten--o'clock.
  Make haste--don't waste
  Minutes--in fits
  Of fear.--Come here!
  'Tis ten--o'clock.
  Tick-tock--tick-tock."

Romeo Augustus put one bare foot out of bed; he drew it back; he half
rose, and sank on the pillows again. Then, with a mighty effort, he gave
a bound, and stood shivering in the middle of the floor.

The house was still. Elias was sleeping the sleep of the just, never
dreaming how he had terrified his small brother.

Out into the entry stole Romeo Augustus. The harvest-moon threw a broad
band of light on the stairs. Down crept the small bare feet along the
lower hall into the sitting-room. How weird everything looked in the
dimness! Gaunt and tall stood the clock in the corner.

The outside moon tossed a handful of beams into the clock-moon's face.
The clock-moon was so very jolly! Did he know that just beneath were
THINGS?--two dangling in air, headless, armless? one "writhing in agony
anon"?

Romeo Augustus almost turned and fled. His breath came in gasps. How
could he go forward? But he creeps on. His hand is on the clock's
brass-bound door. Will he open it now?

  "Tick-tock--tick-tock.
  Past ten--o'clock.
  Turn key--and see
  Things three--in me.
  Past ten--o'clock.
  Tick-tock--tick-tock."

Snap! went the brass key. Into the dark were thrust two little cold
hands.

Then, suddenly, "Ha! ha! ha!" a shrill laugh went dancing up stairs.
"Ha! ha! ha! Hurrah! Ha! ha! ha!"

What could the matter be?

"Ha! ha! ha! Oh, ha! ha! ha!"

Father and mother, Solomon and Isaac, Elias and John, with Philemon in
the rear--into the room they all rushed, winking and blinking, candles
in their hands.

There, in his red night-gown, hopping up and down in front of the clock,
was Master Romeo Augustus.

"Ha! ha! Hurrah! It's nothing but the _pen'lum_ and the two _weights_.
Ha! ha! ha!"

Nobody could guess what he meant. If Elias knew, he kept his own
counsel. But a gleam of intelligence broke over Solomon's face.

"It's a wise fellow who wrenches forth the serpent's fang," shouted he.
"Three cheers for Romeo Augustus!"

The cheers were given with a will.

But mother caught her little son in her arms. "He's been walking in his
sleep," she cried, "and it all comes from eating plum-cake for tea."

But the clock knew better. So did the clock-moon. It wagged its head at
Romeo Augustus. "Brave boy! brave boy!"

And Romeo Augustus nodded back. "Good-night, old fellow!"

He could say that now with the rest. He was not afraid of the clock any
longer.




[Illustration]

[Illustration: SCENES ON AND ABOUT THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL ASSEMBLY GROUNDS AT
CHATAUQUA LAKE, NEW YORK.--FROM SKETCHES BY FRANK BEARD.--[SEE PAGE
626.]]




YOUNG PEOPLE AT CHAUTAUQUA.

A BOY'S LETTER.


Dear Tom,--I last saw you waving your cap as our train rolled out of the
station. That night I slept on a shelf in the sleeping-car, and the next
morning we got breakfast at Hornellsville; and it was a good one, I tell
you. About noon we got off the cars at Jamestown, and after dinner rode
over the hill in a stage, and came to what looked like a narrow river
winding among the trees.

This they said was the outlet of Chautauqua Lake. You would suppose that
the water runs into Lake Erie, which is only seven miles away from Lake
Chautauqua. But instead it goes into the Ohio River, and then down the
Mississippi into the Gulf of Mexico.

We went on board a steamboat three stories high, with a big paddle-box
fastened on the stern, and steamed up the outlet for about three miles
through the wildest swamp I ever saw, until all at once the lake opened
before us. I thought that we would be at Chautauqua in a few minutes,
but the old stern-wheel kept pushing us on for a couple of hours. At
last I began to catch glimpses of cottages among the trees. Then we drew
up to a little wharf, and almost everybody went ashore. We followed the
crowd through the gate, and so we found ourselves at Chautauqua.

The first thing that I saw was a park, with flowers and fountains and
statues under the great trees. Then I came upon the model of a city,
with all its houses and churches. This was Jerusalem. A man was
explaining it to a crowd of people, and pointing out the places with a
long pole. There is an Oriental house, and a park laid out to look like
Palestine, with the top of Mount Hermon white-washed, and the Jordan
with real water. A frog winked his eye at me, and then jumped into the
Dead Sea. (That makes poetry, don't it?)

There are any number of streets laid out in the woods, and lined with
all sorts of cottages. We all asked uncle to let us live in a tent, and
you don't know how airy and pleasant it is. Cousin Jennie says she can't
find any places to hang up "her things"; but I put mine on the floor,
which is always handy.

I happened to be awake early the next morning after we came. Everything
was quiet and still until the bell rang for six o'clock. Then there was
a noise, as if all the boys in our school were hollering at once. I
jumped up, wondering if the Fourth of July had come again. But pretty
soon I found that it was only the newsboys (which means most of the boys
here) selling the morning paper, _The Assembly Herald_. I went out and
got a lot of papers, and made ten cents profit on them before breakfast.

There is a big bell on the upper part of the grounds. An old man rang it
while I was standing by, and all at once I saw dozens and dozens of boys
and girls running from all directions toward the corner where I stood. I
asked one fellow what it all meant, and he said, "Why, don't you
know?--it's the _children's hour_." So I just dropped into the stream,
and went up the street to a large building with a dome and some wings.
They call it "The Children's Temple." It was so full of young people
that I had hard work to crowd myself into the corner of a seat. There
was a platform in front, and a big black-board, and two gentlemen, both
with foreheads that went clear over to the back of their heads. There
was singing, and then one gentleman talked to us, and got us all to
answer and repeat, and we never knew that he was teaching us a lesson
until we had learned it. The other gentleman then came forward and drew
a picture so fast that it seemed like magic, and so funny that we all
laughed and laughed again. It's the jolliest "children's hour" I ever
saw, and I'm going every day.

I can't begin to tell you of the good times here for boys. When you read
in the papers about the big meetings and the long lectures, you might
suppose that young people don't have much chance; but you'd be mistaken.
We go boating on the lake, and fishing down at the Point, and bathing in
a safe place along the shore. This afternoon all the boys and girls are
going pilgriming through Palestine in a procession. Last evening I went
out with little Susie for a walk. We came upon an immense telescope. The
gentleman let me take a peek through it, and I saw the ring around the
planet Saturn. Then he held little Susie up in his arms, and let her see
it too.

There is a tent with a lot of microscopes, and two young ladies who show
people how to use them. I looked at a drop of water through one, and saw
in it an animal fierce enough and almost big enough to bite off your
head.

And then there were the fire-works last night. I can't tell you how
gorgeous they were: fountains lit up with bright colors; Roman candles
flashing, and rockets soaring to the stars; the steamers all hung with
Chinese lanterns, and sailing round and round upon the lake; the woods
bright with the blazing electric lights overhead. Oh, it was grand!

I can't stop to write about the squirrels that run up and down the
trees, nor the big tent where we get our dinners, nor the little tent
where we sleep, nor the pictures at evening in the Amphitheatre (that's
a great hall where they hold meetings), nor lots of other things. Next
year I hope you'll come with us, and have a good time.

  Your friend,
  BOB.




MIMIR'S WELL.

A SCANDINAVIAN MYTH.

BY JULIA CLINTON JONES.


In the north of Europe there is a rugged land, where the winters are
long and dark, with short bright summers. Nine hundred years ago the
people there were pagans, believing in gods and giants, and their
mythology is full of wonderful stories. As these myths, or sacred
fables, tell of strange adventures, I think you will like them quite as
well as even the _Arabian Nights_.

Take your maps now, and find this wild north land. It is called
Scandinavia, and comprises Norway and Sweden. The home of these Northern
gods was a city called Asgard, built above the clouds, in the midst of
which stood Valhalla, the hall of the chief god, Odin. Such a marvellous
place as this was! It had a golden roof that reflected light over all
the earth, just like the sun, and its ceiling was supported by spears,
while millions of shields formed its walls, over which were draped coats
of mail. A huge wolf stood before its immense gates, through which eight
hundred men could march abreast. Around the walls flowed a deep river,
through whose waves Odin's guests were forced to wade. But I can not
tell you now of Odin's feast, which was always being held in Valhalla,
nor of his guests, the heroes, whom the beautiful Battle Maidens brought
there on bloody shields from the earth. Asgard was overshadowed by the
mighty tree Igdrasil. This tree was more marvellous than any of which
you ever heard; no cork, nor India rubber, nor banyan tree could begin
to compare with it; for this was the Life-Tree, and had been growing
before creation. The horrible dragon, Death, gnawed constantly at its
roots, but three sisters, the Nornas, watering them daily from the
Life-Spring, kept the tree flourishing. Seated under its shade, the
elder sisters (Past and Present) spun away briskly at the wonderful web
of Time, which the youngest (the Future) amused herself by tearing to
pieces. Far down in Giant-land, where the roots began to shoot, was an
ancient well, guarded by the good giant Mimir (Memory). There the gods
always went for a morning draught that should make them wise in their
daily tasks, since this was the well of wisdom.

On one occasion there was a disturbance in Asgard. Loki, a bad spirit,
living there in disguise, had been playing tricks on the goddesses, and
setting the gods by the ears through his mischief-making pranks, while
leading them into many dangerous scrapes, though as yet he had not been
found out. His children, too, were just as bad as himself, his son
Fenris (Pain), a hideous howling wolf, being the terror of Asgard, while
Hela, his daughter (Death), was more horrible than I can describe.
Besides these, Loki had brought in other bad spirits, and altogether
Asgard was greatly disturbed. Odin himself did not know what to do. He
asked the Nornas, but they could not answer, although the youngest
hinted that if her lips had not been sealed she could have told
something. At last he determined to see Mimir, and take a drink from his
well. Saddling his eight-footed horse Sleipnir, away he rode in the
night, all alone, over the Rainbow Bridge that joins Asgard with Earth,
down to dark Giant-land. He had often before been there to consult
Mimir; for although Odin was very wise, Mimir was wiser still, since he
guarded the source of wisdom.

The giant was sitting deep in thought by the well, his white beard
flowing down far below his waist, which was clasped by a girdle graven
with curious characters, as old as the world. He heard Odin coming, and
rising to meet him, said this was just what he had known must happen;
for what else could have been expected with such a set as Loki and his
family living in Asgard? The first thing to be done, he said, was to
cast them out from among the gods, then bind them fast in some safe
place far away.

What do you suppose this advice cost? Giant-land, you know, was very
dark, and although the well was full of wisdom, Mimir had not always
light enough to read its secrets. Odin's eye was the sun; so Mimir was
glad enough to give his horn of water for a daily loan of Odin's glowing
eye, while Odin was willing thus to buy the advice that should make
Asgard happy again.




[Begun in HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 37, July 13.]

THE STORY OF THE AMERICAN NAVY.

BY BENSON J. LOSSING.


CHAPTER VII.

Lieutenant Lawrence had gained great renown by his capture of the
_Peacock_. He was promoted to Captain, and when the _Chesapeake_
returned to Boston, after a long cruise, in May, 1813, he was offered
the command of her. He accepted it with reluctance, for she had the
reputation of being an "unlucky" ship. In the cruise just ended she had
accomplished nothing, and as she entered Boston Harbor a gale carried
away a top-mast, and with it several men, who were drowned. This
incident confirmed the belief that she was "unlucky," and it was
difficult to get a good crew to serve in her.

On the morning of the 1st of June Lawrence received from Captain Broke,
of the frigate _Shannon_, a challenge to come out and fight him. It was
promptly accepted, and at noon the _Chesapeake_ sailed out of Boston
Harbor. The hostile frigates met not far at sea. At four o'clock they
opened their broadsides within pistol-shot distance, and fought
desperately. The loss of life on board the _Chesapeake_ was fearful.
Lawrence was mortally wounded, and as he was carried below he uttered
the famous words, in substance, "Don't give up the ship." The
_Chesapeake_ was boarded, captured, and taken to Halifax. Lawrence died
on the way. Broke was severely wounded, but recovered.

The American sloop of war _Argus_, Lieutenant Allen commander, took Mr.
Crawford (American Minister) to France in the summer of 1813, and then
cruised in British waters, imitating the exploits of Paul Jones. Allen
captured and burned twenty merchantmen in the course of a few weeks
(valued, with their cargoes, at full $2,000,000), and spread
consternation throughout commercial England. Several cruisers were sent
out to capture the _Argus_. This was effected in August by the brig
_Pelican_.

The Americans were partially compensated for these misfortunes by the
capture of the British brig _Boxer_ by the brig _Enterprise_, Lieutenant
Burrows. They fought off Portland, at half pistol-shot distance, on the
3d of September, 1813. The commander of the _Boxer_ (Lieutenant Blyth)
had boastfully nailed his flag to her mast, and after a sharp, short,
and destructive engagement, she was compelled to surrender. Her second
officer had to announce the fact through his trumpet, for he could not
haul down her flag. Burrows and Blyth were both slain, and were buried
side by side in a cemetery in Portland.

[Illustration: THE "ESSEX," "PHOEBE," AND "CHERUB."--DRAWN BY J. O.
DAVIDSON.]

One of the most remarkable cruises made during the war of 1812-15 was by
Commander Porter in the frigate _Essex_. She sailed from the Delaware in
October, 1812; went toward the equator to join the _Constitution_ and
_Hornet_, under Bainbridge; missed them; swept around Cape Horn into the
Pacific Ocean, and went into the harbor of Valparaiso, on the western
coast of South America. Then she cruised northward in search of British
armed whaling vessels, capturing several. Porter converted them into war
vessels, and created for himself an active little squadron, with which
he sailed for the Marquesas Islands. After remaining there awhile, he
returned to Valparaiso, and at that sea-port had a fierce battle with
two British vessels which had been sent to oppose his destructive career
in the waters of the Pacific. These were the frigates _Phoebe_ and
_Cherub_.

These vessels cruised off the harbor of Valparaiso, waiting for
re-enforcements. The _Essex_, with her consort, _Essex Junior_, in
attempting to get to sea, became crippled by a squall, when the
_Phoebe_ and _Cherub_ attacked, in violation of the rights of a
neutral port. Then occurred one of the most sanguinary sea-fights of the
war, and it was only when her officers and men were nearly all slain or
wounded, and she was on fire, that the _Essex_ was surrendered. "We have
been unfortunate, but not disgraced," wrote Porter to the Secretary of
the Navy. That was in February, 1814. Porter had carried the first
American flag on a vessel of war ever seen in the Pacific Ocean.

Commodore Rodgers made a memorable cruise of one hundred and forty days
on the stormy Atlantic in 1813, sailing from Boston in the frigate
_President_ in April. He captured eleven British merchant vessels and
the armed schooner _Highflyer_, a tender of Admiral Warren's flag-ship.
Rodgers had been put in possession of some of the British signals. When
he saw the _Highflyer_, he hoisted English colors, and trying his
signals, found to his delight that they were answered. He then assumed
the character of a British officer. He decoyed the _Highflyer_ alongside
the _President_, which he pretended was the large British ship
_Sea-Horse_, then in American waters. The commander of the _Highflyer_
(Lieutenant Hutchinson) was thoroughly deceived. Rodgers ordered him to
send him his signal books. He obeyed, and soon followed them in person.
He saw the marines of the _President_ in British uniform, and mistook
them for his own countrymen.

"The _President_," said the unsuspecting Hutchinson, "has spread alarm
in British waters, and the main object of the Admiral is to catch her."

"What kind of a man is Rodgers?" asked the Commodore.

"I have never seen him," said Hutchinson, "but have been told that he is
an odd fish, and hard to catch."

"Would you like to meet him?"

"Indeed I would, with a vessel of equal size."

"Sir!" said Rodgers, in a tone that startled the Lieutenant, "do you
know what ship this is?"

"The _Sea-Horse_, of course."

"You are mistaken. You are on board the _President_, and I am Commodore
Rodgers."

Then the band struck up "Yankee Doodle," the coats of the marines were
suddenly changed from scarlet to blue, and the American flag was
displayed over the quarter-deck. Rodgers took his captive and his prize
to Newport. He made another less successful cruise, and about the middle
of January, 1814, he dashed through the British blockading squadron at
New York, and anchored in the harbor.

The British had carried on a distressing marauding warfare on the coasts
during 1813, which kept the smaller vessels of the navy and privateers
vigilant and active. During that summer there were only three American
frigates at sea, others being either blockaded or undergoing repairs;
and yet the Americans, with indomitable will, resolved to carry on the
war with vigor. In September, Commodore Perry, in command of a squadron
on Lake Erie, won a decisive victory over a British squadron under
Commodore Barclay, and thereby secured the absolute control of that
lake. Meanwhile Commodore Chauncey, in command on Lake Ontario, was
performing gallant services there, standing in the way of British
invasions on that frontier, and co-operating efficiently with the land
forces on its borders.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration: "KEEP STEP, KEEP STEP: ONE, TWO, THREE--ONE, TWO,
THREE."]




HOW THE GEESE SAVED THE BABY.

BY MRS. L. G. MORSE.


John Evans was raking hay in a field on the south side of his cottage,
while his wife was in the dairy printing butter for market. Little Elsy,
their two-year-old baby, was playing with blocks on the sitting-room
floor, and old Robin Hood, the dog, was asleep on the grass close by the
door that opened on the lawn.

The sky was almost cloudless, and the sun blazed warm in the fields.

"Just the weather to make the corn grow," said John Evans, resting a
quarter of a minute, and looking contentedly over the wall at his
flourishing corn blades, already two good inches at least above those of
his rich neighbor, Mr. Haverly.

"Elsy is safe," said Barbara, the trim little house-maid. "I might as
well knead up the bread." And she whisked through the sitting-room so
fast, and with so little noise, that Elsy only looked up to see if a
bird had flown in over the low half-door.

Tired of her blocks at last, Elsy went and tugged at the door, and made
the latch rattle. Robin opened one eye--the one toward the house--and
half-cocked an ear. But Elsy kept up the rattle long enough for him to
get used to it, and drawing his tail closer under his nose, he ceased
paying any attention to the child. He knew she was behind the door. He
had done his full duty by standing on his hind-legs against it, and
looking to see what she was about before he settled himself for his nap.
She rattled the latch every day, but she had never been able to lift
it--he needn't have _that_ on his mind. So, by-and-by, when the crown of
her little white head showed itself above the door, Robin was dozing
away, more sleepy than ever.

She had pushed her block-box close to the sill, and stepped on it to
take another view of the latch. For Elsy was enterprising, and had no
more idea than have other two-year-old babies of remaining in ignorance
of any new and untried danger. Of course she succeeded at last, and so
easily that she pushed the door open and let herself backward down the
steps without waking the dog.

The oldest mother goose in the barn-yard was as energetic as Elsy. She
quacked about among her neighbors until she collected the whole flock,
and then matronized them down to the big shallow pond in front of the
house. They pottered a good deal on the way among mud-puddles, for there
had been a shower the night before.

Dame Evans pottered too in the dairy, but that was because pretty Miss
Ruth Haverly called to bespeak some of the butter before it should be
sent to market, and was trying her hands at the printing. Very soft
white hands they were, and Mrs. Evans enjoyed watching them.

"There," she said, "that one is a beauty!" as Ruth turned one of the
yellow balls into a dish. But she never would have allowed anybody else
to meddle so with her butter. A spot on the dairy shelf would have been
as great a crime as a speck on the snow-white kerchief crossed on her
bosom. But no thought would she have taken of the butter, nor even of
dainty Miss Ruth, had she known what Elsy was doing. Nor would Barbara
have cared so much about the bread. She was singing, and did not hear
Elsy fumbling with the door-latch.

But the child had trotted by Robin Hood, down the long path, all the way
to the river, and was so pleased at the feat that she laughed aloud. It
was the first chance she had ever had to get alone to the river.
Somebody had always been on hand to pull her away just in time to save
her feet from touching the water. Now they touched it in comfort, and
little cool ripples washed over the toes of her stockings--she had
pulled her shoes off long ago in the house. She ran up and down the edge
of the water a few times, and then began picking up sticks and stray
leaves to throw into it. Higher and higher her spirits rose with the
sport. If it had not been for Barbara's song, Robin would surely have
heard Elsy shout. But Robin was lazy in his old age, and was actually
snoring. Elsy spied a pretty goose-feather, and gave it a toss. The
breeze carried it farther out on the water than the small maid intended.
But she was fearless, and catching at some cat-tails growing on the
bank, she waded in after her feather.

[Illustration: THE RESCUE.--DRAWN BY H. P. SHARE.]

She stumbled over the uneven bottom, and the stones hurt her soft little
feet. Down she went, head and all under water, just as the geese came,
ready at last for their swim. When they saw Elsy splashing about, they
thought she was trespassing. Or perhaps they understood perfectly well
that the river, although safe for them, was a dangerous place for the
innocent baby. Who knows? Certain it was that as Elsy went down under
the water, the geese flapped their wings, and made a tremendous racket.
They made such a noise as never had been heard in the place before. They
wakened old Robin at last, and brought him quick as a flash to his post
of duty. Oh, he could make noise enough then, to be sure! He could tear
round the house like a hurricane, dash down the path and into the water,
seize little Elsy's dress, and hold her head above the surface until her
father came to the rescue, plunged into the river, and in another minute
had borne his darling safely to land. Her bright eyes were closed, and
her form lay quite senseless against her father's bosom, while Robin
looked up to be sure she was safe, and Barbara ran terrified from the
house, her singing silenced at last.

But Elsy opened her eyes again before long. Joy greeted the little life
saved, and the mother half smothered old Robin with kisses, in spite of
his dripping coat, which utterly ruined her kerchief.

John Evans and his good dame would never have cheated a mouse of its
due, yet they petted and honored old Robin as long as he lived, and told
children and grandchildren hundreds of times how it was _he_ saved Elsy,
when, as sure as anything, the whole credit was due to the geese.




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.]


We have received a large number of letters from our young readers asking
for stamps, leaves, flowers, and other things; but unless they offer
some suitable equivalent in exchange, which they must specify in the
letter, we can not print such requests.

The cooking club is broken up. We are assured that the disbandment is
not on account of any bad feeling among the members, neither for lack of
interest, but that the sole reason is the whooping-cough! As we have
already given enough recipes to render our young housekeepers skillful
bread, cake, and candy makers, if they try them all, we shall not print
any after the present number. If any of you wish to give a tea party to
your little friends, by using the recipes sent by the little readers of
HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE you can prepare with your own hands a very
inviting supper, for you could wish for nothing nicer than hot
pop-overs, little cakes, and candy.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BALTIMORE, MARYLAND.

     I am almost ten years old, and I weigh fifty-seven pounds. My
     greatest pleasure is in reading HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE. My papa
     subscribed for it, beginning with the first number. I read the
     nice stories over and over again. I like my paper better than any
     present I ever received, and look forward with great joy to every
     Wednesday, when it comes.

     How I wish I could tell all the boys and girls in this city what a
     good paper it is! I would like to get one thousand new
     subscribers. It is such nice print, and the stories are so plainly
     told that any little boy can understand them. Good-by.

  WILLIE F. L.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEW YORK CITY.

     I take YOUNG PEOPLE, and I think it is the nicest paper I ever
     read.

     I have a very cunning little poodle dog for a pet. He will stand
     up in a corner, and hold a cane in his paws, and a pipe in his
     mouth.

  FRANK B. W.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS.

     My friend Ethel has a parrot that her father brought from South
     America. He is a very funny bird. One day Ethel went into the room
     where he was, and he said, "Ethel, Ethel." She did not answer, and
     after waiting a moment the parrot said, "What?" as if to remind
     her to answer him. He talks mostly in Spanish, but has learned a
     good many English words since he came to this country. He laughs
     so loud sometimes that a person can not talk in the room with him.

     I like YOUNG PEOPLE very much indeed. My brother was interested in
     "Old Times in the Colonies," and hopes there will be some more
     Indian stories.

  OLIVE R.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PINEVILLE, MISSOURI.

     I send you my brother's way of making beautiful soap-bubbles: Take
     a basin of either warm or cold water, and mix with it a quantity
     of country-made soap. Then take a piece of hollow pumpkin vine
     about a foot long, and place one end of it in the basin and one in
     the mouth, and blow.

  WROTON K.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WHITEHALL, ILLINOIS.

     I take HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, and I think it is the best paper
     published.

     I have some minnows which I feed on bits of bread and meat. They
     are so tame that when I go to feed them, they will come up and eat
     from my fingers.

  NORMAN W. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MOBERLY, MISSOURI.

     We have a big dog named Jack. He is the biggest dog in town. He
     weighs over one hundred pounds, and he is very intelligent.

     Mamma found a queer worm the other day. Its eyes were green, and
     it was green all over. It had yellow bunches on its back with
     prickles on them, and on its sides were blue spots. Papa took it
     down town, but nobody knew what it was. I wish some correspondent
     could tell me its name.

  MAGGIE P. B.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.

     I have three turtles. The smallest one I can cover with a
     twenty-five-cent piece. It sometimes stays under water over
     thirteen minutes.

     I would like to tell Jessie B., whose letter was in No. 33, that
     she must put her turtle in water deep enough to half cover it; and
     when she feeds it, she must put one end of the worm in the water,
     and whenever the turtle snaps for it, she must lift it up, until,
     after a while, the turtle will take it from her hand.

     I like the story of "The Moral Pirates" the best of all. I am ten
     years old.

  W. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MOUNT PLEASANT, NEW YORK.

     I am having a very nice time up here among the Catskills. I go
     fishing very often, and always have very good luck. I am also
     hunting for birds' eggs, and have collected a large number.

     We are entirely surrounded by the mountains, one of which I have
     already ascended, and was rewarded by a beautiful view of the
     surrounding country.

     Through exchange with the readers of YOUNG PEOPLE I have received
     a great many eggs. I hope all the correspondents are enjoying
     their vacation as well as I am mine.

  I. QUACKENBOSS.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS.

     Since I wrote to YOUNG PEOPLE I have received and exchanged so
     many specimens! I am delighted. Last week my papa helped me, and
     we sent twenty-three boxes of ocean curiosities to different parts
     of the United States.

     I have all sorts of beautiful things. One of them is a live bat
     that is so tame that he will eat from my hand, and does not offer
     to fly away.

     I get something new nearly every day from some of the subscribers
     of YOUNG PEOPLE. I think it is the nicest paper I ever saw.

  "WEE TOT" BRAINARD.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WRIGHTS, CALIFORNIA.

     I am eleven years old, and I live in the Santa Cruz Mountains.
     Sometimes we are above the clouds. When it is clear, we can see
     the bay, and the ships coming in.

     There are deep gulches here, full of trees and moss and fern.
     Wild-cats, wolves, and California lions live here, and they often
     steal our chickens. We dare not go far from the house at night.
     From this you would think that it is a very wild country, but it
     is not, and there are a great many people living here. The animals
     live in the gulches, and only come out at night when we are
     asleep.

     I have taken YOUNG PEOPLE from the first number.

  JESSIE N.

       *       *       *       *       *

  VIENNA, NEW JERSEY.

     I had a little kitten. I stroked it one day, and it followed me
     down to an ash-barrel, where it went smelling round as if it was
     hungry. Then I went up the street a little way to where a girl was
     sweeping, and I asked her if it was her kitten. She said it was,
     but she was going to give it away. I asked her to give it to me,
     and she did. Then I took it home, and fed it on milk. As soon as I
     brought the milk up stairs it began lapping it as fast as its
     little tongue could go. I brought it to the country with me in a
     little basket, and about two weeks afterward it died. I was very,
     very sorry, for it was my only pet. It would lie on its back under
     the centre table, and play with a string.

     I am only six years old, and I can not write very well yet.

  CHARLIE J. P.

       *       *       *       *       *

  REIDSVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA.

     I am ten years old. My papa takes YOUNG PEOPLE for me, and
     HARPER'S WEEKLY for mamma. I live in a tobacco-manufacturing town.
     There are about two thousand negroes employed in the factories.

     I have three little dogs for pets--two rat terriers and a little
     yellow dog. Their names are Minnie, Whitefoot, and Ka.

     I had a present of a large book-case filled with books, from my
     grandpa, who lives in Richmond, but I like to read YOUNG PEOPLE
     best of all.

  WILLIE W.

       *       *       *       *       *

  LINWOOD, KANSAS.

     My brother made me a present of YOUNG PEOPLE for a year. I never
     saw such a nice little paper before. I think there is nothing like
     it. I can not tell which is the best story, for all of them are so
     good. I can hardly wait for Wednesday to come, for that is the day
     I get my paper.

     I have a kitty that is almost white. It will run right up a smooth
     wall.

     I am eleven years old. I live in the country, and I go to school
     when there is any.

  LEONIE Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ATLANTA, GEORGIA.

     I think YOUNG PEOPLE is the nicest little paper I have ever read.
     I like the story of "Across the Ocean" best of all.

     The 1st of July I read a letter from Canada, in the Post-office
     Box, saying that strawberries were just ripening. That seemed so
     funny to me, for they had been all gone for ever so long here. I
     feel so sorry for the Canadians, and for all people who live in
     cold countries, for it is so cold there in winter.

     We have taken YOUNG PEOPLE ever since the first number. Papa takes
     all of Harper's periodicals.

  LIZZIE E. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BOONVILLE, INDIANA.

     I live in the southern part of this State, and I go to school when
     the school is open. I have not taken YOUNG PEOPLE very long, but I
     like it so much I can scarcely wait till it comes.

     I had a pet goat, but I sold it, and now I have a very handsome
     redbird that my grandpa gave me. Its name is Bob. Papa made me a
     martin box last spring, but the bluebirds took possession of it.
     The English sparrows come on our porch, and eat the wheat Bob
     drops from his cage.

  GEORGE G. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS.

     I am seven years old, and I am going to write this and spell it
     all myself.

     I have a little dog, and he will beg, and he will jump through a
     hoop.

     We do not have far to go to school, because it is in the next
     house to ours. I have been to school one year and a half.

  EDITH G. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  DECATUR, TEXAS.

     I have been taking YOUNG PEOPLE ever since Christmas, and I want
     to put a letter in the Post-office Box to say how very much I like
     to read it.

     I am nine years old. I have been going to school about seven
     months, but now it is vacation, and I have time to play with all
     my pets.

     I wish all the little boys and girls in the United States could
     read YOUNG PEOPLE.

  BLANCHE S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FORT MISSOULA, MONTANA TERRITORY.

     Here is a recipe for sponge-cake: One cup of fine white sugar;
     three eggs; beat the sugar and eggs together till they are white;
     then add one table-spoonful of milk and one cup of flour. Do not
     beat up after mixing in the flour, as it will make the cake heavy.
     Bake about twenty minutes in a quick oven. My big sister makes
     this just as light as it can be.

  JULIA G.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PARKVILLE, LONG ISLAND.

     Here is a recipe for pop-overs: Three doll's cups of flour; two of
     milk; one egg; one salt-spoonful of baking powder; half a
     salt-spoonful of salt. Bake in patty-pans fifteen minutes in a
     quick oven. Break open and butter, and eat while hot.

     I like the engravings in YOUNG PEOPLE, especially "The Little
     Miser," and "Kitty, you can't have my Apple." I have a kitty
     named Netty.

  EMMIE R.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I get HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE every week, and I think it is the best
     paper for boys and girls.

     I am collecting postage stamps, and would like to exchange with
     any of the readers.

  JOHN DOLUNE,
  109 South St. Clair Street, Dayton, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I am spending the summer here in the country, although I live in
     Cambridge. I would like to exchange birds' eggs and nests with any
     readers of YOUNG PEOPLE.

  GEORGE L. OSGOOD, Jun.,
  P. O. Box 38, Dublin, New Hampshire.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have a great variety of United States International Revenue
     stamps, and would like to exchange them for others.

  FRANK LYNN,
  1 Pemberton Square, Room No. 4, Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Papa has taken YOUNG PEOPLE for me for several months, and I like
     it so much. I think "The Moral Pirates" is very interesting, only
     it is a great wonder that those boys do not get drowned. The story
     about Frank Austin was splendid, but it was not long enough.

     I am eleven years old. I live one mile from town. My brother has a
     large farm here. I have some of the prettiest little ducks you
     ever saw, and the most playful little kitten in the world. Kitty
     will run up my back and go to sleep on my shoulder.

     I would like to exchange flower seeds with some little girl. I
     have a pretty lily that is in bloom now. It is called
     lily-of-the-Nile.

  JESSIE LEE,
  Lewisville, Lafayette County, Arkansas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I am making a collection of birds' eggs, and would like to
     exchange with any of the correspondents of YOUNG PEOPLE. I have
     eggs of the robin, cat-bird, bluebird, king-bird, brown thrush,
     orchard oriole, and of several kinds of sparrows.

  AUGUST PILGER,
  172 East One-hundred-and-thirteenth Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

L. M. Fobes writes to us that by exchange with the readers of YOUNG
PEOPLE he has added more than two hundred new postage stamps to his
collection. If he wishes to obtain any more United States, German,
English, or Mexican stamps, Theodore Dreyfus, 255 St. Mary's Street, New
Orleans, Louisiana, a little boy nine years old, would be glad to
exchange with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have a very nice collection of insects, and would like to
     exchange with some one living in the South, or any other distant
     locality.

  KITTIE WEAVER,
  Villa Park, Mankato, Minnesota.

       *       *       *       *       *

S. E. THOMAS.--You can make a heated-air toy balloon with tissue-paper,
a very light wire hoop with a cross piece, and a sponge. Cut your paper
in shape like a lengthened quarter of orange peel, and after pasting the
edges firmly together, joining them only at one end, paste the open end
around the wire hoop. Soak the sponge with as much alcohol or turpentine
as it will hold, and after fastening it securely to the cross piece of
the hoop, light it, and the balloon will soon expand with the heated
air, and rise. If you make the balloon of colored tissue-paper, and it
rises while the sponge is still burning, the effect at night is very
pretty. A bunch of tow might be used in place of a sponge.

       *       *       *       *       *

SADIE MCB.--We think the address given by the correspondent you wish to
exchange with is sufficient. Write, and you will probably receive an
answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

ED. S. K.--In YOUNG PEOPLE No. 23 you will find full directions for
building a sloop-yacht.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARLES K.--The recipe for butter-scotch was in the Post-office Box of
YOUNG PEOPLE No. 37.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORD M. G.--The specimen you send is a sphinx moth, of which there are
several varieties in the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *

F. W. B.--You can obtain the numbers of YOUNG PEOPLE you wish by sending
one dollar and fourteen cents to the publishers.

       *       *       *       *       *

BROWNIE.--A salt-water turtle feeds upon the tough stems of sea-weeds,
and upon crustacea and very small mollusks, but it might eat bits of
bread and meat, or insects.

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGE H. K.--We doubt if you could make a microscope which would be as
cheap or as satisfactory as one already manufactured. Microscopes may be
bought at all prices.

       *       *       *       *       *

Favors are acknowledged from Mary C. Hodges, Clare A. Howe, Amy Piper,
Mabel C. C., Nellie W. Edson, M. C. S., Carrie Taylor, Mart Seeds, Lidie
B. D., George A. C., Thomas S., H. S. K., Margarets M. and W., Allie
M. B., George Paul, Clara S. A., Angie and Anna W., C. Hegemin, Orrin D.
Bradford, Mattie Murphy, Josie Parcher, Bertie Jones, Bertha F. H.,
Charles A. H., E. I. R., Frank Boucher, Stella M. S., Mary E. Paine,
Victoria Gregory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles are received from Wroton Kenny, A. H. Ellard,
James C. Smith, Philip P. Cruger, Bertie Bassett, Daisy Balch, Harry C.
and Shelton H., C. M., E. A. Cartereau, L. M. Fobes, Mary C. Spaulding,
H. M. P., Fanny Squire, Willie Murphy, "Capt. Frank," R. H. King, Marion
E. Norcross, G. Volckhausen, Gracie Kelley, Henry M. Western, Frank
Merry, Jennie Edwards.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

ENIGMA.

  My first is in ducat, my second in gold.
  My third is in courage, my fourth is in bold.
  My fifth is in whimper; my sixth is in scream.
  My seventh is in thinking, my eighth is in dream.
  My ninth is in acorn, my tenth is in seed.
  My eleventh is in hunger, my twelfth is in need.
  My thirteenth is in silence, my fourteenth in death.
  My fifteenth is in living, my sixteenth in breath.
  You may spell out my name, you may have me in view,
  But I'm still an enigma to all but a few.

  LOTTIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

NUMERICAL CHARADE.

  I am an ancient historian composed of 8 letters.
  My 5, 7, 3, 8 is a pet animal.
  My 6, 2, 3, 4 conveys water.
  My 1, 2, 8, 6 is a nickname.

  EDDIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

WORD SQUARE.

First, an explosive article. Second, a mixture. Third, manner. Fourth,
in a servile state.

  A. H. E.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

DOUBLE ACROSTIC.

Frozen vapor. Fear. A fruit. A form of government. A member of a
religious community. Vessels. Answer--Tempests, and their consequences.

  LONE STAR.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5.

ENIGMA.

  My first is in cat, but not in dog.
  My second is in marsh, but not in bog.
  My third is in hand, but not in fist.
  My fourth is in rubber, but not in whist.
  My fifth is in cow, but not in milk.
  My sixth is in woollen, but not in silk.
  My seventh is in brays, but not in neighs.
  My whole is a poet whose rhythmic lays
  Are writ in English of ancient days.

  E. A. L.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN NO. 40.

No. 1.

New York.

No. 2.

  H   ar   T
  Y ablono I
  E   g    G
  N   ot   E
  A  rmo   R

Hyena, Tiger.

No. 3.

Tierra del Fuego.

No. 4

      P
    E A T
  P A P E R
    T E N
      R

No. 5

  S N O W
  N I N E
  O N C E
  W E E K

No. 6

Lafayette

       *       *       *       *       *

Charade on page 584--Pop-Corn.




ADVERTISEMENTS.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be issued every Tuesday, and may be had at
the following rates--_payable in advance, postage free_:

  SINGLE COPIES                     $0.04
  ONE SUBSCRIPTION, _one year_       1.50
  FIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS, _one year_     7.00

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY ORDER or DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

ADVERTISING.

The extent and character of the circulation of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
will render it a first-class medium for advertising. A limited number of
approved advertisements will be inserted on two inside pages at 75 cents
per line.

  Address
  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




The Child's Book of Nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Child's Book of Nature, for the Use of Families and Schools:
intended to aid Mothers and Teachers in Training Children in the
Observation of Nature. In Three Parts. Part I. Plants. Part II. Animals.
Part III. Air, Water, Heat, Light, &c. By WORTHINGTON HOOKER, M.D.
Illustrated. The Three Parts complete in One Volume, Small 4to, Half
Leather, $1.12; or, separately, in Cloth, Part I., 45 cents; Part II.,
48 cents; Part III., 48 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

A beautiful and useful work. It presents a general survey of the kingdom
of nature in a manner adapted to attract the attention of the child, and
at the same time to furnish him with accurate and important scientific
information. While the work is well suited as a class-book for schools,
its fresh and simple style cannot fail to render it a great favorite for
family reading.

The Three Parts of this book can be had in separate volumes by those who
desire it. This will be advisable when the book is to be used in
teaching quite young children, especially in schools.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




Harper's New and Enlarged Catalogue,

With a COMPLETE ANALYTICAL INDEX, and a VISITORS' GUIDE TO THEIR
ESTABLISHMENT,

Sent by mail on receipt of Nine Cents.

HARPER & BROTHERS, FRANKLIN SQUARE, N. Y.




CHILDREN'S

PICTURE-BOOKS.

Square 4to, about 800 pages each, beautifully printed on Tinted Paper,
embellished with many Illustrations, bound in Cloth, $1.50 per volume.

The Children's Picture-Book of Sagacity of Animals.

     With Sixty Illustrations by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Bible Picture-Book.

     With Eighty Illustrations, from Designs by STEINLE, OVERBECK,
     VEIT, SCHNORR, &c.

The Children's Picture Fable-Book.

     Containing One Hundred and Sixty Fables. With Sixty Illustrations
     by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Picture-Book of Birds.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

The Children's Picture-Book of Quadrupeds and other Mammalia.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




Old Books for Young Readers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arabian Nights' Entertainments.

     The Thousand and One Nights; or, The Arabian Nights'
     Entertainments. Translated and Arranged for Family Reading, with
     Explanatory Notes, by E. W. LANE. 600 Illustrations by Harvey. 2
     vols., 12mo, Cloth, $3.50.

Robinson Crusoe.

     The Life and Surprising Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, of York,
     Mariner. By DANIEL DEFOE. With a Biographical Account of Defoe.
     Illustrated by Adams. Complete Edition. 12mo, Cloth, $1.50.

The Swiss Family Robinson.

     The Swiss Family Robinson; or, Adventures of a Father and Mother
     and Four Sons on a Desert Island. Illustrated. 2 vols., 18mo,
     Cloth, $1.50.

     The Swiss Family Robinson--Continued: being a Sequel to the
     Foregoing. 2 vols., 18mo, Cloth, $1.50.

Sandford and Merton.

     The History of Sandford and Merton. By THOMAS DAY. 18mo, Half
     Bound, 75 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




A GUNPOWDER PLOT.


[Illustration]

A few months ago Mr. Two Trees, a Sioux Indian, with his family, visited
Fort Benton, where he hoped to dispose of some robes. While bathing in
the Missouri the young hopefuls of the family discover a keg of
gunpowder that has been washed out from a wrecked steamboat. They
rejoice greatly over their prize; and after taking it ashore, hold a
long discussion in their own musical language as to what they shall do
with it.

All-la-goo-la (the Mouse that Nibbles), the younger of the boys,
proposes that they ask their father how they shall dispose of the
powder. But his elder brother, the Wise Owl that Hoots, knows of a
better plan: it is to dry the powder, and trade it for sugar to the "Man
of Many Blankets," as they call the trader.

[Illustration]

They carry the keg of powder to the Two Trees teepee, against which
their beloved father lies in peaceful slumber. Beyond they see
Ka-ka-na-cha (the Crooked Road), their dear mother, and Chee-chi-cat-soo
(the Singing Mud Turtle), their aunt, busily preparing robes for the
trader.

[Illustration]

Stealing into the lodge unobserved, the boys find a puppy stewing over
the fire, but manage to make room beside it for their keg of powder,
which they leave to dry.

[Illustration]

While it is drying the young Two Trees stroll down to the trader's
store, to look over his stock, and try and decide what they shall accept
in exchange for their prize. The trader is studying his "medicine," or
the paper that talks.

[Illustration]

Suddenly a heavy explosion is heard. The boys guess only too well what
has happened, as they look out and see the Two Tree lodge sailing
through the air, spread open like an umbrella, and followed by the
puppy-dog stew. They see their noble father, rudely awakened from his
nap, also attempting a short flight, while their mother, the Crooked
Road, and their aunt, the Mud Turtle, exhibit every sign of surprise on
the foreground.

[Illustration]

The boys fly; but after them come the avengers, and they are taught by
painful experience the danger of meddling with gunpowder.





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, August 24, 1880, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, AUG 24, 1880 ***

***** This file should be named 29108.txt or 29108.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/1/0/29108/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
