Project Gutenberg's Representative Plays by American Dramatists, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Representative Plays by American Dramatists
       1765-1819

Author: Various

Editor: Montrose J. Moses

Release Date: June 26, 2009 [EBook #29221]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPRESENTATIVE PLAYS ***




Produced by David Starner, Brownfox and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         TRANSCRIBERS' NOTE

    This e-book only contains the front matter of _Representative
    Plays by American Dramatists_. The individual plays have been
    posted as separate Project Gutenberg e-books; they are listed
                  in this book's table of contents.




[Illustration:                 THE

                            CONTRAST,

                                A

                             COMEDY;

                          IN FIVE ACTS:

                          WRITTEN BY A

                  CITIZEN OF THE _UNITED STATES_;

Performed with Applause at the Theatres in NEW-YORK, PHILADELPHIA,
                          and MARYLAND;

   AND PUBLISHED (_under an Assignment of the Copy-Right_) BY

                         THOMAS WIGNELL.


    Primus ego in patriam
    Aonio----deduxi vertice Musas.

                           VIRGIL.

           (_Imitated._)

    First on our shores I try THALIA'S powers,
    And bid the _laughing, useful_ Maid be ours.


                       PHILADELPHIA:

FROM THE PRESS OF PRICHARD & HALL, IN MARKET STREET, BETWEEN SECOND
                     AND FRONT STREETS.

                         M.DCC.XC.

       *       *       *       *       *

FAC-SIMILE TITLE-PAGE OF THE FIRST EDITION

(_From the Original, owned by Dr. F. W. Atkinson_)]




Representative Plays by
American Dramatists


Edited, with an Introduction to Each Play

By MONTROSE J. MOSES


1765-1819

Illustrated with Portraits, and
Original Title-Pages


BENJAMIN BLOM, INC.

New York

First published by E. P. Dutton & Co. Inc., 1918,
Copyright renewed by Mrs. Leah H. Moses, 1946
Reissued by Benjamin Blom, Inc. 1964 by arrangement with Mrs. L. H. Moses.


_Printed in U.S.A. by_
NOBLE OFFSET PRINTERS, INC.
NEW YORK 3, N. Y.




                      To

            DR. FRED W. ATKINSON

In grateful recollection of his encouragement
      and aid in the preparation of
              this volume.




Table of Contents


General Introduction.                                   1-10

Bibliographies.                                        11-18

The Prince of Parthia.
                   By _Thomas Godfrey, Jr._ _1765_    19-108

Ponteach; or, The Savages of America.
                        By _Robert Rogers_. _1766_   109-208

The Group; A Farce.
                    By _Mrs. Mercy Warren_. _1775_   209-232

The Battle of Bunkers-Hill.
              By _Hugh Henry Brackenridge_. _1776_   233-276

The Fall of British Tyranny; or, American Liberty.
                         By _John Leacock_. _1776_   277-350

The Politician Out-witted. By _Samuel Low_. _1789_   351-429

The Contrast.            By _Royall Tyler_. _1790_   431-498

Andre.                 By _William Dunlap_. _1798_   499-564

The Indian Princess; or, La Belle Sauvage.
                         By _J. N. Barker_. _1808_   565-628

She Would Be a Soldier; or, The Plains of Chippewa.
                           By _M. M. Noah_. _1819_   629-678




_INTRODUCTION_


The present collection of "Representative Plays by American
Dramatists" is the first of its kind to be offered to the general
reader. In its scope, it covers a period from 1765-1911, and in its
plan of selection, it strives to show the advance in playwriting
during successive periods of American history.

Because of this scheme, the choice of plays for the Colonial and
Revolutionary sections necessarily includes several which, while
written for the stage, are not authentically located as far as
production is concerned. There is no indication that Robert Rogers's
"Ponteach" was ever accepted by any of the theatrical companies of
the time, and there is no positive proof that Mrs. Mercy Warren's
"The Group" was ever done, although there are casual references to
the fact that performances were given at Amboyne. Nor have we any
right to believe that Samuel Low's "The Politician Out-witted"
received other than scant treatment from the managers to whom it was
submitted; it was published rather to please the readers of the
closet drama. Nevertheless, it has been thought essential to include
these plays because they are representative of the spirit of the
times, and help to give a more comprehensive view of the subjects
which were treated in dramatic form by the early American
playwrights.

From the moment the American writer ceased to be an Englishman, and
became fully aware of his national consciousness, American drama,
following the trend of the development of American literature, began
to feel its way for the proper expression of national characteristics.

And so, in the second and third volumes of this series, the reader
will find plays which, while not wonderful in their literary value,
are, nevertheless, very distinctive, as reflecting the theatrical
tastes of the time, and the very crude, but none the less sincere,
technical effort of the playwrights. All the dramas included in the
second and third volumes have had their stage productions, and are
thus representative of characteristics which mark the abilities of
certain actors, whose claims to originality are found in the special
types they created.

It has been the present editor's object so to arrange the successive
order of these plays that the reader may not only be able to judge
the change in stagecraft and technique, but, likewise, may note the
change in social idea and in historical attitude toward certain
subjects. For example, "The Contrast" contains the first American
Stage Yankee--a model for a succession of Stage Yankees to follow.
But, whereas Royall Tyler's _Jonathan_ was not especially written to
exploit the peculiar abilities of Mr. Wignell, the comedian, most of
the Yankee plays of a later date were written to exploit the
peculiar excellences of such actors as G. H. Hill and James H.
Hackett.

In no way can the reader better sense the change in social customs
and ideals than by reading a series of plays written in successive
generations and reflecting the varying customs of the time. In some
respects "The Contrast" may be considered our very earliest drama of
social manners, even though Royall Tyler was not over-successful in
stamping the small talk of his women as being distinctively
American. Rather is it the direct imitation--without the
brilliancy--of the small talk in "The School for Scandal." But,
nevertheless, "The Contrast" does attempt to deal with society in
New York before the nineteenth century, and in Mrs. Mowatt's
"Fashion," in Mrs. Bateman's "Self," in Bronson Howard's "Saratoga"
(which has been published), in Clyde Fitch's "The Moth and the
Flame," and in Langdon Mitchell's "The New York Idea," we are given
a very significant and sharply defined panoramic view of the
variations in moral and social attitudes.

The plays included in this series have very largely been selected
because of their distinct American flavour. The majority of the
dramas deal directly with American subjects. But it seemed unwise
and unrepresentative to frame one's policy of selection too rigidly
on that score. Had such a method been adhered to, many of the plays
written for Edwin Forrest would have to be omitted from
consideration. It would have been difficult, because of this
stricture, to include representative examples of dramas by the
Philadelphia and Knickerbocker schools of playwrights. Robert T.
Conrad's "Jack Cade," John Howard Payne's "Brutus," George Henry
Boker's "Francesca da Rimini," and Nathaniel P. Willis's "Tortesa,
the Usurer," would thus have been ruled from the collection.
Nevertheless are they representative plays by American dramatists.
Another departure from the American atmosphere is in the case of
Steele Mackaye; here in preference to "Hazel Kirke," I have selected
"Paul Kauvar," farthest away from American life, inasmuch as it
deals with Nihilism, but written at a time when there was a
Nihilistic fever in New York City.

No editor, attempting such a comprehensive collection as this, can
be entirely successful in including everything which will enrich his
original plan. There are always limitations placed upon him by the
owners of copyrights, and by gaps in the development, due to loss of
manuscripts. It was naturally my desire to have all the distinctive
American playwrights represented in the present collection.
Therefore, in justice, the omissions have to be indicated here,
because they leave gaps in a development which it would have been
well to offer unbroken and complete.

When the collection was first conceived, there was every indication
that permission would be granted me to reproduce at least one of the
Robert Montgomery Bird manuscripts, now owned by the University of
Pennsylvania. Naturally, a collection of representative plays should
include either Bird's "The Gladiator," or one of his other more or
less oratorical and poetical pieces, written under the inspiration
of Edwin Forrest. The intention to include John Augustus Stone's
"Metamora" brought to light, after correspondence with the Forrest
Home in Philadelphia, that either the manuscript of that play has
irrevocably been destroyed, or else has been preserved so carefully
that no one remotely connected with the actor Forrest has thus far
been able to locate it. Only a few well remembered speeches and
isolated scenes are seemingly left of a play which increased so
largely the fame of Mr. Forrest.

In the selection of _types_ my attention naturally became centered
on the characters of _Colonel Mulberry Sellars_, and _Judge Bardwell
Slote_, the former in a dramatization of "The Gilded Age," by Mark
Twain and Charles Dudley Warner, and the latter, in a play by
Benjamin E. Woolf, called "The Mighty Dollar." Extended
investigation revealed the fact that, even if the plays are not
lost, they are still unlocated, by the literary executors of Mark
Twain on the one hand, and by the family of Mr. Woolf on the other.
It is well to mention these instances, because, until the recent
interest in the origins of American drama, manifest on all sides,
there has been a danger that many most valuable manuscript plays
would be lost to the student forever.

At a revival of individual scenes from distinctive American Plays,
given in New York, on January 22, 1917, considerable difficulty was
experienced before the stock-company manuscript of Frank E.
Murdoch's "Davy Crockett" was procured. This play, old-fashioned in
its general development, is none the less representative of old-time
melodramatic situation and romantic manipulation, and there is every
reason to believe that, with the tremendous changes in theatrical
taste, unless this play is published in available printed form, it
will be lost to the student of ten years from now. The play would
have been included in the present edition if space had allowed.

When I came to a consideration of the modern section, there were
many omissions which had to be made, due very largely to the fact
that authors and owners of copyright were loath to forego their
rights. A collection of this kind should undoubtedly have the name
of James A. Herne represented in its contents, inasmuch as none of
Mr. Herne's plays have heretofore been published, and two of his
most distinctive dramas in original manuscript, "Margaret Fleming"
and "Griffith Davenport," have been totally destroyed by fire. But
representatives of Mr. Herne's family have declined, at the present
time, to allow his plays to be published. This is to be regretted,
inasmuch as nearly all of the most prominent American playwrights
are represented, either in the publication of isolated plays or in
definitive editions. I should have liked to end this collection with
the inclusion of Mr. Eugene Walter's "The Easiest Way;" at the
present time, that play, which was once issued in an edition
privately printed, is to be found in the _Drama League Series_ of
plays.

From the standpoint of non-copyright material, two interesting
conditions have been revealed through investigation. The first
published play, in America, was "Androboros," by Governor Robert
Hunter, written in collaboration with Chief Justice Lewis Morris.[1]
Only one copy of that play is in existence, owned by Mr. H. E.
Huntington, of New York, having formerly been a valued possession in
the library of the Duke of Devonshire; and having descended from the
private ownership of David Garrick and John Kemble, the English
actors. Naturally, the private collector is loath, in view of the
rarity of his edition, to allow it, at present, to be reprinted.

[1] The title-page of "Androboros" reads: "Androboros"/
A/Bographical [_Sic._] Farce/In Three Acts, Viz./The Senate,/The
Consistory,/and/The Apotheosis./ By Governour Hunter./Printed at
Moropolis since 1st August, 1714. [Taken from Huntington Copy.
Moropolis means Fool's Town.]

Some scholars, however, point to "Les Muses de la Nouvelle-France,"
printed in Paris in 1609, where the third piece is "Le Theatre de
Neptune en la Nouvelle-France." According to Marc Lescarbot, this
was "representee sur les flots du Port-Royal le quatorzieme de
Novembre, mille six cens six, au retour de Sieur de Poutrincourt du
pais des Armouchiquois." This may be regarded as example of the
first play written and acted on North American soil, it, however,
being in French, and not given within what is now the United States,
but rather at Port Royal, in Acadia. (See two interesting letters,
1o W. J. Neidig, _Nation_, 88:86, January 28, 1909; 2o Philip
Alexander Bruce, _Nation_, 88:136, February 11, 1909.)

It was my further desire, as an example of college playwriting, to
include the text of Barnabas Bidwell's "The Mercenary Match,"
written at Yale, and played by the students of Yale.[2] Only one
copy of that play is, thus far, known to be in existence, owned by
Mr. Evert Jansen Wendell, and its inclusion in the present
collection is debarred for the same reason.

[2] The/Mercenary Match,/A Tragedy./By Barna Bidwell./New
Haven:/Printed by Meigs, Bowen and Dana,/In Chapel-Street./(1785.)

Were this collection--Representative Plays by American
Dramatists--encyclopedic in its scope, rather than a suggestive
arrangement of a limited number of plays for the purpose of
illustrating certain phases of playwriting in American theatrical
history, it would have been necessary for the editor to intersperse,
here and there, between the plays, certain minor forms of dramatic
writing, characteristic of the work done in this country. For
example, plays and dialogues written at colleges at a period
ante-dating 1800, and likewise ante-dating the Revolution, are a
distinctive development in themselves, and would form an interesting
contrast with the work being done at the colleges since the
beginning of the present so-called dramatic renaissance (1917).
These dialogues, in their proper place, will be dealt with in the
introductions to a few of the plays. But it is well to indicate here
that such illustrations of very definite forms of dramatic
expression have been omitted.

In all cases the texts used have been carefully collated with the
first editions of the published dramas and, wherever possible, the
original casts have been given with the Dramatis Personae. Interest
in American drama consists very largely in the elements of
comparison and contrast which certain definite dramas suggest. Even
if there is no manuscript of "Metamora" extant, there is sufficient
data relating to the character of _Metamora_ to contrast the play
with Robert Rogers's "Ponteach." Even though Mrs. Warren's "The
Group" might be ruled out as an acting drama, none the less is it
definitely reflective of the revolutionary temper of Revolutionary
times. A comparison of other types of plays will be made as they
occur in the course of the three volumes. I emphasize the point
here, because I wish to suggest that such a collection as this
offers infinite possibilities in the study of the historical,
social, and economic evolution of America.

Most of these plays have been revived. There will be noted, later,
performances of "The Prince of Parthia," of "The Contrast," of
Dunlap's "Andre," and of Mrs. Mowatt's "Fashion," according to our
modern methods of acting. These plays may often seem verbose and
lacking in continuous development and interest. This would lead us
to believe that possibly the early actor had means at his disposal
of overcoming these defects by a method of dramatic technique
unknown to the present player. In reading these dramas, one must be
able to bear in mind the differences which exist between the theatre
of to-day and the theatre of yesterday, between the tradition of the
actor of to-day and of the actor of yesterday. The technique, for
example, in the characterization of _Jonathan_, and in the
characterization of _Solon Shingle_, is different from the technique
which characterizes the work of Clyde Fitch or which is to be found
in David Belasco's "Peter Grimm." In other words, in such a
collection, one asks, not the judgment of the highest literary
standards, but the judgment of an historical appreciation of the
changes in dramatic taste.

       *       *       *       *       *

This, the first volume of "Representative Plays by American
Dramatists," contains dramas which measure the tastes and
inclinations of Colonial and Revolutionary life. In the proper
understanding of their atmosphere, it is necessary to know something
of the general spirit of the theatre of the period; to measure the
conditions, customs, and social peculiarities of the provincial
actors and audiences. For that reason, it would be well for the
general reader beforehand to obtain a bird's-eye view of the history
of the American theatre--a view which will comprise some
consideration of the first playhouse in this country, of the
conditions which confronted Hallam, Henry, and Douglass, the first
actors to be at the head of what, in Williamsburg, Virginia, was
known as the Virginia Comedians, and in New York and Philadelphia,
as the American Company.

No more fascinating study could be imagined than following the
trials and tribulations of the actors in America at this early day,
who, as soon as they reached Philadelphia, or as soon as they
attempted to invade Boston, were confronted by the Puritanical and
sectarian prejudices, against which the early history of the
American theatre had to struggle. The personalities of the Hallams,
of Douglass and Hodgkinson, are picturesque and worth while tracing
in all aspects of their Thespian careers in the Colonies. So, too,
the persons of Thomas Wignell, the Comedian, and of Mrs. Merry, are
of especial interest. Wignell, at the John Street Theatre, in New
York, and at the Southwark Theatre, in Philadelphia, was wont to
amuse George Washington, who, on careful examination of his Journals
and expense accounts, looms up as the one big theatre-goer of the
time.

The reader who follows the effect open hostility with England had
upon the American theatre, will find most interesting material
relating to the dramatic activities of the soldiers under the
leadership of Generals Burgoyne and Howe. In fact, no account of
dramatic writings in this country can ignore the fact that General
Burgoyne, apart from the farce which incited Mrs. Mercy Warren, was
himself a serious dramatist, who took his work seriously, and whose
dramas may be obtained at any large reference library. The
Red-Coats, as actors, amused their Tory public with such plays as
"Tamerlane," "The Busybody," and "Zara;" and when they invaded the
Southwark Theatre, around 1777, Major Andre, the presiding genius of
the English soldier-actors, turned to good account his ability as a
scene-painter, and painted a backdrop which was preserved in
Philadelphia until 1821, when it was destroyed by fire. We have,
however, a description of the scene, taken from Durang's "History of
the Philadelphia Stage."

"It was a landscape," he writes, "presenting a distant _champagne_
country, and a winding rivulet, extending from the front of the
picture to the extreme distance. In the foreground and centre was a
gentle cascade--the water exquisitely executed--overshadowed by a
group of majestic forest trees. The perspective was excellently
preserved; the foliage, verdure, and general colouring artistically
toned and glazed. It was a drop scene, and Andre's name was
inscribed on the back of it in large black letters."

The early American theatre was nothing more than the theatre of
England transplanted to a more provincial atmosphere. We have a record
of dramatic performances being given at Williams and Mary College
before the Royal Governor, in 1702, and, in 1736, the students were
presenting Addison's "Cato." In 1714, in Massachusetts, Chief Justice
Samuel Sewall, famed for his witchcraft injunctions, protested against
acting in Boston, and warned the people in this fashion: "Let not
Christian Boston goe beyond Heathen Rome in the practice of Shameful
Vanities."

Evidently the actors who had appeared in New York from the West
Indies, in 1702, were, by an ill wind, blown into the sharp-prejudiced
atmosphere of New England. Some authorities are inclined to believe
that Thomas Kean's appearance on March 5, 1750, in New York, when, as
noted by the _Weekly Postboy_, he gave a performance of "Richard III,"
with permission of Governor Clinton, really begins the history of
legitimate theatrical performances in America. This, however, is not
historically accurate, for, in South Carolina, it is noted that the
first dramatic production occurred in 1734 or 1735, January 18th,
although the first Charleston theatre was afterwards erected in 1773,
the third regular theatre to be established in the Colonies. (See _The
Nation_, 99:278-279; Yates Snowden, "South Carolina Plays and
Playwrights," _The Carolinian_, November, 1909.)

The disputed point as to the first theatre in America has also been
very thoroughly discussed by Judge Charles P. Daly in his brochure,
"The First Theatre in America." (Dunlap Society, New Series, No. 1,
1896.)

In 1755, the Reverend Samuel Davies, whose eloquence made him quite
as much an actor as a divine, complained of conditions in Virginia,
declaring that plays and romances were more read than "the history
of the Blessed Jesus."

The real narrative of Colonial acting, however, begins with William
Hallam's appearance in Williamsburg in "The Merchant of Venice," on
September 5, 1752; thereafter, as is so excellently traced in
Seilhamer, the American Theatre, with its different itinerant
companies, began to flourish.

The theatre was such a recreation to the Colonial people that, in
many ways, it figured as the one source of official entertainment;
especially on occasions when the Royal Governor had to show
hospitality to visiting people. For example, the _Maryland Gazette_
for November 17, 1752, declares that "The Emperor of the Cherokee
nation, with his Empress and their son, the young Prince, attended
by several of his warriors and Great Men, and their Ladies, were
received at the Palace by his Honour the Governor, attended by such
of the Council as were in Town on Thursday, the 9th instant, with
all the Marks of Courtesy and Friendship, and were that Evening
entertained at the Theatre with the Play (the Tragedy of 'Othello'),
and a Pantomime Performance which gave them great surprise, as did
the fighting with naked swords on the Stage, which occasioned the
Empress to order some about her to go and prevent them killing one
another."

The spirit of the theatre-going at this period has been excellently
suggested by John Esten Cook in his novel, "The Virginia Comedians,"
but the reader who will consult rare files of Colonial newspapers
will find therein many advertisements which will throw light on some
of the social details of the theatre. It is enough here to suggest
that, in the reading of the different plays here offered, some
consideration be paid to the general theatrical atmosphere which
created and fostered them.

In several of the Introductions the editor has had occasion to
mention the exercises and dialogues and plays given in the colleges
before the Revolution. These were the distinctive forms which time
and occasion created; otherwise the early American dramatist framed
his pieces in imitation of English and German tradition. However, as
soon as the national period began, another interesting dramatic
experiment was put into effect. This has been noted by W. W. Clapp,
in his chapter written for Justin Winsor's "Commemorative History of
Boston." He says:

"[It was] the custom in the earlier days of the theatre to signalize
passing events by such appropriate notice as the resources of the
stage would permit."

In other words, the event called forth from the Manager, because of
commercial possibilities, certain spectacular scenes to attract the
patriotic notice of the people. Manager Hodgkinson, on September 20,
1797, celebrated the launching of the frigate _Constitution_.[3] On
January 8, 1800, at the New York Theatre, an "Ode on the Death of
General Washington" was recited by Mr. Hodgkinson, written by Samuel
Low. It is interesting here to note likewise that Royall Tyler
pronounced a Eulogy on Washington at Bennington, Vermont, on
February 22, 1800.

[3] Dunlap, himself atune to the hour, wrote "Yankee Chronology; or,
Huzza for the Constitution"--"a musical Interlude, in One Act, to
which are added, The Patriotic Songs of the Freedom of the Seas, and
Yankee Tars," produced at the Park Theatre, New York, 1812. Dunlap
wrote many pieces of like character.

A patriotic effusion, celebrating the capture of the British frigate
_Guerriere_, was produced on October 2, 1812. In 1813, to
commemorate the victory of Perry, a piece was mounted, entitled,
"Heroes of the Lake; or, the Glorious Tenth of September." Another
piece, equally as suggestive in its title, was "The Sailor's Return;
or, Constitution Safe in Port."

When the Marquis de Lafayette visited the United States in 1825, and
was taken to the theatre, the occasion was celebrated by an
appropriate "drop." In other words, the Manager, even in those days,
had the commercial instinct fully developed.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the preparation of the present collection, the editor wishes to
thank those who have been generous in their advice and appreciation
of the work in hand. Being a pioneer effort, the original research
necessitated has been of an extensive character. I have had, in
order to verify my data, to correspond extensively, not only with
the members of the families of the different playwrights, but with
many historical societies and libraries. I have likewise had the
advantage of being able to consult with Dr. F. W. Atkinson, of the
Brooklyn Polytechnic, whose collection of American Drama is probably
one of the richest in the country, and with Professor Brander
Matthews, whose interest in all drama makes the historian
continually in his debt. Certain information concerning Royall Tyler
has been furnished me by members of the Tyler family, including Mrs.
E. L. Pratt, of Boston. In their proper places, when the plays
occur, certain credits and references will be found, but it is a
pleasure for me here to thank Mr. Percy Mackaye, Mr. David Belasco,
Mr. Langdon Mitchell, Mr. Augustus Thomas, the Clyde Fitch Estate,
and the Bronson Howard Estate, for their generous cooeperation in
bringing the present collection to a successful issue. The privilege
is also mine to thank Mr. L. Nelson Nichols, of the Americana
Division, and Mr. Victor H. Paltsits, in charge of the Manuscript
Division, of the New York Public Library, together with other
officials of that Library, of Columbia University, and of the
Library Company of Philadelphia, and Miss Z. K. Macdonald, for their
unfailing courtesy and untiring efforts in my behalf.

In order to preserve uniformity of style throughout the text of the
plays certain modifications in punctuation and spelling have been
adopted.

                                                MONTROSE J. MOSES.

February 22, 1917.




BIBLIOGRAPHY OF GENERAL WORKS


Some of the most important works on the history of the American
Drama and the American Theatre are given herewith. Under each
author, there will be found short individual bibliographies, and in
the succeeding volumes of the Collection, other general references
will be given which will throw light on the theatrical conditions of
the particular theatre periods. Naturally, books relating to modern
conditions will be reserved for the third volume.

ALLIBONE, S. AUSTIN. A Critical Dictionary of English Literature and
British and American Authors. (3 vols.) Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott & Co. 1874. (Supplement to Allibone. By John Foster Kirk.
Lippincott, 1891, 2 vols.)

ATKINSON, F. W. List of American Drama in the Atkinson Collection.
1756-1915. Brooklyn, January 1, 1916.

BATES, ALFRED. Drama. Vols. XIX, XX. For American Drama.

BECKS. Collection of Prompt Books in the New York Public Library.
_Bulletin_, February, 1906, pp. 100-148.

BROWN, T. ALLSTON. A History of the New York Stage. From the First
Performance in 1732 to 1901. (3 vols.) New York: Dodd, Mead & Co.
1903.

BURTON, RICHARD. The New American Drama. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell
Co. 1913.

CLAPP, WILLIAM W., JR. A Record of the Boston Stage. Boston: James
Munroe and Company. 1853.

CLARK, BARRETT H. The British and American Drama of Today. New York:
Henry Holt & Co. 1915.

CRAWFORD, MARY CAROLINE. The Romance of the American Theatre.
Boston: Little, Brown & Co. 1913.

DALY, HON. CHARLES P. First Theatre in America: When Was the Drama
First Introduced in America? An Inquiry. Dunlap Soc. Pub., n. s. 1,
1896.

DICKINSON, THOMAS H. The Case of American Drama. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Co. 1915.

DUNLAP, WILLIAM. History of the American Theatre. London: Richard
Bentley. 1833.

DURANG, CHARLES. History of the Philadelphia Stage. 1749-1855.
(Published serially in the _Philadelphia Dispatch_.)

DUYCKINCK, EVERT A. and GEORGE L. The Cyclopedia of American
Literature: From the Earliest Period to the Present Day.
Philadelphia: William Rutter & Co. 1877. (2 vols.)

EVANS, CHARLES. American Biography. 8 vols. Privately Printed.

FAXON, FREDERICK W. Dramatic Index. Boston Book Co. 1909 _seq._

FORD, PAUL LEICESTER. The Beginnings of American Dramatic
Literature. _New England Magazine_, n. s. 9:673-687, February, 1894.

FORD, PAUL LEICESTER. Some Notes Toward an Essay on the Beginnings
of American Dramatic Literature. 1606-1789.

FORD, PAUL LEICESTER. Washington and the Theatre. Dunlap Soc. Pub.,
n. s. 8, 1899.

GAISFORD, JOHN. Drama in New Orleans. New Orleans. 1849.

GRISWOLD, RUFUS WILMOT. Female Poets of America, With Additions by
R. H. Stoddard. New York, 1843-1873.

GRISWOLD, RUFUS WILMOT. Prose Writers of America. Philadelphia:
Parry & McMillan. 1854.

HARRIS, C. FISKE. Index to American Poetry and Plays in the
Collection of. Providence, 187-.

HARRISON, GABRIEL. History of the Drama in Brooklyn.

HASKELL, DANIEL C. (Compiler.) American Dramas, A List of, in the
New York Public Library. New York, 1916. (See also _Bulletin of the
New York Public Library_, October, 1915.)

HILDEBURN, CHARLES R. The Issues of the Press in Pennsylvania.
Philadelphia, 1886.

HUTTON, LAURENCE. Curiosities of the American Stage. New York:
Harper & Bros. 1891.

IRELAND, JOSEPH N. Records of the New York Stage, from 1750 to 1860.
(2 vols.) New York: T. H. Morrell, Publisher. 1866.

LUDLOW, N. M. Dramatic Life as I Found It: A Record of Personal
Experience with an Account of the Drama in the West and South. St.
Louis: G. I. Jones & Co. 1880.

MATTHEWS, J. B. American on the Stage. _Scribner_, 28:321.

MATTHEWS, J. B. A Book About the Theatre. New York: Charles
Scribner's Sons. 1916.

MOSES, MONTROSE J. The American Dramatist. Boston: Little, Brown &
Co. 1917.

MOSES, MONTROSE J. Famous Actor-Families in America. New York:
Thomas Y. Crowell & Co. 1906.

PENCE, JAMES HARRY. (Compiler.) The Magazine and the Drama. An
Index. New York: The Dunlap Society. 1896.

PHELPS, H. P. Players of a Century. A Record of the Albany Stage.
Albany, 1880.

REES, J. The Dramatic Authors of America. Philadelphia, 1845.

RODEN, ROBERT F. Later American Plays. 1831-1900. New York: The
Dunlap Society. (1900, n. s. 12.)

SABIN, JOSEPH. Dictionary of Books Relating to America. From Its
Discovery to the Present Time. Vol. 1, _seq._ New York: 1868 _seq._

SABINE, LORENZO. Biographical Sketches of Loyalists of the American
Revolution. (2 vols.) Boston: Little, Brown & Co. 1864.

SCHARF, J. THOMAS, and WESTCOTT, THOMPSON. History of Philadelphia.
1609-1884. Philadelphia: L. H. Everts & Co. 1884.

SEARS, ALONZO. American Literature in the Colonial and National
Periods. Boston: Little, Brown & Co. 1902.

SEILHAMER, GEORGE O. I. History of the American Theatre Before the
Revolution. Philadelphia, 1888. II. History of the American Theatre
During the Revolution and After. Philadelphia, 1889. III. History of
the American Theatre: New Foundations. Philadelphia, 1891.

SIMPSON, HENRY. The Lives of Eminent Philadelphians, Now Deceased.
Collected from Original and Authentic Sources. Philadelphia: William
Brotherhead. 1859.

SMITH, SOLOMON FRANKLIN. Theatrical Management in the West and South
for Thirty Years, with Anecdotal Sketches. New York: Harper & Bros.
1868.

SONNECK, OSCAR GEORGE THEODORE. Catalogue of Opera Librettos Printed
Before 1800. (2 vols.) Washington: Government Printing Office. 1914.

SONNECK, O. G. T. Early Opera in America. New York: G. Schirmer.
1915.

SONNECK, O. G. T. Report on the Star-Spangled Banner, Hail Columbia,
America, and Yankee Doodle. Washington: Government Printing Office.
1909.

STONE, HENRY DICKINSON. Personal Recollections of the Drama. Albany,
1873.

_Times_, New York. The Early Theatre. December 15, 1895, p. 13.

TOMPKINS, EUGENE, and KILBY, QUINCY. History of the Boston Theatre.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co. 1908.

TYLER, MOSES COIT. The Literary History of the American Revolution.
1763-1783. (2 vols.) New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. 1897.

WEGELIN, OSCAR. The Beginning of the Drama in America. _Literary
Collector_, 9:177-181, 1905.

WEGELIN, OSCAR. Early American Plays. 1714-1830. New York: The
Literary Collector Press. 1905. (See Dunlap Soc. Pub., n. s. 10,
1900; also the _Literary Collector_, 2:82-84.)

WEMYSS, F. C. Chronology of the American Stage from 1752 to 1852.
New York: Wm. Taylor & Co.

WEMYSS, F. C. Twenty-six Years of the Life of an Actor and Manager.
(2 vols.) New York: Burgess, Stringer & Co. 1847.

WILKINS, FREDERICK H. Early Influence of German Literature in
America. _Americana Germanica_, 3:103-205, 1899.

WILLARD, GEORGE O. History of the Providence Stage. 1762-1891.
Providence: R. I. News Co. 1891.

WILSON, JAMES GRANT. (Editor.) The Memorial History of the City of
New York. (4 vols.) New York History Co. 1892 _seq._

WINSOR, JUSTIN. The Memorial History of Boston, including Suffolk
Co., Mass. 1630-1880. Boston: Ticknor & Co. 1880.

WINTER, WILLIAM. The Wallet of Time. (2 vols.) New York: Moffat,
Yard & Co. 1913.

WOOD, WILLIAM B. Personal Recollections of the Stage. Embracing
Notices of Actors, Authors, and Auditors, During a Period of Forty
Years. Philadelphia: Henry Carey Baird. 1855.




INDIVIDUAL BIOGRAPHIES FOR PLAYS.


Only essential references are given, and wherever possible the
author's name is indicated, rather than the title. In such cases,
the full title of the reference may be had by consulting the General
Bibliography.


THOMAS GODFREY, JR.

William Allen, American Biographical Dictionary; Dunlap, i, 50;
Seilhamer, i, 185; Tyler, Consult Index; Journal of William Black;
Journal of Sarah Eve, Extracts from the: Written while living near
the City of Philadelphia in 1772-1773 (Philadelphia, 1881);
_American Museum_, 471-472; _Journal National Institute Sciences_,
i: 165, 1915; _Nation_, 100:415, April 15, 1915.


MAJOR ROBERT ROGERS

Allibone; Appleton's Cyclopedia of American Biography; Dictionary of
National Biography; Duyckinck; Ryerson, American Loyalists; Sabin;
Sabine, American Loyalists; Tyler; Winsor. Ellis P. Oberholtzer,
Literary History of Philadelphia (1906); Sears. _Canadian Magazine_,
1914, 42:316-318; _Dial_ (Chicago), 59:68-69; 97, 1915; _Historical
Magazine_ (New York), April, 1860, 127; _New England Magazine_,
1894, n. s. 9:678; Royal Society of Canada Proceedings and
Transactions, ser. 2, vol. 6, sec. 2, pp. 49-59, Ottawa, 1900. The
reader is also referred to the Nevins re-issue of "Ponteach," in
which full bibliographies are given; also to Parkman's "History of
the Conspiracy of Pontiac." Consult Caleb Stark's "Memoir and
Official Correspondence of Gen. John Stark, with Notices of Several
other Officers of the Revolution. Also, a Biography of Capt.
Phinehas Stevens, and of Colonel Robert Rogers" (1860).


MRS. MERCY WARREN

Alice Brown, "Mercy Warren" (_Women of Colonial and Revolutionary
Times_). New York: Scribner's, 1896; Duyckinck; Ellet, Women of the
American Revolution; Fiske, John, American Revolution; Griswold,
Female Poets of America; Mrs. Hale, Woman's Record; Rees, 132;
Seilhamer, ii, 3; Winsor, Boston; Wegelin. Adams, Works of John--ed.
by Charles Francis Adams.--Consult Index; _Blackwood Magazine_,
xvii, 203; Correspondence Relating to Mrs. Warren's History of the
American Revolution, _Mass. Hist. Coll._, ser. 5, v. 4, 315-511;
_Harper's Magazine_, 1884, 68:749; _New England Magazine_, 1894, n.
s. 9:680; _North American Review_, lxviii, 415. In studying first
editions of plays, the reader is referred to the Bibliographies of
Charles Evans and Charles Hildeburn.


HUGH HENRY BRACKENRIDGE

Allibone; Duyckinck; Victor H. Paltsits, A Bibliography of the
Separate and Collected Works of Philip Freneau (including
Brackenridge)--New York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1903; 1846 edition of
Brackenridge's "Modern Chivalry," containing a biographical sketch by
his son; Oberholtzer; Tyler; _United States Magazine_ (in the
collection of the Historical Society of Pennsylvania). The reader is
also referred to Mary S. Austin's "Philip Freneau, the Poet of the
Revolution: A History of his Life and Times" (1901); F. L. Pattee's
"The Poems of Philip Freneau: Poet of the American Revolution"--Edited
for the Princeton Historical Association, 3 volumes, 1902-1907; Samuel
Davies Alexander's "Princeton College during the Eighteenth Century;"
James Madison's Correspondence while at College; W. C. Armor's "Lives
of the Governors of Pennsylvania," for a picture and an account of the
administration of Governor Thomas Mackean. Consult also, for college
atmosphere, the Journals of Philip Fithian, and the Correspondence of
the Rev. Ezra Stiles, Letter of July 23, 1762, published by the Yale
Press. (Styles encouraged "The Mercenary Match," by Barnabas Bidwell.)


JOHN LEACOCK

Durang; Duyckinck; Hildeburn; Ford; Sabin; Seilhamer, ii, 10; Tyler;
"New Travels through North-America." Translated from the Original of
the Abbe Robin [Claude C.], one of the Chaplains to the French Army
in America, 1783. (Observations made in 1781); Sonneck's "Early
Opera in America;" Watson's "Annals of Philadelphia;" Philadelphia
Directories as mentioned in text.


SAMUEL LOW

Dunlap; Duyckinck; Sabin; Seilhamer, ii, 284; Stedman-Hutchinson,
Cyclopedia of American Literature; New York Directories as
mentioned.


ROYALL TYLER

Allibone; Appleton's Cyclopedia of American Biography; Dunlap, i,
137; Duyckinck; Ireland, i, 76; Stedman-Hutchinson, Library of
American Literature; Winsor; "Memoirs of the Hon. Royall Tyler: Late
Chief Justice of Vermont. Compiled from his Papers by his son,
Thomas Pickman Tyler, 1873" (Unpublished). According to information
(1917), this manuscript, incomplete, is being brought to a close by
Helen Tyler Brown, great-granddaughter of the Judge. There is
likewise a life of Mary Tyler, unpublished, written by herself when
quite an old woman.

Consult also: J. T. Buckingham's "Personal Memoirs and
Recollections," 2 vols., 1852; J. T. Buckingham's "Specimens of
Newspaper Literature," 2 vols., 1850; Vermont Bar Association
Proceedings, 1878-1886, vol. i, pp. 44-62, an article by the Rev.
Thomas P. Tyler, D.D., of Brattleboro; Harold Milton Ellis's "Joseph
Dennie and His Circle: A Study in American Literature from 1792 to
1812."--Studies in English, No. 1, _Bulletin of the University of
Texas_, No. 40, July 15, 1915; John Trumbull's "Autobiographical
Reminiscences and Letters, 1756-1841." The correspondence relating
to Shays's Rebellion is to be found in "Brattleboro, Wyndham Co.,
Vermont, Early History, with Biographical Sketches. Henry
Burnham."--Edited by Abby Maria Hemenway (Includes an excellent
picture of Royall Tyler); William Willis's "The Law, the Courts and
the Lawyers of Maine" (1863). Further references to Tyler are
contained in Rees, 131; Mitchell, American Lands; John Adams' Works;
Sonneck's "Opera in America," under "May-day in Town;" Seilhamer,
ii, 227; _Delineator_ (New York), 85:7; _New England Magazine_,
1894, n. s. 9:674; _North American Review_, July, 1858, 281.

Among Tyler's works, other than those mentioned in the Introduction,
may be recorded:

1. "The Algerine Captive; or, The Life and Adventures of Dr. Updike
Underhill, Six Years a Prisoner Among the Algerines." 2 vols.
Walpole, N. H., 1797.

2. "Moral Tales for American Youths." Boston, 1800.

3. "The Yankee in London: A Series of Letters, written by an
American Youth during Nine Months of Residence in the City of
London." New York, 1809.

4. Tyler wrote for the newspapers with Joseph Dennie, Walpole, N.
H., and published selections from his contributions under the title
of "The Spirit of the Farmer's Museum and Lay Preacher's Gazette."
He also contributed poems to the _Farmer's Weekly Museum_, to the
_Portfolio_, to the Columbia _Centinel_, to the _New England
Galaxy_, and to the _Polyanthus_. Prose works were likewise included
therein. Some of his contributions to the _Farmer's Museum_ were
gathered together in 1798 under the title of "Colon and Spondee
Papers," and issued by the pioneer American printer, Isaiah Thomas.


WILLIAM DUNLAP

The reader is referred to Dunlap's own "History of the American
Theatre," and to his numerous other prose works, notably his Lives
of Charles Brockden Brown and George Frederick Cooke. The Dunlap
Society's Reprints of "Andre" (iv. 1887), "Darby's Return" (n. s. 8,
1899), and "The Father" (ii, 1887) contain biographical data. See
Oscar Wegelin's "William Dunlap and His Writings," _Literary
Collector_, 7:69-76, 1904; O. S. Coad's "William Dunlap: A Study of
his Life and Writings, and of Contemporary Culture" (scheduled for
issuance by the Dunlap Society in 1917); Dunlap's Diary, in the
Library of the New York Historical Society: Vol. 14, July 27-Dec.
13, 1797; vol. 15, Dec. 14, 1797-June 1, 1798; vol. 24, Oct. 15,
1819-April 14, 1820; vol. 30, June 27, 1833-Dec. 31, 1834. Consult
also Duyckinck; Rees, 76; Stedman-Hutchinson, Library of American
Literature; Seilhamer, Index; Wood, Personal Recollections;
Sonneck's "The Musical Side of George Washington;" _Analytical
Magazine_, i, 404, 466; _New England Magazine_, 1894, n. s. 9, 684.
See Wegelin, Evans, Hildeburn.


JAMES NELSON BARKER

Dunlap, ii, 307; Durang; Ireland; Rees; Diary of Manager Wood, in
possession of the University of Pennsylvania. Also Griswold's "Poets
and Poetry of America;" Oberholtzer's "Literary History of
Philadelphia;" Simpson. Barker's political writings were extensive.


MORDECAI MANUEL NOAH

Dunlap, ii, 316; Ireland, i, 356; Jewish Encyclopedia; National
Cyclopedia of American Biography. See also Allibone; Duyckinck; P.
K. Foley's "American Authors;" Oberholtzer's "Literary History of
Philadelphia;" Rees; Scharf and Westcott; James Grant Wilson's
"Fitz-Green Halleck;" _International Magazine_, iii, 282; _American
Jewish Historical Society Pub._, No. 6, 1897, 113-121; _Lippincott_,
i, 665; J. T. Trowbridge's "My Own Story. With Recollections of
Noted Persons" (1903).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Representative Plays by American
Dramatists, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPRESENTATIVE PLAYS ***

***** This file should be named 29221.txt or 29221.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/2/2/29221/

Produced by David Starner, Brownfox and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
