The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Indian Princess, by James Nelson Barker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Indian Princess
       La Belle Sauvage

Author: James Nelson Barker

Editor: Montrose J. Moses

Release Date: June 27, 2009 [EBook #29230]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INDIAN PRINCESS ***




Produced by David Starner, Brownfox and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





TRANSCRIBERS' NOTES

This e-book contains the text of _The Indian Princess_, extracted from
Representative Plays by American Dramatists: Vol 1, 1765-1819. Comments
and background to all the plays and the other plays are available at
Project Gutenberg.

Spelling as in the original has been preserved.




THE INDIAN PRINCESS

_By_ J. N. BARKER




JAMES NELSON BARKER

(1784-1858)


In a letter written to William Dunlap, from Philadelphia, on June 10,
1832, James Nelson Barker very naively and very fully outlined his career,
inasmuch as he had been informed by Manager Wood that Mr. Dunlap wished
such an account for his "History of the American Stage."

From this account, we learn that whatever dramatic ability Mr. Barker
possessed came from the enthusiasm created within him as a reader of wide
range. For example, in 1804, he became the author of a one-act piece,
entitled "Spanish Rover," furnished in plot by Cervantes. In 1805, he
wrote what he describes as a Masque, entitled "America," in which poetic
dialogue afforded America, Science and Liberty the opportunity of singing
in unison. He confesses that this Masque was "to close a drama I had
projected on the adventures of Smith in Virginia, in the olden time." Then
followed a tragedy suggested by Gibbon, entitled "Attila," but Mr. Barker
had advanced only two acts when news came to him that John Augustus Stone
was at work on a play of the same kind.

In his letter to Dunlap, Mr. Barker deplored this coincidence, which put a
stop to "Attila." "But have you never yourself been the victim of these
odd coincidences, and, just as you had fixed upon a subject or a title,
found yourself superseded--a thing next in atrocity to the ancients'
stealing all one's fine thoughts. My comedy of 'Tears and Smiles' was to
be called 'Name it Yourself,' when out comes a 'Name it Yourself,' in
England, and out comes too a 'Smiles and Tears,' with a widow, an
Irishman, and almost all my _dramat. pers._ I wrote the 'Indian Princess,'
and an 'Indian Princess' appears in England. Looking over the old English
dramatists, I am struck with the 'Damon and Pythias' of Edwards as a
subject, but am scarcely set down to it, when lo, the modern play in
London; and what is worse, with the fine part of Pythias absolutely
transformed into a snivelling fellow, who bellows like a calf at the
prospect of dying for his friend. 'Wallace' was purloined from me in like
manner, and several other heroes: at length I fix upon 'Epaminondas', as
a 'learned Theban' of so philosophical a cast of character, that even the
French had not thought of him for the boards. I form my plot, and begin
_con amore_, when I am told that Dr. Bird has written a 'Pelopidas' and an
'Epaminondas,' comprehending the whole life of the latter."

Then, having finished with his diatribe against coincidence--a diatribe
which excellently well shows the channels in which Barker's literary mind
ran, and likewise the closeness with which he followed the literary
activity of the period among his associates, he continued in his narrative
to Dunlap:

"'Tears and Smiles' was written between May 1 and June 12, of 1806, with
the character of a Yankee intended for Jefferson. By the way, such a
Yankee as I drew!" he writes. "I wonder what Hackett would say to it! The
truth is, I had never even seen a Yankee at the time."

Then, in view of Barker's political tastes which, in consideration of the
dramatists of those days, one must always take into account, he wrote a
piece called "The Embargo; or, What News?" borrowed from Murphy's
"Upholsterer," and produced on March 16, 1808.

Between this play and 1809, "The Indian Princess" was written, and what
Barker has to say about it will be quoted in its proper place.

Right now, we are letting him enumerate his own literary activities, which
were many and continuous.

In 1809, he Americanized Cherry's "Travellers," a dramatic method which
has long been in vogue between America and England, and has, in many
respects, spoiled many American comedies for English consumption.

In 1812, at the request of Manager Wood, Mr. Barker made a dramatization
of Scott's "Marmion," and, strange to say, it was announced as being
written by Thomas Morton, Esq.

"This was audacious enough in all conscience," says Mr. Barker, "but the
finesse was successful, and a play most probably otherwise destined to
neglect, ran like wild fire through all our theatres." On March 24, 1817,
there was acted in Philadelphia, Barker's "The Armourer's Escape; or,
Three Years at Nootka Sound," described by Mr. Barker as a melodramatic
sketch, founded on the adventures of John Jewett, the armourer of the ship
_Boston_, in which Jewett himself assumed the hero's role. This same year
he likewise wrote "How to Try a Lover," suggested by Le Brun's novel.
Finally, in 1824, on March 12, there was performed "Superstition," a
five-act drama. This closed the account that Barker sent to Dunlap.

We see from it a number of things relative to placing Barker as a literary
personage. First, his interest in literature made him draw from all
sources, combining Scott with Holinshed, and turning, as was the wont of
the cultivated American of that day, to the romantic literatures of the
past. Secondly, Barker's interest in Colonial History was manifest by his
return, time and time again, to Colonial records for dramatic material.
Furthermore, as a participant in the political disputes of his day, it
would have been a surprise had Barker not directed his pen to some
reflection of the discussions of the period.

James Nelson Barker was the son of the Honourable John Barker, one-time
Mayor of Philadelphia, and ex-Revolutionary soldier. He was born in that
city on June 17, 1784.

His education was received in Philadelphia, and he must have entered the
literary and political arenas at an early age. After the fashion of the
day, he was trained in the old-time courtesy and in the old-time manner of
defending one's honour with the sword, for it is recorded that he was once
severely wounded in a duel.

At the outbreak of the War of 1812, he received a commission, fighting
mostly on the Canadian frontier, and winning distinction as a Captain of
Artillery. After the close of the War, he was supported by the Democratic
Party, and elected Mayor of the City of Philadelphia. Later, he upheld
"Old Hickory" for the Presidency, and, after filling the position of the
Collector of the Port of Philadelphia from 1829-1838, on the election of
Van Buren to the presidency, he was appointed First Controller of the
Treasury, and moved to Washington. From that time on, he was connected
with the highest offices in the department. His pen was continually
dedicated to the support of Democracy, and, during the years from
1832-1836, he figured as a contributor to many papers of the time on
political topics. He lived until March 9, 1858.

I have selected his play, "The Indian Princess,"[1] as an example of the
numberless dramas that grew up around the character of Pocahontas. The
reader will find it particularly of interest to contrast with this piece
G. W. P. Custis's "Pocahontas; or, The Settlers of Virginia" (1830), and
John Brougham's burlesque, "Po-ca-hon-tas; or, The Gentle Savage."

The Indian Drama, in America, is a subject well worth careful attention.
There are numberless plays mentioned by Laurence Hutton in his
"Curiosities of the American Stage" which, though interesting as titles,
have not been located as far as manuscripts are concerned.

Barker's "The Indian Princess" is one of the earliest that deal with the
character of Pocahontas. The subject has been interestingly treated in an
article by Mr. E. J. Streubel (_The Colonnade_, New York University,
September, 1915).

Barker had originally intended his play, "The Indian Princess," to be a
legitimate drama, instead of which, when it was first produced, it formed
the libretto for the music by a man named John Bray, of the New Theatre.
In his letter to Dunlap, he says:

"'The Indian Princess,' in three acts ... begun some time before, was
taken up in 1808, at the request of Bray, and worked up into an opera, the
music to which he composed. It was first performed for his benefit on the
6th of April, 1808, to a crowded house; but Webster, particularly
obnoxious, at that period, to a large party, having a part in it, a
tremendous tumult took place, and it was scarcely heard. I was on the
stage, and directed the curtain to be dropped. It has since been
frequently acted in, I believe, all the theatres of the United States. A
few years since, I observed, in an English magazine, a critique on a drama
called 'Pocahontas; or, the Indian Princess,' produced at Drury Lane. From
the sketch given, this piece differs essentially from mine in the plan and
arrangement; and yet, according to the critic, they were indebted for this
very stupid production 'to America, where it is a great favourite, and is
to be found in all the printed collections of stock plays.' The copyright
of the 'Indian Princess' was also given to Blake, and transferred to
Longworth. It was printed in 1808 or 1809. George Washington Custis, of
Arlington, has, I am told, written a drama on the same subject."

An account of the riot is to be found in Durang's "History of the
Philadelphia Stage," and the reader, in order to gain some knowledge of
the popularity of "The Indian Princess," may likewise obtain interesting
material in Manager Wood's "Diary," the manuscript of which is now in
possession of the University of Pennsylvania. When the play was given in
Philadelphia, the advertisement announced, "The principal materials
forming this dramatic trifle are extracted from the General History of
Virginia, written by Captain Smith, and printed London, folio, 1624; and
as close an adherence to historic truth has been preserved as dramatic
rules would allow of."

It was given its first New York production at the Park Theatre on June 14,
1808.

[Illustration:

THE

INDIAN PRINCESS

OR,

_LA BELLE SAUVAGE._

AN OPERATIC MELO-DRAME.

IN THREE ACTS.

PERFORMED AT THE THEATRES PHILADELPHIA AND BALTIMORE.


BY J. N. BARKER.


FIRST ACTED APRIL 6, 1808.


PHILADELPHIA.

PRINTED BY T. & G. PALMER,

FOR G. E. BLAKE, NO. 1, SOUTH THIRD-STREET.

1808.

FAC-SIMILE TITLE-PAGE TO THE 1808 EDITION]




PREFACE


While I am proud to acknowledge my grateful sense of those flattering
marks of liberal kindness with which my dramatic entree has been greeted
by an indulgent audience, I feel so fully conscious of the very humble
merit of this little piece, that perhaps nothing but the peculiar
circumstances under which it was acted should have induced me to publish
it. In sending it to the press I am perfectly apprized of the probability
that it goes only to add one more to the list of those unfortunate
children of the American drama, who, in the brief space that lies between
their birth and death, are doomed to wander, without house or home,
unknown and unregarded, or who, if heeded at all, are only picked up by
some critic beadle to receive the usual treatment of vagrants. Indeed,
were I disposed to draw comfort from the misfortunes of others, I might
make myself happy with the reflection, that however my vagabond might
deserve the lash, it would receive no more punishment than those who
deserved none at all; for the gentlemen castigators seldom take the pains
to distinguish Innocence from Guilt, but most liberally bestow their
stripes on all poor wanderers who are unhappily of American parentage.
Far, however, from rejoicing at this circumstance, I sincerely deplore it.
In all ages, and in every country, even the sturdiest offspring of genius
have felt the necessity and received the aid of a protecting hand of
favour to support and guide their first trembling and devious footsteps;
it is not, therefore, wonderful, that here, where every art is yet but in
its infancy, the youthful exertions of dramatic poetry, unaided and
unsupported, should fail, and that its imbecile efforts should for ever
cease with the failure; that chilled by total neglect, or chid with
undeserved severity; depressed by ridicule, starved by envy, and stricken
to the earth by malevolence, the poor orphan, heartless and spirit-broken,
should pine away a short and sickly life. I am not, I believe, quite
coxcomb enough to advance the most distant hint that the child of my brain
deserves a better fate; that it may meet with it I might, however, be
indulged in hoping, under the profession that the hope proceeds from
considerations distinct from either it or myself. Dramatic genius, with
genius of every other kind, is assuredly native of our soil, and there
wants but the wholesome and kindly breath of favour to invigourate its
delicate frame, and bid it rapidly arise from its cradle to blooming
maturity. But alas! poor weak ones! what a climate are ye doomed to draw
your first breath in! the teeming press has scarcely ceased groaning at
your delivery, ere you are suffocated with the stagnant atmosphere of
entire apathy, or swept out of existence by the hurricane of unsparing,
indiscriminating censure!

Good reader, I begin to suspect that I have held you long enough by the
button. Yet, maugre my terror of being tiresome, and in despite of my
clear anticipation of the severe puns which will be made in this punning
city, on my _childish_ preface, I must push my allusion a little further,
to deprecate the wrath of the critics, and arouse the sympathies of the
ladies. Then, O ye sage censors! ye goody gossips at poetic births! I
vehemently importune ye to be convinced, that for my bantling I desire
neither rattle nor bells; neither the lullaby of praise, nor the pap of
patronage, nor the hobby-horse of honour. 'Tis a plain-palated, home-bred,
and I may add independent urchin, who laughs at sugar plums, and from its
little heart disdains gilded gingerbread. If you like it--so; if not--why
so; yet, without being mischievous, it would fain be amusing; therefore,
if its gambols be pleasant, and your gravities permit, laugh; if not, e'en
turn aside your heads, and let the wanton youngling laugh by itself. If it
speak like a sensible child, prithee, pat its cheek, and say so; but if it
be ridiculous when it would be serious, smile, and permit the foolish
attempt to pass. But do not, O goody critic, apply the birch, because its
unpractised tongue cannot lisp the language of Shakspeare, nor be very
much enraged, if you find it has to creep before it can possibly walk.

To your bosoms, ladies, sweet ladies! the little stranger flies with
confidence for protection; shield it, I pray you, from the iron rod of
rigour, and scold it yourselves, as much as you will, for on _your_ smooth
and polished brows it can never read wrinkled cruelty; the mild anger of
_your_ eyes will not blast it like the fierce scowl of the critic; the
chidings of _your_ voice will be soothing music to it, and it will
discover the dimple of kindness in your very frowns. Caresses it does not
ask; its modesty would shrink from that it thought it deserved not; but if
its faults be infantile, its punishment should be gentle, and from you,
dear ladies, correction would be as thrillingly sweet as that the little
_Jean Jacques_ received from the fair hand of Mademoiselle Lambercier.

THE AUTHOR.




ADVERTISEMENT


The principal materials that form this dramatic trifle are extracted from
the General History of Virginia, written by Captain Smith, and printed
London, folio, 1624; and as close an adherence to historic truth has been
preserved as dramatic rules would allow of. The music[2] was furnished by
Mr. John Bray, of the New Theatre.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE


EUROPEANS.

DELAWAR,                      Mr. Warren.
CAPTAIN SMITH,                Mr. Rutherford.
LIEUTENANT ROLFE,             Mr. Wood.
PERCY,                        Mr. Charnock.
WALTER,                       Mr. Bray.
LARRY,                        Mr. Webster.
ROBIN,                        Mr. Jefferson.
TALMAN,                       Mr. Durang.

GERALDINE,                    Mrs. Francis.
KATE,                         Miss Hunt.
ALICE,                        Mrs. Mills.

_SOLDIERS and ADVENTURERS._


VIRGINIANS.

POWHATAN, _king_,             Mr. Serson.
NANTAQUAS, _his son_,         Mr. Cone.
MIAMI, _a prince_,            Mr. Mills.
GRIMOSCO, _a priest_,         Mr. Cross.

POCAHONTAS, _the princess_,   Mrs. Wilmot.
NIMA, _her attendant_,        Miss Mullen.

_WARRIORS and INDIAN GIRLS._

SCENE, Virginia.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The/Indian Princess;/or,/La Belle Sauvage./An Operatic Melo-Drame./In
Three Acts./Performed at the Theatres Philadelphia and/Baltimore./By J. N.
Barker./ First Acted April 6, 1808./Philadelphia,/Printed by T. & G.
Palmer,/For G. E. Blake, No. 1, South Third-Street./1808./

[2] The music is now published and sold by Mr. G. E. Blake, No. 1, South
Third-street, Philadelphia.




THE INDIAN PRINCESS

ACT I.


SCENE I. _Powhatan River; wild and picturesque. Ships appear. Barges
  approach the shore, from which land SMITH, ROLFE, PERCY, WALTER,
  LARRY, ROBIN, ALICE, &c._

_Chorus._

    Jolly comrades, raise the glee,
    Chorus it right cheerily;
    For the tempest's roar is heard no more,
    And gaily we tread the wish'd-for shore:
      Then raise the glee merrily,
      Chorus it cheerily,
    _For past are the perils of the blust'ring sea._

SMITH. Once more, my bold associates, welcome. Mark
What cheery aspects look upon our landing:
The face of Nature dimples o'er with smiles,
The heav'ns are cloudless, whiles the princely sun,
As glad to greet us in his fair domain,
Gives us gay salutation--

LARRY. [_To WALTER._]        By St. Patrick
His fiery majesty does give warm welcome.
Arrah! his gracious smiles are melting--

WALTER.                  Plague!
He burthens us with favours till we sweat.

SMITH. What think ye, Percy, Rolfe, have we not found
Sir Walter Raleigh faithful in his tale?
Is 't not a goodly land? Along the bay,
How gay and lovely lie its skirting shores,
Fring'd with the summer's rich embroidery!

PERCY. Believe me, sir, I ne'er beheld that spot
Where Nature holds more sweet varieties.

SMITH. The gale was kind that blew us hitherward.
This noble bay were undiscover'd still,
Had not that storm arose propitious,
And, like the ever kindly breath of heav'n,
Which sometimes rides upon the tempest's wing,
Driv'n us to happiest destinies, e'en then
When most we fear'd destruction from the blast.

ROLFE. Let our dull, sluggish countrymen at home
Still creep around their little isle of fogs,
Drink its dank vapours, and then hang themselves.
In this free atmosphere and ample range
The bosom can dilate, the pulses play,
And man, erect, can walk a manly round.

ROBIN. [_Aside._] Aye, and be scalp'd and roasted by the Indians.

SMITH. Now, gallant cavalier adventurers,
On this our landing spot we'll rear a town
Shall bear our good king's name to after-time,
And yours along with it; for ye are men
Well worth the handing down; whose paged names
Will not disgrace posterity to read:
Men born for acts of hardihood and valour,
Whose stirring spirits scorn'd to lie inert,
Base atoms in the mass of population
That rots in stagnant Europe. Ye are men
Who a high wealth and fame will bravely win,
And wear full worthily. I still shall be
The foremost in all troubles, toil, and danger,
Your leader and your captain, nought exacting
Save strict obedience to the watchful care
Which points to your own good: be wary then,
And let not any mutinous hand unravel
Our close knit compact. Union is its strength:
Be that remember'd ever. Gallant gentlemen,
We have a noble stage, on which to act
A noble drama; let us then sustain
Our sev'ral parts with credit and with honour.
Now, sturdy comrades, cheerly to our tasks!

                                           [_Exeunt SMITH, ROLFE, &c._


Scene II. _A grove._

_Enter WALTER and LARRY._

LARRY. Now by the black eyes of my Katy, but that master of yours and
captain of mine is a prince!

WALTER. Tut, you hav'n't seen an inch yet of the whole hero. Had you
followed him as I have, from a knee-high urchin, you'd confess that there
never was soldier fit to cry comrade to him. O! 'twould have made your
blood frisk in your veins to have seen him in Turkey and Tartary, when he
made the clumsy infidels dance to the music of his broad sword!

LARRY. Troth now, the mussulmans may have been mightily amused by the
caper; but for my part I should modestly prefer skipping to the simple jig
of an Irish bag-pipe.

WALTER. Then he had the prettiest mode of forming their manners--

LARRY. Arrah, how might that be?

WALTER. For example: whenever they were so ill-bred as to appear with
their turbans on before him, he uses me this keen argument to convince
them they shewed discourtesy. He whips me out his sword, and knocks their
turbans off--

LARRY. Knocks their turbans off?

WALTER. Aye, egad, and their heads to boot.

LARRY. A dev'lish cutting way of reasoning indeed; that argument cou'dn't
be answered asily.

WALTER. Devil a tongue ever wagg'd in replication, Larry.--Ah! my fairy of
felicity--my mouthful of melody--my wife--

_Enter ALICE._

Well, Alice, we are now in the wilds of Virginia, and, tell me truly,
doesn't repent following me over the ocean, wench? wilt be content in
these wild woods, with only a little husband, and a great deal of love,
pretty Alice?

ALICE. Can you ask that? are not all places alike if you are with me,
Walter?

_Song._--ALICE.

    In this wild wood will I range;
      Listen, listen, dear!
    Nor sigh for towns so fine, to change
      This forest drear.
    Toils and dangers I'll despise,
      Never, never weary;
    And be, while love is in thine eyes,
      Ever cheery.
    Ah! what to me were cities gay;
      Listen, listen, dear!
    If from me thou wert away,
      Alas! how drear!
    Oh! still o'er sea, o'er land I'll rove,
      Never, never weary;
    And follow on where leads my love,
      Ever cheery.

LARRY. Och! the creature!

WALTER. Let my lips tell thee what my tongue cannot.
                                                              [_Kiss._

LARRY. Aye, do, do stop her mellifluous mouth; for the little nightingale
warbles so like my Kate, she makes me sigh for Ballinamone; ah! just so
would the constant creature carol all day about, roving through the seas
and over the woods.

_Enter ROBIN._

ROBIN. Master Walter, the captain is a going to explore the country, and
you must along.

WALTER. That's our fine captain, always stirring.

ROBIN. Plague on his industry! would you think it, we are all
incontinently to fall a chopping down trees, and building our own houses,
like the beavers.

LARRY. Well, sure, that's the fashionable mode of paying rent in this
country.

ALICE. O, Walter, these merciless savages! I sha'n't be merry till you
return--

ROBIN. I warrant ye, mistress Alice--Lord love you I shall be here.

WALTER. Cheerly, girl; our captain will make the red rogues
scamper like so many dun deer. Savages, quotha! at sight of him, their
copper skins will turn pale as silver, with the very alchemy of fear.
Come, a few kisses, _en passant_, and then away! cheerly, my dainty
Alice.                                     [_Exeunt WALTER and ALICE._

ROBIN. Aye, go your ways, master Walter, and when you are gone--

LARRY. What then! I suppose you'll be after talking nonsense to his wife.
But if ever I catch you saying your silly things--

ROBIN. Mum, Lord love you, how can you think it? But hark ye, master
Larry, in this same drama that our captain spoke of, you and I act parts,
do we not?

LARRY. Arrah, to be sure, we are men of parts.

ROBIN. Shall I tell you in earnest what we play in this merry comedy?

LARRY. Be doing it.

ROBIN. Then we play the parts of two fools, look you, to part with all at
home, and come to these savage parts, where, Heaven shield us, our heads
may be parted from our bodies. Think what a catastrophe, master Larry!

LARRY. So the merry comedy ends a doleful tragedy, and exit fool in the
character of a hero! That's glory, sirrah, a very feather in our cap.

ROBIN. A light gain to weigh against the heavy loss of one's head. Feather
quotha! what use of a plumed hat without a head to wear it withal?

LARRY. Tut, man, our captain will lead us through all dangers.

ROBIN. Will he? an' he catch me following him through these same dangers--

LARRY. Och, you spalpeen! I mean he'll lead us out of peril.

ROBIN. Thank him for nothing; for I've predetermined, look you, not to be
led into peril. Oh, master Larry, what a plague had I to do to leave my
snug cot and my brown lass, to follow master Rolfe to this devil of a
country, where there's never a girl nor a house!

LARRY. Out, you driveller! didn't I leave as neat a black-ey'd girl, and
as pretty a prolific potato-patch all in tears--

ROBIN. Your potato-patch in tears! that's a bull, master Larry--

LARRY. You're a calf, master Robin. Wasn't it raining? Och, I shall never
forget it; the thunder rolling, and her tongue a-going, and her tears and
the rain; och, bother, but it was a dismal morning!

_Song_--LARRY.

I.

        Och! dismal and dark was the day, to be sure,
        When Larry took leave of sweet Katy Maclure;
        And clouds dark as pitch hung just like a black lace
        O'er the sweet face of Heav'n and my Katy's sweet face.
    Then, while the wind blow'd, and she sigh'd might and main,
            Drops from the black skies
            Fell--and from her black eyes;
    Och! how I was soak'd with her tears--and the rain.

[_Speaks._] And then she gave me this beautiful keep-sake [_Shows a pair
of scissors._], which if ever I part with, may a tailor clip me in two
with his big shears. Och! when Katy took you in hand, how nicely did you
snip and snap my bushy, carroty locks; and now you're cutting the hairs of
my heart to pieces, you tieves you--

[_Sings._] Och! Hubbaboo--Gramachree--Hone!

II.

        When I went in the garden, each bush seem'd to sigh
        Because I was going--and nod me good-bye;
        Each stem hung its head, drooping bent like a bow,
        With the weight of the water--or else of its woe;
    And while sorrow, or wind, laid some flat on the ground,
            Drops of rain, or of grief,
            Fell from every leaf,
    Till I thought in a big show'r of tears I was drown'd.

[_Speaks._] And then each bush and leaf seem'd to sigh, and say, "don't
forget us, Larry." I won't, said I.--"But arrah, take something for
remembrance," said they; and then I dug up this neat jewel [_Shows a
potato._]; you're a little withered to be sure, but if ever I forget your
respectable family, or your delightful dwelling place--may I never again
see any of your beautiful brothers and plump sisters!--Och! my darling, if
you had come hot from the hand of Katy, how my mouth would have watered at
ye; now, you divil, you bring the water into my eyes.

[_Sings_.] Och! Hubbaboo--Gramachree--Hone!                 [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _Werocomoco, the royal village of POWHATAN. INDIAN GIRLS
  arranging ornaments for a bridal dress. Music._

NIMA. Let us make haste, my companions, to finish the dress of the bride;
to-day the prince Miami returns with our hunters from the chase; to-morrow
he will bear away our princess to his own nation.

_Enter POCAHONTAS from the wood, with bow and arrow, and a flamingo
  (red bird). Music as she enters._

PRINCESS. See, Nima, a flamingo.

_INDIAN GIRLS crowd around, and admire the bird._

PRINCESS. O Nima! I will use my bow no longer; I go out to the wood, and
my heart is light; but while my arrow flies, I sorrow; and when the bird
drops through the branches, tears come into mine eyes. I will no longer
use my bow.

_Distant hunting-horn. Music. They place themselves in attitudes of
  listening. Hunting-horn nearer._

NIMA. 'Tis Miami and our hunters. Princess, why are your looks sad?

PRINCESS. O Nima! the prince comes to bear me far from my father and my
brother. I must quit for ever the companions and the woods that are dear
to me. Nima, the Susquehannocks are a powerful nation, and my father would
have them for his friends. He gives his daughter to their prince, but his
daughter trembles to look upon the fierce Miami.

_Music. HUNTERS seen winding down the hills; they are met by the women
  of the village; MIAMI approaches POCAHONTAS, and his attendants lay
  skins at her feet._

MIAMI. Princess, behold the spoils I bring thee. Our hunters are laden
with the deer and the soft furred beaver. But Miami scorned such prey: I
watched for the mighty buffalo and the shaggy bear; my club felled them to
the ground, and I tore their skins from their backs. The fierce carcajou
had wound himself around the tree, ready to dart upon the hunter; but the
hunter's eyes were not closed, and the carcajou quivered on the point of
my spear. I heard the wolf howl as he looked at the moon, and the beams
that feel upon his upturned face shewed my tomahawk the spot it was to
enter. I marked where the panther had crouched, and, before he could
spring, my arrow went into his heart. Behold the spoil the Susquehannock
brings thee!

PRINCESS. Susquehannock, thou'rt a mighty hunter. Powhatan shall praise
thee for his daughter. But why returns not my brother with thee?

MIAMI. Nantaquas still finds pleasure in the hunt, but the soul of Miami
grew weary of being away from Werocomoco, for there dwelt the daughter of
Powhatan.

PRINCESS. Let us go to my father.

_Music. Exeunt PRINCESS and MIAMI into palace, followed by NIMA and
  train; the others into their several cabins._


SCENE IV. _A Forest. SMITH enters, bewildered in its mazes. Music,
  expressive of his situation._

SMITH. 'Tis all in vain! no clue to guide my steps.          [_Music._
By this the explorers have return'd despairing,
And left their forward leader to his fate.
The rashness is well punish'd, that, alone,
Would brave the entangling mazes of these wilds.
The night comes on, and soon these gloomy woods
Will echo to the yell of savage beasts,
And savage men more merciless. Alas!
And am I, after all my golden dreams
Of laurel'd glory, doom'd in wilds to fall,
Ignobly and obscure, the prey of brutes?                     [_Music._
Fie on these coward thoughts! this trusty sword,
That made the Turk and Tartar crouch beneath me,
Will stead me well, e'en in this wilderness.
                                                             [_Music._
O glory! thou who led'st me fearless on,
Where death stalk'd grimly over slaughter'd heaps,
Or drank the drowning shrieks of shipwreck'd wretches,
Swell high the bosom of thy votary!              [_Music. Exit SMITH._

_Music. A party of INDIANS enter, as following SMITH, and steal
  cautiously after him. The Indian yell within. Music, hurried.
  Re-enter SMITH, engaged with the INDIANS; several fall. Exeunt,
  fighting, and enter from the opposite side the Prince NANTAQUAS, who
  views with wonder the prowess of SMITH; when the music has ceased he
  speaks._

Sure 'tis our war-god, Aresqui himself, who lays our chiefs low! Now
they stop; he fights no longer; he stands terrible as the panther, which
the fearful hunter dares not approach. Stranger, brave stranger,
Nantaquas must know thee!                                    [_Music._

_He rushes out, and re-enters with SMITH._

PRINCE. Art thou not then a God?

SMITH. As thou art, warrior, but a man.

PRINCE. Then art thou a man like a God; thou shalt be the brother of
Nantaquas. Stranger, my father is king of the country, and many nations
obey him: will thou be the friend of the great Powhatan?

SMITH. Freely, prince; I left my own country to be the red man's friend.

PRINCE. Wonderful man, where is thy country?

SMITH. It lies far beyond the wide water.

PRINCE. Is there then a world beyond the wide water? I thought only the
sun had been there: thou comest then from behind the sun?

SMITH. Not so, prince.

PRINCE. Listen to me. Thy country lies beyond the wide water, and from it
do mine eyes behold the sun rise each morning.

SMITH. Prince, to your sight he seems to rise from thence, but your eyes
are deceived, they reach not over the wilderness of waters.

PRINCE. Where sleeps the sun then?

SMITH. The sun never sleeps. When you see him sink behind the mountains,
he goes to give light to other countries, where darkness flies before him,
as it does here, when you behold him rise in the east: thus he chases
Night for ever round the world.

PRINCE. Tell me, wise stranger, how came you from your country across the
wide water? when our canoes venture but a little from the shore, the waves
never fail to swallow them up.

SMITH. Prince, the Great Spirit is the friend of the white men, and they
have arts which the red men know not.

PRINCE. My brother, will you teach the red men?

SMITH. I come to do it. My king is a king of a mighty nation; he is great
and good: go, said he, go and make the red men wise and happy.

_During the latter part of the dialogue, the INDIANS had crept in,
  still approaching till they had almost surrounded SMITH. A burst of
  savage music. They seize and bear him off, the PRINCE in vain
  endeavouring to prevent it._

PRINCE. Hold! the white man is the brother of your prince; hold, coward
warriors!                                            [_He rushes out._


SCENE V. _Powhatan River, as the first scene._

_Enter LARRY._

Now do I begin to suspect, what, to be sure, I've been certain of a long
time, that master Robin's a little bit of a big rogue. I just now
observed him with my friend Walter's wife. Arrah! here they come. By
your leave, fair dealing, I'll play the eavesdropper behind this tree.
                                             [_Retires behind a tree._

_Enter ALICE, followed by ROBIN._

ROBIN. But, mistress Alice, pretty Alice.

ALICE. Ugly Robin, I'll not hear a syllable.

ROBIN. But plague, prithee, Alice, why so coy?

_Enter WALTER [observing them, stops]._

ALICE. Master Robin, if you follow me about any longer with your
fooleries, my Walter shall know of it.

ROBIN. A fig for Walter! is he to be mentioned the same day with the
dapper Robin? can Walter make sonnets and madrigals, and set them, and
sing them? besides, the Indians have eat him by this, I hope.

WALTER. Oh, the rascal!

ROBIN. Come, pretty one, quite alone, no one near, even that blundering
Irishman away.

LARRY. O you spalpeen! I'll blunder on you anon.

ROBIN. Shall we, Alice, shall we?

_Quartetto._

ROBIN.

    Mistress Alice, say,
    Walter's far away,
                Pretty Alice!
    Nay, now--prithee, pray,
    Shall we, Alice? hey!
            Mistress Alice?

ALICE.

Master Robin, nay--
Prithee, go your way,
        Saucy Robin!
If you longer stay,
You may rue the day,
        Master Robin.

WALTER. [_Aside._] True my Alice is.

LARRY. [_Aside._] Wat shall know of this.

ROBIN. [_Struggling._] Pretty Alice!

WALTER. [_Aside._] What a rascal 'tis!

LARRY. [_Aside._] He'll kill poor Rob, I wis!

ROBIN. [_Struggling._]       Mistress Alice,
      Let me taste the bliss--
                                              [_Attempts to kiss her._

ALICE.       Taste the bliss of this,               [_Slaps his face._
                        Saucy Robin!

WALTER. [_Advancing._] Oh, what wond'rous bliss!

LARRY. [_Advancing._] How d'ye like the kiss?

ALICE.  }
WALTER. }       Master Robin?
LARRY.  }

                                                  [_ROBIN steals off._

WALTER. Jackanapes!

LARRY. Aye, hop off, cock robin! Blood and thunder now, that such a
sparrow should try to turn hawk, and pounce on your little pullet here.

ALICE. Welcome, my bonny Walter.

WALTER. A sweet kiss, Alice, to season my bitter tidings. Our captain's
lost.

LARRY. }
ALICE. } Lost!

WALTER. You shall hear. A league or two below this, we entered a charming
stream, that seemed to glide through a fairy land of fertility. I must
know more of this, said our captain. Await my return here. So bidding us
moor the pinnace in a broad basin, where the Indian's arrows could reach
us from neither side, away he went, alone in his boat, to explore the
river to its head.

LARRY. Gallant soul!

WALTER. What devil prompted us to disobey his command I know not, but
scarce was he out of sight, when we landed; and mark the end on't: up from
their ambuscado started full three hundred black fiends, with a yell that
might have appalled Lucifer, and whiz came a cloud of arrows about our
ears. Three tall fellows of ours fell: Cassen, Emery, and Robinson. Our
lieutenant, with Percy and myself, fought our way to the water side,
where, leaving our canoe as a trophy to the victors, we plunged in, ducks,
and, after swimming, dodging, and diving like regained the pinnace that we
had left like geese.

ALICE. Heaven be praised, you are safe; but our poor captain--

WALTER. Aye; the day passed and he returned not; we came back for a
reinforcement, and to-morrow we find him, or perish.

ALICE. Perish!--

WALTER. Aye; shame seize the poltroon who wou'dn't perish in such a cause;
wou'dn't you, Larry?

LARRY. By Saint Patrick, it's the thing I would do, and hould my head the
higher for it all the days of my life after.

WALTER. But see, our lieutenant and master Percy.

_Enter ROLFE and PERCY._

ROLFE. Good Walter look to the barge, see it be ready
By earliest dawn.

WALTER.   I shall, sir.

ROLFE.          And be careful,
This misadventure be not buzz'd abroad,
Where 't may breed mutiny and mischief. Say
We've left the captain waiting our return,
Safe with the other three; meantime, choose out
Some certain trusty fellows, who will swear
Bravely to find their captain or their death.

WALTER. I'll hasten, sir, about it.

LARRY.                       Good lieutenant,
Shall I along?

ROLFE.         In truth, brave Irishman,
We cannot have a better. Pretty Alice,
Will you again lose Walter for a time?

ALICE. I would I were a man, sir, then, most willingly I'd lose myself to
do our captain service.

ROLFE. An Amazon!

WALTER.    Oh, 'tis a valiant dove.

LARRY. But come; Heaven and St. Patrick prosper us.
                                       [_Exeunt WALTER, LARRY, ALICE._

ROLFE. Now, my sad friend, cannot e'en this arouse you?
Still bending with the weight of shoulder'd Cupid?
Fie! throw away that bauble, love, my friend:
That glist'ning toy of listless laziness,
Fit only for green girls and growing boys
T' amuse themselves withal. Can an inconstant,
A fickle changeling, move a man like Percy?

PERCY. Cold youth, how can you speak of that you feel not?
You never lov'd.

ROLFE.       Hum! yes, in mine own way;
Marry, 'twas not with sighs and folded arms;
For mirth I sought in it, not misery.
Sir, I have ambled through all love's gradations
Most jollily, and seriously the whilst.
I have sworn oaths of love on my knee, yet laugh'd not;
Complaints and chidings heard, but heeded not;
Kiss'd the cheek clear from tear-drops, and yet wept not;
Listen'd to vows of truth, which I believed not;
And after have been jilted--

PERCY.        Well!

ROLFE.                And car'd not.

PERCY. Call you this loving?

ROLFE.              Aye, and wisely loving.
Not, sir, to have the current of one's blood
Froz'n with a frown, and molten with a smile;
Make ebb and flood under a lady Luna,
Liker the moon in changing than in chasteness.
'Tis not to be a courier, posting up
To the seventh heav'n, or down to the gloomy centre,
On the fool's errand of a wanton--pshaw!
Women! they're made of whimsies and caprice,
So variant and so wild, that, ty'd to a God,
They'd dally with the devil for a change.--
Rather than wed a European dame,
I'd take a squaw o' the woods, and get papooses.

PERCY. If Cupid burn thee not for heresy,
Love is no longer catholic religion.

ROLFE. An' if he do, I'll die a sturdy martyr.
And to the last preach to thee, pagan Percy,
Till I have made a convert. Answer me,
Is not this idol of thy heathen worship
That sent thee hither a despairing pilgrim;
Thy goddess, Geraldine, is she not false?

PERCY. Most false!

ROLFE.          For shame, then; cease adoring her;
Untwine the twisted cable of your arms,
Heave from your freighted bosom all its charge,
In one full sigh, and puff it strongly from you;
Then, raising your earth-reading eyes to Heaven,
Laud your kind stars you were not married to her,
And so forget her.

PERCY.       Ah! my worthy Rolfe,
'Tis not the hand of infant Resolution
Can pluck this rooted passion from my heart:
Yet what I can I will; by heaven! I will.

ROLFE. Why, cheerly said; the baby Resolution
Will grow apace; time will work wonders in him.

PERCY. Did she not, after interchange of vows--
But let the false one go, I will forget her.
Your hand, my friend; now will I act the man.

ROLFE. Faith, I have seen thee do 't, and burn'd with shame,
That he who so could fight should ever sigh.

PERCY. Think'st thou our captain lives?

ROLFE.                       Tush! he must live;
He was not born to perish so. Believe 't,
He'll hold these dingy devils at the bay,
Till we come up and succour him.

PERCY.                And yet
A single arm against a host--alas!
I fear me he has fallen.

ROLFE.          Then never fell
A nobler soul, more valiant, or more worthy,
Or fit to govern men. If he be gone,
Heaven save our tottering colony from falling!
But see, th' adventurers from their daily toil.

_Enter adventurers, WALTER, LARRY, ROBIN, ALICE, &c._

WALTER. Now, gentlemen labourers, a lusty roundelay after the toils of the
day; and then to a sound sleep, in houses of our own building.

_Roundelay Chorus._

    Now crimson sinks the setting sun,
    And our tasks are fairly done.
    Jolly comrades, home to bed,
    Taste the sweets by labour shed;
    Let his poppy seal your eyes,
    Till another day arise,
    For our tasks are fairly done,
    As crimson sinks the setting sun.




ACT II.


SCENE I. _Inside the palace at Werocomoco. POWHATAN in state, GRIMOSCO,
  &c., his wives, and warriors, ranged on each side. Music._

POWHATAN. My people, strange beings have appeared among us; they come from
the bosom of the waters, amid fire and thunder; one of them has our
war-god delivered into our hands: behold the white being!

_Music. SMITH is brought in; his appearance excites universal wonder;
  POCAHONTAS expresses peculiar admiration._

POCAHONTAS. O Nima! is it not a God!

POWHATAN. Miami, though thy years are few, thou art experienced as age;
give us thy voice of counsel.

MIAMI. Brothers, this stranger is of a fearful race of beings; their
barren hunting grounds lie beneath the world, and they have risen, in
monstrous canoes, through the great water, to spoil and ravish from us our
fruitful inheritance. Brothers, this stranger must die; six of our
brethren have fall'n by his hand. Before we lay their bones in the narrow
house, we must avenge them: their unappeased spirits will not go to rest
beyond the mountains; they cry out for the stranger's blood.

NANTAQUAS. Warriors, listen to my words; listen, my father, while your son
tells the deeds of the brave white man. I saw him when 300 of our fiercest
chiefs formed the warring around him. But he defied their arms; he held
lightning in his hand. Wherever his arm fell, there sunk a warrior: as the
tall tree falls, blasted and riven, to the earth, when the angry Spirit
darts his fires through the forest. I thought him a God; my feet grew to
the ground; I could not move!

POCAHONTAS. Nima, dost thou hear the words of my brother.

NANTAQUAS. The battle ceased, for courage left the bosom of our warriors;
their arrows rested in their quivers; their bowstrings no longer sounded;
the tired chieftains leaned on their war-clubs, and gazed at the terrible
stranger, whom they dared not approach. Give an ear to me, king: 't was
then I held out the hand of peace to him, and he became my brother; he
forgot his arms, for he trusted to his brother: he was discoursing wonders
to his friend, when our chiefs rushed upon him, and bore him away. But oh!
my father, he must not die; for he is not a war captive; I promised that
the chain of friendship should be bright between us. Chieftains, your
prince must not falsify his word; father, your son must not be a liar!

POCAHONTAS. Listen, warriors; listen, father; the white man is my
brother's brother!

GRIMOSCO. King! when last night our village shook with the loud noise, it
was the Great Spirit who talk'd to his priest; my mouth shall speak his
commands: King, we must destroy the strangers, for they are not our God's
children; we must take their scalps, and wash our hands in the white man's
blood, for he is an enemy to the Great Spirit.

NANTAQUAS. O priest, thou hast dreamed a false dream; Miami, thou tellest
the tale that is not. Hearken, my father, to my true words! the white man
is beloved by the Great Spirit; his king is like you, my father, good and
great; and he comes from a land beyond the wide water, to make us wise and
happy!

_POWHATAN deliberates. Music._

POWHATAN. Stranger, thou must prepare for death. Six of our brethren fell
by thy hand. Thou must die.

POCAHONTAS. Father, O father!

SMITH. Had not your people first beset me, king,
I would have prov'd a friend and brother to them;
Arts I'd have taught, that should have made them gods,
And gifts would I have given to your people,
Richer than red men ever yet beheld.
Think not I fear to die. Lead to the block.
The soul of the white warrior shall shrink not.
Prepare the stake! amidst your fiercest tortures,
You'll find its fiery pains as nobly scorned,
As when the red man sings aloud his death-song.

POCAHONTAS. Oh! shall that brave man die!

_Music. The KING motions with his hand, and SMITH is led to the block._

MIAMI. [_To executioners._] Warriors, when the third signal strikes, sink
your tomahawks in his head.

POCAHONTAS. Oh, do not, warriors, do not! Father, incline your heart to
mercy; he will win your battles, he will vanquish your enemies! [_First
signal._] Brother, speak! save your brother! Warriors, are you brave?
preserve the brave man! [_Second signal._] Miami, priest, sing the song
of peace; ah! strike not, hold! mercy!

_Music. The third signal is struck, the hatchets are lifted up: when
  the PRINCESS, shrieking, runs distractedly to the block, and presses
  SMITH'S head to her bosom._

White man, thou shalt not die; or I will die with thee!

_Music. She leads SMITH to the throne, and kneels._

My father, dost thou love thy daughter? listen to her voice; look upon her
tears: they ask for mercy to the captive. Is thy child dear to thee, my
father? Thy child will die with the white man.

_Plaintive music. She bows her head to his feet. POWHATAN, after some
  deliberation, looking on his daughter with tenderness, presents her
  with a string of white wampum. POCAHONTAS, with the wildest
  expression of joy, rushes forward with SMITH, presenting the beads of
  peace._

Captive! thou art free!--

_Music. General joy is diffused--MIAMI and GRIMOSCO only appear
  discontented. The prince NANTAQUAS congratulates SMITH. The PRINCESS
  shows the most extravagant emotions of rapture._

SMITH. O woman! angel sex! where'er thou art,
Still art thou heavenly. The rudest clime
Robs not thy glowing bosom of its nature.
Thrice blessed lady, take a captive's thanks!

                                             [_He bows upon her hand._

POCAHONTAS. My brother!--

                              [_Music. SMITH expresses his gratitude._

NANTAQUAS. Father, hear the design that fills my breast. I will go among
the white men; I will learn their arts; and my people shall be made wise
and happy.

POCAHONTAS. I too will accompany my brother.

MIAMI. Princess!--

POCAHONTAS. Away, cruel Miami; you would have murdered my brother!--

POWHATAN. Go, my son; take thy warriors, and go with the white men.
Daughter, I cannot lose thee from mine eyes; accompany thy brother but a
little on his way. Stranger, depart in peace; I entrust my son to thy
friendship.

SMITH. Gracious sir,
He shall return with honours and with wonders;
My beauteous sister! noble brother, come!

_Music. Exeunt, on one side, SMITH, PRINCESS, NANTAQUAS, NIMA, and
  train. On the other, KING, PRIEST, MIAMI, &c. The two latter express
  angry discontent._


SCENE II. _A forest._

_Enter PERCY, ROLFE._

ROLFE. So far indeed 'tis fruitless, yet we'll on.

PERCY. Aye, to the death.

ROLFE.             Brave Percy, come, confess
You have forgot your love.

PERCY.           Why, faith, not quite;
Despite of me, it sometimes through my mind
Flits like a dark cloud o'er a summer sky;
But passes off like that, and leaves me cloudless.
I can't forget that she was sweet as spring;
Fair as the day.

ROLFE.             Aye, aye, like April weather;
Sweet, fair, and faithless.

PERCY.             True alas! like April!

_Song_--PERCY.

    Fair Geraldine each charm of spring possest,
      Her cheek glow'd with the rose and lily's strife;
    Her breath was perfume, and each winter'd breast
      Felt that her sunny eyes beam'd light and life.

    Alas! that in a form of blooming May,
      The mind should April's changeful liv'ry wear!
    Yet ah! like April, smiling to betray,
      Is Geraldine, as false as she is fair!

ROLFE. Beshrew the little gipsy! let us on.
                                               [_Exeunt PERCY, ROLFE._

_Enter LARRY, WALTER, ROBIN, &c._

LARRY. Go no further? Och! you hen-hearted cock robin!

ROBIN. But, master Larry--

WALTER. Prithee, thou evergreen aspen leaf, thou non-intermittent ague!
why didst along with us?

ROBIN. Why, you know, my master Rolfe desired it; and then you were always
railing out on me for chicken-heartedness. I came to shew ye I had valour.

WALTER. But forgetting to bring it with thee, thou wouldst now back for
it; well, in the name of Mars, go; return for thy valour, Robin.

ROBIN. What! alone?

LARRY. Arrah! then stay here till it comes to you, and then follow us.

ROBIN. Stay here! O Lord, methinks I feel an arrow sticking in my gizzard
already! Hark ye, my sweet master, let us sing.

LARRY. Sing?

ROBIN. Sing; I'm always valiant when I sing. Beseech you, let us chaunt
the glee that I dish'd up for us three.

LARRY. It has a spice of your cowardly cookery in it.

WALTER. But since 'tis a provocative to Robin's valour--

LARRY. Go to: give a lusty hem, and fall on.

_Glee._

    We three, adventurers be,
    Just come from our own country;
    We have cross'd thrice a thousand ma,
    Without a penny of money.

    We three, good fellows be,
    Who wou'd run like the devil from Indians three;
    We never admir'd their bowmandry;
    Oh, give us whole skins for our money.

    We three, merry men be,
    Who gaily will chaunt our ancient glee,
    Though a lass or a glass, in this wild country,
    Can't be had, or for love, or for money.

LARRY. Well, how do you feel?

ROBIN. As courageous as, as a--

LARRY. As a wren, little Robin. Are you sure, now, you won't be after
fancying every deer that skips by you a divil, and every bush a bear?

ROBIN. I defy the devil; but hav'n't you heard, my masters, how the
savages go a hunting, drest out in deer-skin? How could you put one in
mind, master Larry? O Lord! that I should come a captain-hunting! the only
game we put up is deer that carry scalping knives! or if we beat the bush
to start a bold commander, up bolts a bloody bear!

                        [_WALTER and LARRY exchange significant nods._

LARRY. To be sure we're in a parlous case. The forest laws are dev'lish
severe here: an they catch us trespassing upon their hunting ground, we
shall pay a neat poll-tax: nothing less than our heads will serve.

ROBIN. Our heads?

WALTER. Yes, faith! they'll soon collect their capitation.
They wear men's heads, sir, hanging at the breast,
Instead of jewels; and at either ear,
Most commonly, a child's, by way of ear-drop.

ROBIN. Oh! curse their finery! jewels, heads, O Lord!

LARRY. Pshaw man! don't fear. Perhaps they'll only burn us.
What a delicate roasted Robin you wou'd make!
Troth! they'd so lick their lips!

ROBIN.                             A roasted robin!--

WALTER. Tut! if they only burn us, 'twill be brave.
Robin shall make our death-songs.

ROBIN.                             Death-songs, oh!
                                 [_ROBIN stands motionless with fear._

LARRY. By the good looking right eye of Saint Patrick,
There's Rolfe and Percy, with a tribe of Indians.      [_Looking out._

ROBIN. Indians! they're pris'ners, and we--we're dead men!

[_While WALTER and LARRY exeunt, ROBIN gets up into a tree._]

O Walter, Larry! ha! what gone, all gone!
Poor Robin, what is to become of thee?

_Enter SMITH, POCAHONTAS, NANTAQUAS, PERCY, ROLFE, NIMA and INDIANS,
  LARRY and WALTER._

SMITH. At hazard of her own dear life she saved me.
E'en the warm friendship of the prince had fail'd,
And death, inevitable death, hung over me.
Oh, had you seen her fly, like Pity's herald,
To stay the uplifted hatchet in its flight;
Or heard her, as with cherub voice she pled,
Like Heav'n's own angel-advocate, for mercy.

POCAHONTAS. My brother, speak not so.                    [_Bashfully._

ROLFE.                       What gentleness!
What sweet simplicity! what angel softness!

_ROLFE goes to her. She, timidly, but with evident pleasure, receives
  his attentions. During this scene the PRINCESS discovers the first
  advances of love in a heart of perfect simplicity. SMITH, &c.,
  converse apart._

ROBIN. [_In the tree._] Egad! there's never a head hanging to their ears;
and their ears hang to their heads, for all the world as if they were
christians; I'll venture down among them.

                                                      [_Getting down._

NIMA. Ah!              [_Bends her bow, and is about to shoot at him._

LARRY. Arrah! my little dark Diana, choose noble game, that's only little
Robin.

ROBIN. Aye, bless you, I'm only little Robin.           [_Jumps down._

_NIMA examines him curiously, but fearfully._

ROBIN. Gad, she's taken with my figure; ah! there it is now; a personable
fellow shall have his wench any where. Yes, she's admiring my figure.
Well, my dusky dear, how could you like such a man as I am?

NIMA. Are you a man?

ROBIN. I'll convince you of it some day. Hark ye, my dear.
                                               [_Attempts to whisper._

NIMA. Ah! don't bite.

ROBIN. Bite! what do you take me for?

NIMA. A racoon.

ROBIN. A racoon! Why so?

NIMA. You run up the tree.                  [_Motions as if climbing._

LARRY. Well said, my little pagan Pythagoras!--
Ha! ha!

ROBIN. Hum!                                   [_Retires disconcerted._

_ROLFE and PERCY come forward._

ROLFE. Tell me, in sooth, didst ever mark such sweetness!
Such winning--such bewitching gentleness!

PERCY. What, caught, my flighty friend, love-lim'd at last?
O Cupid, Cupid! thou'rt a skilful birder.
Although thou spread thy net, i' the wilderness,
Or shoot thy bird-bolt from an Indian bow,
Or place thy light in savage ladies' eyes,
Or pipe thy call in savage ladies' voices,
Alas! each tow'ring tenant of the air
Must fall heart pierc'd--or stoop, at thy command,
To sigh his sad notes in thy cage, O Cupid!

ROLFE. A truce; a truce! O friend, her guiltless breast
Seems Love's pavilion, where, in gentle sleep,
The unrous'd boy has rested. O my Percy!
Could I but wake the slumb'rer--

PERCY.                               Nay, i' faith,
Take courage; thou hast given the alarm:
Methinks the drowsy god gets up apace.

ROLFE. Say'st thou?

SMITH.             Come, gentlemen, we'll toward the town.

NANTAQUAS. My sister, you will now return to our father.

PRINCESS. Return, my brother?

NANTAQUAS. Our father lives but while you are near him. Go, my sister,
make him happy with the knowledge of his son's happiness. Farewell, my
sister!

                                     [_The PRINCESS appears dejected._

SMITH. Once more, my guardian angel, let me thank thee.
                                                  [_Kissing her hand._
Ere long we will return to thee, with presents
Well worth a princess' and a king's acceptance.
Meantime, dear lady, tell the good Powhatan
We'll show the prince such grace and entertainment,
As shall befit our brother and his son.
Adieu, sweet sister.

_Music. They take leave of the PRINCESS; she remains silently dejected;
  her eyes anxiously follow ROLFE, who lingers behind, and is the last
  to take leave._

PRINCESS. Stranger, wilt thou too come to Werocomoco?

ROLFE. Dost thou wish it, lady?

PRINCESS. [_Eagerly._] O yes!

ROLFE. And why, lovely lady?

PRINCESS. My eyes are pleased to see thee, and my ears to hear thee,
stranger.

ROLFE. And did not the others who were here also please thy sight and
hearing?

PRINCESS. Oh! they were all goodly; but--their eyes looked not like thine;
their voices sounded not like thine; and their speeches were not like thy
speeches, stranger.

ROLFE. Enchanting simplicity! But why call me stranger? Captain Smith thou
callest brother. Call me so too.

PRINCESS. Ah, no!

ROLFE. Then thou thinkest not of me as thou dost of him? [_She shakes her
head and sighs._] Is Captain Smith dear to thee?

PRINCESS. Oh yes! very dear; [_ROLFE is uneasy._] and Nantaquas too: they
are my brothers;--but--that name is not thine--thou art--

ROLFE. What, lovely lady?

PRINCESS. I know not; I feel the name thou art, but I cannot speak it.

ROLFE. I am thy lover, dear princess.

PRINCESS. Yes, thou art my lover. But why call me princess?

ROLFE. Dear lady, thou art a king's daughter.

PRINCESS. And if I were not, what wouldst thou call me?

ROLFE. Oh! if thou wert a beggar's, I would call thee love!

PRINCESS. I know not what a beggar is; but oh! I would I were a beggar's
daughter, so thou wouldst call me love. Ah! do not longer call me king's
daughter. If thou feelest the name as I do, call me as I call thee: thou
shalt be _my_ lover; I will be _thy_ lover.

ROLFE. Enchanting, lovely creature!            [_Kisses her ardently._

PRINCESS. Lover, thou hast made my cheek to burn, and my heart to beat!
Mark it.

ROLFE. Dear innocence!               [_Putting his hand to her heart._

PRINCESS. Lover, why is it so? To-day before my heart beat, and mine eyes
were full of tears; but then my white brother was in danger. Thou art not
in danger, and yet behold--[_Wipes a tear from her eye._] Besides, then,
my heart hurt me, but now! Oh, now!--Lover, why is it so?

                           [_Leaning on him with innocent confidence._

ROLFE. Angel of purity! thou didst to-day feel pity; and now--Oh,
rapturous task to teach thee the difference!--now, thou dost feel love.

PRINCESS. Love!

ROLFE. Love: the noblest, the sweetest passion that could swell thy angel
bosom.

PRINCESS. Oh! I feel that 'tis very sweet. Lover, with thy lips thou didst
make me feel it. My lips shall teach thee sweet love. [_Kisses him, and
artlessly looks up in his face; placing her hand upon his heart._] Does
thy heart beat?

ROLFE. Beat! O heaven!--

                      [_ROBIN, who had been with NIMA, comes forward._

ROBIN. Gad! we must end our amours, or we shall be left. Sir, my master,
hadn't we better--

ROLFE. Booby! idiot!

_Enter WALTER._

WALTER. Sir, lieutenant, the captain awaits your coming up.

ROLFE. I'll follow on the instant.

PRINCESS. Thou wilt not go?

ROLFE. But for a time, love.

PRINCESS. I do not wish thee to leave me.

ROLFE. I must, love; but I will return.

PRINCESS. Soon--very soon?

ROLFE. Very--very soon.

PRINCESS. I am not pleased now--and yet my heart beats. Oh, lover!

ROLFE. My angel! there shall not a sun rise and set, ere I am with thee.
Adieu! thy own heavenly innocence be thy safeguard. Farewell, sweet love!

_Music. He embraces her and exit, followed by ROBIN and WALTER.
  PRINCESS looks after him. A pause._

PRINCESS. O Nima!

NIMA. Princess, white men are pow-wows. The white man put his lips here,
and I felt something--here--

                                     [_Putting her hand to her heart._

PRINCESS. O lover!

_She runs to the place whence ROLFE went out, and gazes after him._

_Music. Enter from opposite side, MIAMI._

MIAMI. [_Sternly._] Princess!

PRINCESS. [_Turning._] Ah!

MIAMI. Miami has followed thy steps. Thou art the friend of the white men.

PRINCESS. Yes, for they are good and godlike.

MIAMI. Mine eyes beheld the pale youth part from you; your arms were
entwined, your lips were together!

                                          [_Struggling with jealousy._

PRINCESS. He is my lover; I am his lover.

                                         [_Still looking after ROLFE._

MIAMI. [_Stamps with anger._] Hear me! In what do the red yield to the
white men? and who among the red men is like Miami? While I was yet a
child, did the dart which my breath blew through my sarbacan ever fail to
pierce the eye of the bird? What youth dared, like Miami, to leap from the
precipice, and drag the struggling bear from the foaming torrent? Is there
a hunter--is there a warrior--skilful and brave as Miami? Come to my
cabin, and see the scalps and the skins that adorn it. They are the
trophies of the Susquehannock!

PRINCESS. Man, mine eyes will never behold thy trophies. They are not
pleased to look on thee.

                                    [_Averting her eyes with disgust._

MIAMI. Ha! [_Pause--he resumes in a softened tone._] Princess, I have
crossed many woods and waters, that I might bear the daughter of Powhatan
to my nation. Shall my people cry out, with scorn, "behold! our prince
returns without his bride?" In what is the pale youth above the red Miami?

PRINCESS. Thine eyes are as the panther's; thy voice like the voice of the
wolf. Thou shouldst make my heart beat with joy; and I tremble before
thee. Oh no! Powhatan shall give me to my lover. I will be my lover's
bride!

_Music. MIAMI stamps furiously; his actions betray the most savage rage
  of jealousy; he rushes to seize the PRINCESS, but, recollecting that
  her attendants are by, he goes out in an agony, by his gestures
  menacing revenge. The PRINCESS exit on the opposite side, followed by
  train._


SCENE III. _Werocomoco._

_Music. Enter from the palace POWHATAN and GRIMOSCO; met by the
  PRINCESS, who runs to her father._

POWHATAN. My daughter!

PRINCESS. O father! the furious Miami!

POWHATAN. What of the prince?

PRINCESS. Father, my father! do not let the fierce prince bear me to his
cruel nation!

POWHATAN. How!

PRINCESS. By the spirit of my mother, I implore my father. Oh! if thou
deliver me to the Susquehannock, think not thine eyes shall ever again
behold me; the first kind stream that crosses our path shall be the end of
my journey; my soul shall seek the soul of the mother that loved me, far
beyond the mountains.

POWHATAN. Daughter, mention not thy mother!

PRINCESS. Her shade will pity her unhappy child, and I shall be at rest
in her bosom.                                              [_Weeping._

POWHATAN. Rest in my bosom, my child! [_She starts with joyful emotion._]
Thou shalt not go from thy father.

PRINCESS. Father; dear father!                    [_Seizing his hand._

_Music. An INDIAN enters, bearing a red hatchet._

INDIAN. King!

POWHATAN. Thou art of the train of the Susquehannock: speak.

INDIAN. My prince demands his bride.

                         [_The PRINCESS clings fearfully to the KING._

POWHATAN. Tell thy prince, my daughter will not leave her father.

INDIAN. Will Powhatan forget his promise to Miami?

POWHATAN. Powhatan will not forget his promise to her mother; and he
vowed, while the angel of death hovered over her, that the eye of tender
care should never be averted from her darling daughter.

INDIAN. Shall not then my prince receive his bride?

POWHATAN. The daughter of Powhatan--never.

INDIAN. Take then his defiance.

                                [_Music. He presents the red hatchet._

POWHATAN. The red hatchet! 'Tis well. Grimosco, summon our warriors.

GRIMOSCO. O king! might I--

POWHATAN. Speak not. Tell our chiefs to assemble; and show them the
war-signal [_Exit GRIMOSCO._]. Go, tell your master, the great Powhatan
will soon meet him, terrible as the minister of vengeance. [_Exit
INDIAN._] The chiefs approach. My child, retire from this war scene.

PRINCESS. O dear parent! thine age should have been passed in the shade of
peace; and do I bring my father to the bloody war-path?

POWHATAN. Not so; the young prince has often dared my power, and merited
my vengeance; he shall now feel both.

PRINCESS. Alas! his nation is numerous and warlike.

POWHATAN. Fear not, my child; we will call the valiant Nantaquas from his
brothers; the brave English too will join us.

PRINCESS. Ah! then is thy safety and success certain.

                            [_Exit into palace, followed by NIMA, &c._

_Music. Enter GRIMOSCO and WARRIORS._

POWHATAN. Brave chieftains! need I remind you of the victories you have
gained; the scalps you have borne from your enemies? Chieftains, another
victory must be won; more trophies from your foes must deck your cabins;
the insolent Miami has braved your king, and defied him with the crimson
tomahawk. Warriors! we will not bury it till his nation is extinct. Ere we
tread the war-path, raise to our god Aresqui the song of battle, then
march to triumph and to glory.

SONG TO ARESQUI.

        Aresqui! Aresqui!
    Lo! thy sons for war prepare!
      Snakes adorn each painted head,
      While the cheek of flaming red
    Gives the eye its ghastly glare.
        Aresqui! Aresqui!
    Through the war-path lead aright,
    Lo! we're ready for the fight.

_War Song._

FIRST INDIAN. See the cautious warrior creeping!

SECOND INDIAN. See the tree-hid warrior peeping!

FIRST INDIAN.                     Mark! Mark!
               Their track is here; now breathless go!

SECOND INDIAN.                    Hark! Hark!
               The branches rustle--'tis the foe!

CHORUS.        Now we bid the arrow fly--
               Now we raise the hatchet high.
               Where is urg'd the deadly dart,
               There is pierced a chieftain's heart;
               Where the war-club swift descends,
               A hero's race of glory ends!

FIRST INDIAN.  In vain the warrior flies--
                  From his brow the scalp we tear.

SECOND INDIAN. Or home the captiv'd prize,
                  A stake-devoted victim, bear.

FIRST AND SECOND INDIAN. The victors advance--
             And while amidst the curling blaze,
             Our foe his death-song tries to raise--
                 Dance the warriors' dance.

                                                         [_War-dance._

GRAND CHORUS.     Aresqui! Aresqui!
             Through the war-path lead aright--
             Lo! we're ready for the fight.

                                                   [_March to battle._




ACT III.


SCENE I. _Jamestown--built._

_WALTER and ALICE._

WALTER. One mouthful more. [_Kiss._] Oh! after a long lent of absence,
what a charming relish is a kiss, served from the lips of a pretty wife,
to a hungry husband.

ALICE. And, believe me, I banquet at the high festival of return with
equal pleasure. But what has made your absence so tedious, prithee?

WALTER. Marry, girl, thus it was: when we had given the enemies of our
ally, Powhatan, defeature, and sent the rough Miami in chains to
Werocomoco, our captain dispatches his lieutenant, Rolfe, to supply his
place, here, in the town; and leading us to the water's edge, and leaping
into the pinnace, away went we on a voyage of discovery. Some thousand
miles we sailed, and many strange nations discovered; and for our
exploits, if posterity reward us not, there is no faith in history.

ALICE. And what were your exploits?

WALTER.                  Rare ones, egad!
We took the devil, Okee, prisoner.

ALICE. And have you brought him hither?

WALTER.                    No: his vot'ries
Redeem'd him with some score or two of deer-skins.
Then we've made thirty kings our tributaries:
Such sturdy rogues, that each could easily
Fillip a buffalo to death with 's finger.

ALICE. But have you got their treasures?

WALTER.                            All, my girl.
Imperial robes of raccoon, crowns of feather;
Besides the riches of their sev'ral kingdoms--
A full boat load of corn.

ALICE.                 Oh, wonderful!

WALTER. Aye, is it not? But, best of all, I've kiss'd
The little finger of a mighty queen.
Sweet soul! among the court'sies of her court,
She gave us a Virginian mascarado.

ALICE. Dost recollect the fashion of it?

WALTER.                           Oh!
Were I to live till Time were in his dotage,
'Twould never from mine eyes. Imagine first,
The scene, a gloomy wood; the time, midnight;
Her squawship's maids of honour were the masquers;
Their masks were wolves' heads curiously set on,
And, bating a small difference of hue,
Their dress e'en such as madam Eve had on
Or ere she eat the apple.

ALICE.                  Pshaw!

WALTER.                       These dresses,
All o'er perfum'd with the self-same pomado
Which our fine dames at home buy of old Bruin,
Glisten'd most gorgeously unto the moon.
Thus, each a firebrand brandishing aloft,
Rush'd they all forth, with shouts and frantic yells,
In dance grotesque and diabolical,
Madder than mad Bacchantes.

ALICE.                 O the powers!

WALTER. When they had finished the divertisement
A beauteous Wolf-head came to me--

ALICE.          To you?

WALTER. And lit me with her pine-knot torch to bedward,
Where, as the custom of the court it was,
The beauteous Wolf-head blew the flambeau out,
And then--

ALICE. Well!

WALTER.      Then, the light being out, you know,
To all that follow'd I was in the dark.
Now you look grave. In faith I went to sleep.
Could a grim wolf rival my gentle lamb?
No, truly, girl: though in this wilderness
The trees hang full of divers colour'd fruit,
From orange-tawny to sloe-black, egad,
They'll hang until they rot or ere I pluck them,
While I've my melting, rosy nonpareil.                        [_Kiss._

ALICE. Oh! you're a Judas!

WALTER.               Then am I a Jew!

_Enter SMITH, PERCY, NANTAQUAS, LARRY, &c._

SMITH. Yet, prince, accept at least my ardent thanks:
A thousand times told over, they would fail
To pay what you and your dear sister claim.
Through my long absence from my people here,
You have sustain'd their feebleness.

NANTAQUAS.               O brother,
To you, the conqueror of our father's foes;
To you, the sun which from our darken'd minds
Has chas'd the clouds of error, what can we
Not to remain your debtors?

SMITH.               Gen'rous soul!
Your friendship is my pride. But who knows aught
Of our young Rolfe?

PERCY.     This morning, sir, I hear,
An hour ere our arrival, the lieutenant
Accompanied the princess to her father's.

SMITH. Methinks our laughing friend has found at last
The power of sparkling eyes. What say you, prince,
To a brave, worthy soldier for your brother?

NANTAQUAS. Were I to choose, I'd put all other by
To make his path-way clear unto my sister.
But come, sir, shall we to my father's banquet?
One of my train I've sent to give him tidings
Of your long-wish'd for coming.

SMITH.                        Gentle prince,
You greet my fresh return with welcome summons,
And I obey it cheerfully. Good Walter,
And, worthy sir [_To LARRY._], be it your care
To play the queen bee here, and keep the swarm
Still gathering busily. Look to it well:
Our new-raised hive must hold no drones within it.
Now, forward, sirs, to Werocomoco.
                                   [_Exeunt SMITH, PRINCE, PERCY, &c._

_Manent WALTER and LARRY._

WALTER. So, my compeer in honour, we must hold
The staff of sway between us.

LARRY.                       Arrah, man,
If we hould it between us, any rogue
Shall run clean off before it knocks him down,
While at each end we tug for mastery.

WALTER. Tush, man! we'll strike in unison.

LARRY.               Go to--

WALTER. And first, let's to the forest--the young sparks
In silken doublets there are felling trees,
Poor, gentle masters, with their soft palms blister'd;
And, while they chop and chop, they swear and swear,
Drowning with oaths the echo of their axe.

LARRY. Are they so hot in choler?

WALTER.               Aye.

LARRY.               We'll cool 'em;
And pour cold patience down their silken sleeves.

WALTER. Cold patience!

LARRY.          In the shape of water, honey.

WALTER. A notable discovery; come away!

LARRY. Ha! isn't that a sail?

WALTER.           A sail! a fleet!        [_Looking toward the river._

_Enter TALMAN._

TALMAN. We have discovered nine tall ships.

LARRY.                         Discovered!
Away, you rogue, we have discovered them,
With nature's telescopes. Run--scud--begone--
Down to the river! Och, St. Pat, I thank you!

_Go toward river. Huzza within. Music expresses joyful bustle. Scene
  closes._


SCENE II. _A grove._

_Enter ROBIN and NIMA._

ROBIN. Aye, bless you, I knew I should creep into your heart at last, my
little dusky divinity.

NIMA. Divinity! what's that?

ROBIN. Divinity--it's a--Oh, it's a pretty title that we lords of the
creation bestow upon our playthings. But hist! here they come. Now is it
a knotty point to be argued, whether this parting doth most affect the
mistress and master, or the maid and man. Let Cupid be umpire, and steal
the scales of Justice to weigh our heavy sighs.             [_Retire._

_Enter ROLFE and POCAHONTAS._

PRINCESS. Nay, let me on--

ROLFE.                    No further, gentle love;
The rugged way has wearied you already.

PRINCESS. Feels the wood pigeon weariness, who flies,
Mated with her beloved? Ah! lover, no.

ROLFE. Sweet! in this grove we will exchange adieus;
My steps should point straight onward; were thou with me,
Thy voice would bid me quit the forward path
At every pace, or fix my side-long look,
Spell-bound, upon thy beauties.

PRINCESS.                     Ah! you love not
The wild-wood prattle of the Indian maid,
As once you did.

ROLFE.          By heaven! my thirsty ear,
Could ever drink its liquid melody.
Oh! I could talk with thee, till hasty night,
Ere yet the sentinel day had done his watch;
Veil'd like a spy, should steal on printless feet,
To listen to our parley! Dearest love!
My captain has arrived, and I do know,
When honour and when duty call upon me,
Thou wouldst not have me chid for tardiness.
But, ere the matin of to-morrow's lark,
Do echo from the roof of nature's temple,
Sweetest, expect me.

PRINCESS.         Wilt thou surely come?

ROLFE. To win thee from thy father will I come;
And my commander's voice shall join with mine,
To woo Powhatan to resign his treasure.

PRINCESS. Go then, but ah! forget not--

ROLFE.                  I'll forget
All else, to think on thee!

PRINCESS.               Thou art my life!
I lived not till I saw thee, love; and now,
I live not in thine absence. Long, Oh! long
I was the savage child of savage Nature;
And when her flowers sprang up, while each green bough
Sang with the passing west wind's rustling breath;
When her warm visitor, flush'd Summer, came,
Or Autumn strew'd her yellow leaves around,
Or the shrill north wind pip'd his mournful music,
I saw the changing brow of my wild mother
With neither love nor dread. But now, Oh! now,
I could entreat her for eternal smiles,
So thou might'st range through groves of loveliest flowers,
Where never Winter, with his icy lip,
Should dare to press thy cheek.

ROLFE.                    My sweet enthusiast!

PRINCESS. O! 'tis from thee that I have drawn my being:
Thou'st ta'en me from the path of savage error,
Blood-stain'd and rude, where rove my countrymen,
And taught me heavenly truths, and fill'd my heart
With sentiments sublime, and sweet, and social.
Oft has my winged spirit, following thine,
Cours'd the bright day-beam, and the star of night,
And every rolling planet of the sky,
Around their circling orbits. O my love!
Guided by thee, has not my daring soul,
O'ertopt the far-off mountains of the east,
Where, as our fathers' fable, shad'wy hunters
Pursue the deer, or clasp the melting maid,
'Mid ever blooming spring? Thence, soaring high
From the deep vale of legendary fiction,
Hast thou not heaven-ward turn'd my dazzled sight,
Where sing the spirits of the blessed good
Around the bright throne of the Holy One?
This thou hast done; and ah! what couldst thou more,
Belov'd preceptor, but direct that ray,
Which beams from Heaven to animate existence,
And bid my swelling bosom beat with love!

ROLFE. O, my dear scholar!

PRINCESS.        Prithee, chide me, love:
My idle prattle holds thee from thy purpose.

ROLFE. O! speak more music! and I'll listen to it,
Like stilly midnight to sweet Philomel.

PRINCESS. Nay, now begone; for thou must go: ah! fly,
The sooner to return--

ROLFE.                  Thus, then, adieu!                 [_Embrace._
But, ere the face of morn blush rosy red,
To see the dew-besprent, cold virgin ground
Stain'd by licentious step; Oh, long before
The foot of th' earliest furred forrester,
Do mark its imprint on morn's misty sheet,
With sweet good morrow will I wake my love.

PRINCESS. To bliss thou'lt wake me, for I sleep till then
Only with sorrow's poppy on my lids.

_Music. Embrace; and exit ROLFE, followed by ROBIN; PRINCESS looks
  around despondingly._

But now, how gay and beauteous was this grove!
Sure ev'ning's shadows have enshrouded it,
And 'tis the screaming bird of night I hear,
Not the melodious mock-bird. Ah! fond girl!
'Tis o'er thy soul the gloomy curtain hangs;
'Tis in thy heart the rough-toned raven sings.
O lover! haste to my benighted breast;
Come like the glorious sun, and bring me day!

_Song._

    When the midnight of absence the day-scene pervading
      Distils its chill dew o'er the bosom of love,
    Oh, how fast then the gay tints of nature are fading!
      How harsh seems the music of joy in the grove!
    While the tender flow'r droops till return of the light,
    Steep'd in tear drops that fall from the eye of the night.

      But Oh! when the lov'd-one appears,
        Like the sun a bright day to impart,
      To kiss off those envious tears,
          To give a new warmth to the heart;
            Soon the flow'ret seeming dead
            Raises up its blushing head,
            Glows again the breast of love,
            Laughs again the joyful grove;
            While once more the mock-bird's throat
            Trolls the sweetly various note.
    But ah! when dark absence the day-scene pervading
      Distils its chill dew o'er the bosom of love,
    Oh! fast then the gay tints of nature are fading!
      Oh! harsh seems the music of joy in the grove!
    And the tender flow'r droops till return of the light,
    Steep'd in tear drops that fall from the eye of the night.

PRINCESS. Look, Nima, surely I behold our captive,
The prince Miami, and our cruel priest.

NIMA. Lady, 'tis they; and now they move this way.

PRINCESS. How earnest are their gestures; ah! my Nima,
When souls like theirs mingle in secret council,
Stern murder's voice alone is listen'd to.
Miami too at large--O trembling heart,
Most sad are thy forebodings; they are here--
Haste, Nima; let us veil us from their view.

                                                       [_They retire._

_Enter MIAMI and GRIMOSCO._

GRIMOSCO. Be satisfied; I cannot fail--hither the king will soon come.
This deep shade have I chosen for our place of meeting. Hush! he comes.
Retire, and judge if Grimosco have vainly boasted--away!
                                                     [_MIAMI retires._

_Enter POWHATAN._

POWHATAN. Now, priest, I attend the summons of thy voice.

GRIMOSCO. So you consult your safety, for 'tis the voice of warning.

POWHATAN. Of what would you warn me?

GRIMOSCO. Danger.

POWHATAN. From whom?

GRIMOSCO. Your enemies.

POWHATAN. Old man, these have I conquered.

GRIMOSCO. The English still exist.

POWHATAN. The English!

GRIMOSCO. The nobler beast of the forest issues boldly from his den, and
the spear of the powerful pierces his heart. The deadly adder lurks in his
covert till the unwary footstep approach him.

POWHATAN. I see no adder near me.

GRIMOSCO. No, for thine eyes rest only on the flowers under which he
glides.

POWHATAN. Away, thy sight is dimmed by the shadows of age.

GRIMOSCO. King, for forty winters hast thou heard the voice of counsel
from my lips, and never did its sound deceive thee; never did my tongue
raise the war cry, and the foe appeared not. Be warned then to beware the
white man. He has fixed his serpent eye upon you, and, like the charmed
bird, you flutter each moment nearer to the jaw of death.

POWHATAN. How, Grimosco?

GRIMOSCO. Do you want proof of the white man's hatred to the red? Follow
him along the bay; count the kings he has conquered, and the nations that
his sword has made extinct.

POWHATAN. Like a warrior he subdued them, for the chain of friendship
bound them not to each other. The white man is brave as Aresqui; and can
the brave be treacherous?

GRIMOSCO. Like the red feathers of the flamingo is craft, the brightest
plume that graces the warrior's brow. Are not your people brave? Yet does
the friendly tree shield them while the hatchet is thrown. Who doubts the
courage of Powhatan? Yet has the eye of darkness seen Powhatan steal to
the surprise of the foe.

POWHATAN. Ha! priest, thy words are true. I will be satisfied. Even now I
received a swift messenger from my son: to-day he will conduct the
English to my banquet. I will demand of him if he be the friend of
Powhatan.

GRIMOSCO. Yes; but demand it of him as thou drawest thy reeking hatchet
from his cleft head. [_KING starts._] The despoilers of our land must die!

POWHATAN. What red man can give his eye-ball the glare of defiance when
the white chief is nigh? He who stood alone amidst seven hundred foes,
and, while he spurned their king to the ground, dared them to shoot their
arrows; who will say to him, "White man, I am thine enemy?" No one. My
chiefs would be children before him.

GRIMOSCO. The valour of thy chiefs may slumber, but the craft of thy
priest shall watch. When the English sit at that banquet from which they
shall never rise; when their eyes read nothing but friendship in thy
looks, there shall hang a hatchet over each victim head, which, at the
silent signal of Grimosco--

POWHATAN. Forbear, counsellor of death! Powhatan cannot betray those who
have vanquished his enemies; who are his friends, his brothers.

GRIMOSCO. Impious! Can the enemies of your God be your friends? Can the
children of another parent be your brethren? You are deaf to the
counsellor: 'tis your priest now speaks. I have heard the angry voice of
the Spirit you have offended; offended by your mercy to his enemies.
Dreadful was his voice; fearful were his words. Avert his wrath, or thou
art condemned; and the white men are the ministers of his vengeance.

POWHATAN. Priest!

GRIMOSCO. From the face of the waters will he send them, in mighty tribes,
and our shores will scarce give space for their footsteps. Powhatan will
fly before them; his beloved child, his wives, all that is dear to him, he
will leave behind. Powhatan will fly; but whither? which of his tributary
kings will shelter him? Not one. Already they cry, "Powhatan is ruled by
the white; we will no longer be the slaves of a slave!"

POWHATAN. Ha!

GRIMOSCO. Despoiled of his crown, Powhatan will be hunted from the land of
his ancestors. To strange woods will the fugitive be pursued by the Spirit
whom he has angered--

POWHATAN. Oh, dreadful!

GRIMOSCO. And at last, when the angel of death obeys his call of anguish,
whither will go his condemned soul? Not to the fair forests, where his
brave fathers are. Oh! never will Powhatan clasp the dear ones who have
gone before him. His exiled, solitary spirit will forever houl on the
barren heath where the wings of darkness rest. No ray of hope shall visit
him; eternal will be his night of despair.

POWHATAN. Forbear, forbear! O priest, teach me to avert the dreadful doom.

GRIMOSCO. Let the white men be slaughtered.

POWHATAN. The angry Spirit shall be appeased. Come.

                                                              [_Exit._

GRIMOSCO. Thy priest will follow thee.

_Enter MIAMI._

MIAMI. Excellent Grimosco! Thy breath, priest, is a deadly pestilence, and
hosts fall before it. Yet--still is Miami a captive.

GRIMOSCO. Fear not. Before Powhatan reach Werocomoco thou shalt be free.
Come.

MIAMI. Oh, my soul hungers for the banquet; for then shall Miami feast on
the heart of his rival!

                                        [_Exeunt with savage triumph._

_Music. The PRINCESS rushes forward, terror depicted in her face. After
  running alternately to each side, and stopping undetermined and
  bewildered, speaks._

PRINCESS. O whither shall I fly? what course pursue?
At Werocomoco, my frenzied looks
Would sure betray me. What if hence I haste?
I may o'ertake my lover, or encounter
My brother and his friends. Away, my Nima!

                                                         [_Exit NIMA._

O holy Spirit! thou whom my dear lover
Has taught me to adore and think most merciful,
Wing with thy lightning's speed my flying feet!

                                              [_Music. Exit PRINCESS._


SCENE III. _Near Jamestown._

_Enter LARRY, and KATE as a page._

LARRY. Nine ships, five hundred men, and a lord governor! Och! St.
Patrick's blessing be upon them; they'll make this land flow with
buttermilk like green Erin. What say you, master page, isn't this a nice
neat patch to plant potatoes--I mean, to plant a nation in?

KATE. There's but one better.

LARRY. And which might that be?

KATE. E'en little green Erin that you spoke of.

LARRY. And were you ever--och, give me your fist--were you ever in
Ireland?

KATE. It's there I was born--

LARRY. I saw its bloom on your cheek.

KATE. And bred.

LARRY. I saw it in your manners.

KATE. Oh, your servant, sir. [_Bows._] And there, too, I fell in love.

LARRY. And, by the powers, so did I; and if a man don't fall into one of
the beautiful bogs that Cupid has digged there, faith he may stand without
tumbling, though he runs over all the world beside. Och, the creatures, I
can see them now--

KATE. Such sparkling eyes--

LARRY. Rosy cheeks--

KATE. Pouting lips--

LARRY. Tinder hearts! Och, sweet Ireland!

KATE. Aye, it was there that I fixed my affections after all my
wanderings.

_Song._--KATE.

    Young Edward, through many a distant place,
      Had wandering pass'd, a thoughtless ranger;
    And, cheer'd by a smile from beauty's face,
      Had laugh'd at the frowning face of danger.
              Fearless Ned,
              Careless Ned,
    Never with foreign dames was a stranger;
              And huff,
              Bluff,
    He laugh'd at the frowning face of danger.

    But journeying on to his native place,
      Through Ballinamone pass'd the stranger;
    Where, fix'd by the charms of Katy's face,
      He swore he'd no longer be a ranger,
              Pretty Kate,
              Witty Kate,
    Vow'd that no time could ever change her;
              And kiss,
              Bliss--
    O, she hugg'd to her heart the welcome stranger.

LARRY. How's that? Ballinamone, Kate, did you say, Kate?

KATE. Aye, Katy Maclure; as neat a little wanton tit--

LARRY. My wife a wanton tit!--Hark ye, master Whippersnapper, do you
pretend--

KATE. Pretend! no, faith, sir, I scorn to _pretend_, sir; I am above
boasting of ladies' favours, unless I receive 'em. Pretend, quotha!

LARRY. Fire and faggots! Favours!--

KATE. You seem to know the girl, mister--a--

LARRY. Know her! she's my wife.

KATE. Your wife! Ridiculous! I thought, by your pother, that she had been
_your friend's wife_, or your mistress. Hark ye, mister--a--cuckoo--

LARRY. Cuckoo!

KATE. Your ear. Your wife loved me as she did herself.

LARRY. She did?

KATE. Couldn't live without me; all day we were together.

LARRY. You were!

KATE. As I'm a cavalier; and all night--we lay----

LARRY. How?

KATE. How! why, close as two twin potatoes; in the same bed, egad!

LARRY. Tunder and turf! I'll split you from the coxcomb to the----

KATE. Ay, do split the twin potato asunder, do.

                                                 [_Discovers herself._

LARRY. It is--no--what! Och, is it nobody but yourself? O my
darling!--[_Catches her in his arms._] And so--But how did you?--And
where--and what--O boderation! [_Kisses._] And how d' ye do? and how's
your mother? and the pigs and praties, and--kiss me, Kate.    [_Kiss._

KATE. So; now may I speak?

LARRY. Aye, do be telling me--but stop every now and then, that I may
point your story with a grammatical kiss.

KATE. Oh, hang it! you'll be for putting nothing but periods to my
discourse.

LARRY. Faith, and I should be for counting--[_Kisses._]--four.--Arrah!
there, then; I've done with that sentence.

KATE. You remember what caused me to stay behind, when you embarked for
America?

LARRY. Aye, 'twas because of your old sick mother. And how does the good
lady? [_KATE weeps._] Ah! well, Heaven rest her soul.--Cheerly, cheerly.
To be sure, I can't give _you_ a mother; but I tell you what I'll do, I'll
give your children one; and that's the same thing, you know. So, kiss me,
Kate. Cheerly.

KATE. One day, as I sat desolate in my cottage, a carriage broke down near
it, from which a young lady was thrown with great violence. My humble
cabin received her, and I attended her till she was able to resume her
journey.

LARRY. My kind Kate!

KATE. The sweet young lady promised me her protection, and pressed me to
go with her. So, having no mother--nor Larry to take care of----

LARRY. You let the pigs and praties take care of themselves.

KATE. I placed an honest, poor neighbour in my cottage, and followed the
fortunes of my mistress--and--O Larry, such an angel!

LARRY. But where is she?

KATE. Here, in Virginia.

LARRY. Here?

KATE. Aye, but that's a secret.

LARRY. Oh! is it so? that's the reason then you won't tell it me.

_GERALDINE, as a page, and WALTER appear behind._

KATE. That's she.

LARRY. Where?

KATE. There.

LARRY. Bother! I see no one but a silken cloaked spark, and our Wat; devil
a petticoat!

KATE. That spark is my mistress.

LARRY. Be asy. Are you sure you ar'n't his mistress?

KATE. Tut, now you've got the twin potatoes in your head.

LARRY. Twins they must be, if any, for faith I hav'n't had a _single_
potato in my head this many a long day. But come, my Kate, tell me how you
and your mistress happened to jump into--

KATE. Step aside then.

LARRY. Have with you, my dapper page.                  [_They retire._

_GERALDINE and WALTER advance._

GERALDINE. You know this Percy, then?

WALTER.                              Know him! Oh, yes!
He makes this wild wood, here, a past'ral grove.
He is a love-lorn shepherd; an Orlando,
Carving love-rhymes and ciphers on the trees,
And warbling dying ditties of a lady
He calls false Geraldine.

GERALDINE.                              O my dear Percy!
How has one sad mistake marr'd both our joys!                [_Aside._

WALTER. Yet though a shepherd, he can wield a sword
As easy as a crook.

GERALDINE.                    Oh! he is brave.

WALTER. As Julius Caesar, sir, or Hercules;
Or any other hero that you will,
Except our captain.

GERALDINE.               Is your captain, then,
Without his peer?

WALTER.                  Aye, marry is he, sir,
Sans equal in this world. I've follow'd him
Half o'er the globe, and seen him do such deeds!
His shield is blazon'd with three Turkish heads.

GERALDINE. Well, sir.

WALTER.      And I, boy, saw him win the arms;
Oh, 'twas the bravest act!

GERALDINE.              Prithee, recount it.

WALTER.       It was at Regal, close beleaguer'd then
By the duke Sigismund of Transylvania,
Our captain's general. One day, from the gate
There issued a gigantic mussulman,
And threw his gauntlet down upon the ground,
Daring our christian knights to single combat.
It was our captain, sir, pick'd up the glove,
And scarce the trump had sounded to the onset,
When the Turk Turbisha had lost his head.
His brother, fierce Grualdo, enter'd next,
But left the lists sans life or turban too.
Last came black Bonamolgro, and he paid
The same dear forfeit for the same attempt.
And now my master, like a gallant knight,
His sabre studied o'er with ruby gems,
Prick'd on his prancing courser round the field,
In vain inviting fresh assailants; while
The beauteous dames of Regal, who, in throngs
Lean'd o'er the rampart to behold the tourney,
Threw show'rs of scarfs and favours from the wall,
And wav'd their hands, and bid swift Mercuries
Post from their eyes with messages of love;
While manly modesty and graceful duty
Wav'd on his snowy plume, and, as he rode,
Bow'd down his casque unto the saddle bow.

GERALDINE. It was a deed of valour, and you've dress'd it
In well-beseeming terms. And yet, methinks,
I wonder at the ladies' strange delight;
And think the spectacle might better suit
An audience of warriors than of women.
I'm sure I should have shudder'd--that is, sir,
If I were woman.

WALTER.         Cry your mercy, page;
Were you a woman, you would love the brave.
You're yet but boy; you'll know the truth of this,
When father Time writes man upon your chin.

GERALDINE. No doubt I shall, sir, when I get a beard.

WALTER. My master, boy, has made it crystal clear:
Be but a Mars, and you shall have your Venus.

_Song._--WALTER.

    Captain Smith is a man of might,
    In Venus' soft wars or in Mars' bloody fight:
    For of widow, or wife, or of damsel bright,
      A bold blade, you know, is all the dandy.

        One day his sword he drew,
        And a score of Turks he slew;
          When done his toil,
          He snatch'd the spoil,
          And, as a part,
          The gentle heart
      Of the lovely lady Tragabizandy.

    Captain Smith trod the Tartar land;
    While before him, in terror, fled the turban'd band,
    With his good broad-sword, that he whirl'd in his hand,
      To a three-tail'd bashaw he gave a pat-a.

        The bashaw, in alarm,
        Turn'd tails, and fled his arm.
          But face to face,
          With lovely grace,
          In all her charms,
          Rush'd to his arms
      The beautiful lady Calamata.

    Captain Smith, from the foaming seas,
    From pirates, and shipwreck, and miseries,
    In a French lady's arms found a haven of ease;
      Her name--pshaw! from memory quite gone 't has.

        And on this savage shore,
        Where his faulchion stream'd with gore,
          His noble heart
          The savage dart
          Had quiver'd through;
          But swifter flew
      To his heart the pretty princess Pocahontas.

                                                       [_Exit WALTER._

_Enter KATE._

GERALDINE. Now, brother page--

KATE.                   Dear mistress, I have found
My faithful Larry.

GERALDINE.              Happy girl! and I
Hope soon to meet my heart's dear lord, my Percy.
Hist! the lord governor--

KATE.                     He little thinks
Who is the page he loves so--

GERALDINE.                Silence.

KATE.                     Mum.

_Enter DELAWAR, WALTER, LARRY, &c._

DELAWAR. Each noble act of his that you recite
Challenge all my wonder and applause.
Your captain is a brave one; and I long
To press the hero's hand. But look, my friends,
What female's this, who, like the swift Camilla,
On airy step flies hitherward?

WALTER.                    My lord,
This is the lovely princess you have heard of;
Our infant colony's best patroness;
Nay, sir, its foster-mother.

DELAWAR.                   Mark how wild--

_Music. The PRINCESS enters, with wild anxiety in her looks; searches
  eagerly around for SMITH and ROLFE._

DELAWAR. Whom do you look for, lady?

PRINCESS.                         They are gone!
Gone to be slaughter'd!

WALTER.                    If you seek our captain,
He has departed for your father's banquet.

PRINCESS. Then they have met, and they will both be lost,
My lover and my friend. O! faithless path,
That led me from my lover! Strangers, fly!
If you're the white man's friends--

DELAWAR.                         Lady, we are.

PRINCESS. Then fly to save them from destruction!

DELAWAR.                         How?

PRINCESS. Inquire not; speak not; treachery and death
Await them at the banquet.

DELAWAR.                         Haste, my friends,
Give order for immediate departure.

PRINCESS. E'en now, perhaps, they bleed! O lover! brother!
Fly, strangers, fly!

_Music. Drum beats; a bustle; scene closes._


SCENE IV. _At Werocomoco; banquet. SMITH, ROLFE, PERCY, NANTAQUAS,
  POWHATAN, &c., seated. GRIMOSCO, MIAMI and a number of INDIANS
  attending._

POWHATAN. White warriors, this is the feast of peace, and yet you wear
your arms. Will not my friends lay by their warlike weapons? They fright
our fearful people.

SMITH. Our swords are part of our apparel, king;
Nor need your people fear them. They shall rest
Peaceful within their scabbards, if Powhatan
Call them not forth, with voice of enmity.

POWHATAN. Oh, that can never be! feast then in peace,
Children and friends--

_Leaves his place and comes forward to GRIMOSCO._

O priest! my soul is afraid it will be stained with dishonour.

GRIMOSCO. Away! the Great Spirit commands you. Resume your seat; hold the
white men in discourse; I will but thrice wave my hand, and your foes are
dead. [_KING resumes his seat._] [_To MIAMI._] Now, prince, has the hour
of vengeance arrived.

POWHATAN. [_With a faltering voice._] Think not, white men, that Powhatan
wants the knowledge to prize your friendship. Powhatan has seen three
generations pass away; and his locks of age do not float upon the temples
of folly.

_GRIMOSCO waves his hand: the INDIANS steal behind the ENGLISH, MIAMI
  behind ROLFE. KING proceeds._

If a leaf but fall in the forest, my people cry out with terror, "hark!
the white warrior comes!" Chief, thou art terrible as an enemy, and
Powhatan knows the value of thy friendship.

_GRIMOSCO waves his hand again; the INDIANS seize their tomahawks, and
  prepare to strike. KING goes on._

Think not, therefore, Powhatan can attempt to deceive thee--

_The KING'S voice trembles; he stops, unable to proceed. The INDIANS'
  eyes are fixed on GRIMOSCO, waiting for the last signal. At this
  moment the PRINCESS rushes in._

PRINCESS. Treachery to the white men!

_At the same instant, drum and trumpet without. Music. The ENGLISH
  seize the uplifted arms of the INDIANS, and form a tableau, as enter
  DELAWAR and his party. After the music, the SOLDIERS take charge of
  the INDIANS. POCAHONTAS flies to the arms of ROLFE._

NANTAQUAS. O father!

                             [_POWHATAN is transfixed with confusion._

SMITH. Wretched king! what fiend could urge you?

POWHATAN. Shame ties the tongue of Powhatan. Ask of that fiend-like
priest, how, to please the angry Spirit, I was to massacre my friends.

SMITH. Holy Religion! still beneath the veil
Of sacred piety what crimes lie hid!
Bear hence that monster. Thou ferocious prince--

MIAMI. Miami's tortures shall not feast your eyes!
                                                  [_Stabbing himself._

SMITH. Rash youth, thou mightst have liv'd--

MIAMI. Liv'd! man, look there!
                   [_Pointing to ROLFE and PRINCESS. He is borne off._

POWHATAN. Oh, if the false Powhatan might--

SMITH.               No more.
Wiser than thou have been the dupes of priesthood.
Your hand. The father of this gen'rous pair
I cannot choose but love. My noble lord,
I pray you pardon my scant courtesy
And sluggish duty, which so tardy-paced
Do greet your new arrival--

DELAWAR.                 Valiant captain!
Virtue-ennobled sir, a hero's heart
Will make mine proud by its most near acquaintance.
                                                           [_Embrace._

SMITH. Your coming was most opportune, my lord.
One moment more--

DELAWAR.         Nay, not to us the praise.
Behold the brilliant star that led us on.

SMITH. Oh! blest is still its kindly influence!
Could a rough soldier play the courtier, lady,
His practis'd tongue might grace thy various goodness,
With proper phrase of thanks; but oh! reward thee!
Heaven only can--

PRINCESS.          And has, my brother. See!
I have its richest gift.                          [_Turning to ROLFE._

ROLFE.             My dearest love!

SMITH. Her brother, sir, and worthy of that name.

_Introduces NANTAQUAS to DELAWAR; PERCY and GERALDINE, who had been
  conversing, advance._

PERCY. You tell me wonders.

GERALDINE.         But not miracles.
Being near the uncle, sir, I knew the lady.

PERCY. And was I then deceived?

GERALDINE.          What, gentle Percy!
Young man, 'twas not well done, in idle pique,
To wound the heart that lov'd you.

PERCY.             O sir! speak!
My Geraldine, your niece, is she not married?

DELAWAR. Nor like to be, poor wench, but to her grave,
If mourning for false lovers break maids' hearts.

PERCY. Was she then true? O madman! idiot!
To let the feeble breath of empty rumour
Drive me from heavenly happiness!

DELAWAR.                  Poor girl!
She fain would have embark'd with me.

PERCY.               Ah, sir!
Why did she not?

DELAWAR.             Marry, sir, I forbade her:
The rough voyage would have shook her slender health
To dissolution.

GERALDINE.            Pardon, sir; not so--

DELAWAR. How now, pert page?

GERALDINE.            For here she is, my lord.
And the rough voyage has giv'n her a new life.

PERCY. My Geraldine!

DELAWAR.              My niece! O brazenface!
Approach me not; fly from your uncle's anger;
Fly to your husband's arms for shelter, hussy!

                                [_GERALDINE flies to PERCY'S embrace._

PERCY. Oh! speechless transport! mute let me infold thee!

DELAWAR. [_To KATE._] And you, my little spark, perhaps, your cloak
Covers another duteous niece--or daughter.
Speak, lady: for I see that title writ
In crimson characters upon your cheek.
Art of my blood?

LARRY.        No, sir, she's of my flesh;
Flesh of my flesh, my lord. Now, arrah, Kate,
Don't blush. This goodly company all knows
My flesh may wear the breeches, without scandal.

WALTER. Listen not, Alice, to his sophistry.
Sir, if our good wives learn this argument,
They'll logically pluck away our--

ALICE.        Tut:
Fear ye not that; for when a woman would,
She'll draw them on without a rule of reason.

DELAWAR. Methinks 'tis pairing time among the turtles.
Who have we here?

_ROBIN and NIMA come forward._

ROBIN. A pair of pigeons, sir; or rather a robin and a dove. A wild thing,
sir, that I caught in the wood here. But when I have clipt her wings, and
tamed her, I hope (without offence to this good company) that we shall
bill without biting more than our neighbours.

SMITH. Joy to ye, gentle lovers; joy to all;
A goodly circle, and a fair. Methinks
Wild Nature smooths apace her savage frown,
Moulding her features to a social smile.
Now flies my hope-wing'd fancy o'er the gulf
That lies between us and the aftertime,
When this fine portion of the globe shall teem
With civiliz'd society; when arts,
And industry, and elegance shall reign,
As the shrill war-cry of the savage man
Yields to the jocund shepherd's roundelay.
Oh, enviable country! thus disjoin'd
From old licentious Europe! may'st thou rise,
Free from those bonds which fraud and superstition
In barbarous ages have enchain'd _her_ with;--
Bidding the antique world with wonder view
A great, yet virtuous empire in the west!

_Finale._

    Freedom, on the western shore
      Float thy banner o'er the brave;
    Plenty, here thy blessings pour;
      Peace, thy olive sceptre wave!

PERCY, WALTER, &c.

    Fire-eyed Valour, guard the land;
      Here uprear thy fearless crest;

PRINCESS, KATE, ALICE, &c.

    Love, diffuse thy influence bland
      O'er the regions of the west.

CHORUS, _Freedom, &c._

LARRY.

    Hither, lassie, frank and pretty,
      Come and live without formality.
    Thou, in English christen'd Pity,
      But call'd, in Irish, Hospitality.

CHORUS, _Freedom, &c._

_The End._




TRANSCRIBERS' NOTES


Page 576: invigourate as in original.

Pages 580, 627: inconsistent hyphenation of after(-)time as in original.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Indian Princess, by James Nelson Barker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INDIAN PRINCESS ***

***** This file should be named 29230.txt or 29230.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/2/3/29230/

Produced by David Starner, Brownfox and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
