Project Gutenberg's She Would Be a Soldier, by Mordecai Manuel Noah

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: She Would Be a Soldier
       The Plains of Chippewa

Author: Mordecai Manuel Noah

Editor: Montrose J. Moses

Release Date: June 27, 2009 [EBook #29231]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHE WOULD BE A SOLDIER ***




Produced by David Starner, Brownfox and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









TRANSCRIBERS' NOTES

This e-book contains the text of _She Would Be A Soldier_, extracted
from Representative Plays by American Dramatists: Vol 1, 1765-1819.
Comments and background to all the plays and the other plays are
available at Project Gutenberg.

Spelling as in the original has been preserved.




SHE WOULD BE A SOLDIER

_By_ M. M. NOAH

[Illustration: M. M. NOAH]




MORDECAI MANUEL NOAH

(1785-1851)


Mr. Noah was born in Philadelphia, July 19, 1785, the son of Portuguese
Jewish descent, it being stated by some sources that his father not only
fought in the Revolutionary Army, but was a sufficient friend of George
Washington to have the latter attend his wedding. In his early years, he
was apprenticed, according to the custom of the day, to a carver and
gilder, but he spent most of his evenings in the Franklin Library and at
the theatre, likewise attending school in his spare time, where, among
the pupils, he met John and Steven Decatur, famed afterwards in the
history of the American Navy. He filled a minor position in the
Auditor's office in Philadelphia, but his tastes inclined more to
journalistic than they did to desk work, and, in 1800, he travelled to
Harrisburg as a political reporter.

Several years after this, he went to Charleston, and studied law, but
before he had had a chance to practise, he became the editor of the
Charleston _City Gazette_, and, advocating those principles which
resulted in the War of 1812, he used his pen, under the pseudonym of
_Muley Molack_, to disseminate those ideas in editorials. The
consequence is he encouraged much hatred, and was forced into many duels
to support his opinions. In 1811, he was offered the position of Consul
at Riga by President Madison, but declined. In 1813, he was sent by Mr.
Monroe, as Consul, to Tunis, at a time when the United States was having
trouble with Algerian piracy.

During all this period, his pen was actively busy, and while he was
abroad he did much travelling which resulted, in 1819, in his publishing
a book of travels.

In 1816, he returned to New York, and settled there as a journalist.
Being a Tammanyite in politics, we find him filling the position of
Sheriff, Judge and Surveyor of the Port at various periods. He was,
likewise, an editor of some skill, and his name is associated with the
columns of the _New York Enquirer_, the _Evening Star_, the _Commercial
Advertiser_, the _Union_, and the _Times and Messenger_.

His political career may be measured in the following manner:

In 1821 he became Sheriff. In 1823, he was admitted to the bar of New
York, and in 1829 to the bar of the Supreme Court of the United States.
This same year he was appointed Surveyor of the Port of New York.

Entering very prominently in politics, he opposed the election of Van
Buren, and gave his vote to General Harrison. Governor Seward appointed
him, in 1841, Judge of the Court of Sessions. The same year he was made
a Supreme Court Commissioner.

It was in 1825 that, as one of the early Zionists of America, he entered
into negotiations for the purchase of nearly three thousand acres of
land on Grand Island, in New York State, where it was his dream to
establish the City of Ararat, a haven of Judaism in this country. This
venture became the basis for a story by Israel Zangwill, called "Noah's
Ark." He died in New York on March 22, 1851, having lived in that city
since 1813.

Any full Bibliography will give a sufficient idea of the scope of Major
Noah's pen. He lived at a time when American Letters were beginning to
develop, himself a friend of most of the literary figures of the
day--Cooper, Irving, Fitz-Green Halleck and others. And we have an
excellent impression of the manner in which the younger literary men
regarded the authority of Noah in the "Reminiscences" of J. T.
Trowbridge:

    "Come with me," he [Mr. Noah] said, putting on his hat; and we
    went out together, I with my roll of manuscript, he with his
    stout cane. Even if I had been unaware of the fact, I should
    very soon have discovered that I was in company with an
    important personage. Everybody observed him, and it seemed as if
    every third or fourth man we met gave him a respectful salute.
    He continued his friendly talk with me in a way that relieved me
    of all sense of my own insignificance in the shadow of his
    celebrity and august proportions.

As far as his theatrical association is concerned, we can have no better
source of information than a letter written by Noah to William Dunlap,
and published in the latter's "History of the American Theatre." It is
quoted in full:


                                            New-York, July 11, 1832.

To William Dunlap, Esq.,
Dear Sir:

    I am happy to hear that your work on the American Drama is in
    press, and trust that you may realize from it that harvest of
    fame and money to which your untiring industry and diversified
    labours give you an eminent claim. You desire me to furnish you
    a list of my dramatic productions; it will, my dear sir,
    constitute a sorry link in the chain of American writers--my
    plays have all been _ad captandum_: a kind of _amateur_
    performance, with no claim to the character of a settled,
    regular, or domiciliated writer for the green-room--a sort of
    volunteer supernumerary--a dramatic writer by "particular
    desire, and for this night only," as they say in the bills of
    the play; my "line," as you well know, has been in the more
    rugged paths of politics, a line in which there is more fact
    than poetry, more feeling than fiction; in which, to be sure,
    there are "exits and entrances"--where the "prompter's whistle"
    is constantly heard in the voice of the people; but which, in
    our popular government, almost disqualifies us for the more soft
    and agreeable translation to the lofty conceptions of tragedy,
    the pure diction of genteel comedy, or the wit, gaiety, and
    humour of broad farce.

    I had an early hankering for the national drama, a kind of
    juvenile patriotism, which burst forth, for the first time, in a
    few sorry doggerels in the form of a prologue to a play, which a
    Thespian company, of which I was a member, produced in the
    South-Street Theatre--the old American Theatre in Philadelphia.
    The idea was probably suggested by the sign of the Federal
    Convention at the tavern opposite the theatre. You, no doubt,
    remember the picture and the motto: an excellent piece of
    painting of the kind, representing a group of venerable
    personages engaged in public discussions, with the following
    distich:

    "These thirty-eight great men have signed a powerful deed,
    That better times, to us, shall very soon succeed."

    The sign must have been painted soon after the adoption of the
    Federation Constitution, and I remember to have stood "many a
    time and oft," gazing, when a boy, at the assembled patriots,
    particularly the venerable head and spectacles of Dr. Franklin,
    always in conspicuous relief. In our Thespian corps, the honour
    of cutting the plays, substituting new passages, casting parts,
    and writing couplets at the exits, was divided between myself
    and a fellow of infinite wit and humour, by the name of
    Helmbold; who subsequently became the editor of a scandalous
    little paper, called _The Tickler_: He was a rare rascal,
    perpetrated all kind of calumnies, was constantly mulcted in
    fines, sometimes imprisoned, was full of faults, which were
    forgotten in his conversational qualities and dry sallies of
    genuine wit, particularly his Dutch stories. After years of
    singular vicissitudes, Helmbold joined the army as a common
    soldier, fought bravely during the late war, obtained a
    commission, and died. Our little company soon dwindled away; the
    expenses were too heavy for our pockets; our writings and
    performances were sufficiently wretched, but as the audience
    was admitted without cost, they were too polite to express any
    disapprobation. We recorded all our doings in a little weekly
    paper, published, I believe, by Jemmy Riddle, at the corner of
    Chestnut and Third-Street, opposite the tavern kept by that
    sturdy old democrat, Israel Israel.

    From a boy, I was a regular attendant of the Chestnut-Street
    Theatre, during the management of Wignell and Reinagle, and made
    great efforts to compass the purchase of a season ticket, which
    I obtained generally of the treasurer, George Davis, for
    eighteen dollars. Our habits through life are frequently
    governed and directed by our early steps. I seldom missed a
    night; and always retired to bed, after witnessing a good play,
    gratified and improved: and thus, probably, escaped the haunts
    of taverns, and the pursuits of depraved pleasures, which too
    frequently allure and destroy our young men; hence I was always
    the firm friend of the drama, and had an undoubted right to
    oppose my example through life to the horror and hostility
    expressed by sectarians to plays and play-houses generally.
    Independent of several of your plays which had obtained
    possession of the stage, and were duly incorporated in the
    legitimate drama, the first call to support the productions of a
    fellow townsman, was, I think, Barker's opera of _The Indian
    Princess_. Charles Ingersoll had previously written a tragedy, a
    very able production for a very young man, which was supported
    by all the "good society;" but Barker, who was "one of us," an
    amiable and intelligent young fellow, who owed nothing to
    hereditary rank, though his father was a Whig, and a soldier of
    the Revolution, was in reality a fine spirited poet, a patriotic
    ode writer, and finally a gallant soldier of the late war. The
    managers gave Barker an excellent chance with all his plays, and
    he had merit and popularity to give them in return full houses.

    About this time, I ventured to attempt a little melo-drama,
    under the title of "The Fortress of Sorrento" [1808], which, not
    having money enough to pay for printing, nor sufficient
    influence to have acted, I thrust the manuscript in my pocket,
    and, having occasion to visit New-York, I called in at David
    Longworth's Dramatic Repository one day, spoke of the little
    piece, and struck a bargain with him, by giving him the
    manuscript in return for a copy of every play he had published,
    which at once furnished me with a tolerably large dramatic
    collection. I believe the play never was performed, and I was
    almost ashamed to own it; but it was my first regular attempt at
    dramatic composition.

    In the year 1812, while in Charleston, Mr. Young requested me to
    write a piece for his wife's benefit. You remember her, no
    doubt; remarkable as she was for her personal beauty and amiable
    deportment, it would have been very ungallant to have refused,
    particularly as he requested that it should be a "_breeches
    part_," to use a green-room term, though she was equally
    attractive in every character. Poor Mrs. Young! she died last
    year in Philadelphia. When she first arrived in New-York, from
    London, it was difficult to conceive a more perfect beauty; her
    complexion was of dazzling whiteness, her golden hair and ruddy
    complexion, figure somewhat _embonpoint_, and graceful carriage,
    made her a great favourite. I soon produced the little piece,
    which was called "Paul and Alexis; or, the Orphans of the
    Rhine." I was, at that period, a very active politician, and my
    political opponents did me the honour to go to the theatre the
    night it was performed, for the purpose of hissing it, which was
    not attempted until the curtain fell, and the piece was
    successful. After three years' absence in Europe and Africa, I
    saw the same piece performed at the Park, under the title of
    "The Wandering Boys,"[1] which even now holds possession of the
    stage. It seems Mr. Young sent the manuscript to London, where
    the title was changed, and the bantling cut up, altered, and
    considerably improved.

    About this time, John Miller, the American bookseller in London,
    paid us a visit. Among the passengers in the same ship was a
    fine English girl of great talent and promise, Miss Leesugg,
    afterwards Mrs. Hackett. She was engaged at the Park as a
    singer, and Phillips, who was here about the same period
    fulfilling a most successful engagement, was decided and
    unqualified in his admiration of her talent. Every one took an
    interest in her success: she was gay, kind-hearted, and popular,
    always in excellent spirits, and always perfect. Anxious for her
    success, I ventured to write a play for her benefit, and in
    three days finished the patriotic piece of "She Would be a
    Soldier; or, the Battle of Chippewa,"[2] which, I was happy to
    find, produced her an excellent house. Mrs. Hackett retired from
    the stage after her marriage, and lost six or seven years of
    profitable and unrivalled engagement.[3]

    After this play, I became in a manner domiciliated in the
    green-room. My friends, Price and Simpson, who had always been
    exceedingly kind and liberal, allowed me to stray about the
    premises like one of the family, and, always anxious for their
    success, I ventured upon another attempt for a holy-day
    occasion, and produced "Marion; or, the Hero of Lake George." It
    was played on the 25th of November, Evacuation day [1821], and I
    bustled about among my military friends, to raise a party in
    support of a military play, and what with generals,
    staff-officers, rank and file, the Park Theatre was so crammed,
    that not a word of the play was heard, which was a very
    fortunate affair for the author. The managers presented me with
    a pair of handsome silver pitchers, which I still retain as a
    memento of their good-will and friendly consideration. You must
    bear in mind that while I was thus employed in occasional
    attempts at play-writing, I was engaged in editing a daily
    journal, and in all the fierce contests of political strife: I
    had, therefore, but little time to devote to all that study and
    reflection so essential to the success of dramatic composition.

    My next piece, I believe, was written for the benefit of a
    relative and friend, who wanted something to bring a house; and
    as the struggle for liberty in Greece was at that period the
    prevailing excitement, I finished the melodrama of the _Grecian
    Captive_, which was brought out with all the advantages of good
    scenery and music [June 17, 1822]. As a "good house" was of more
    consequence to the actor than fame to the author, it was
    resolved that the hero of the piece should make his appearance
    on an elephant, and the heroine on a camel, which were procured
    from a neighbouring _menagerie_, and the _tout ensemble_ was
    sufficiently imposing, only it happened that the huge elephant,
    in shaking his skin, so rocked the castle on his back, that the
    Grecian general nearly lost his balance, and was in imminent
    danger of coming down from his "high estate," to the infinite
    merriment of the audience. On this occasion, to use another
    significant phrase, a "gag" was hit upon of a new character
    altogether. The play was printed, and each auditor was presented
    with a copy gratis, as he entered the house. Figure to yourself
    a thousand people in a theatre, each with a book of the play in
    hand--imagine the turning over a thousand leaves simultaneously,
    the buzz and fluttering it produced, and you will readily
    believe that the actors entirely forgot their parts, and even
    the equanimity of the elephant and camel were essentially
    disturbed.

    My last appearance, as a dramatic writer, was in another
    national piece, called "The Siege of Tripoli," which the
    managers persuaded me to bring out for my own benefit, being my
    first attempt to derive any profit from dramatic efforts. The
    piece was elegantly got up--the house crowded with beauty and
    fashion--everything went off in the happiest manner; when, a
    short time after the audience had retired, the Park Theatre was
    discovered to be on fire, and in a short time was a heap of
    ruins. This conflagration burnt out all my dramatic fire and
    energy, since which I have been, as you well know, peaceably
    employed in settling the affairs of the nations, and mildly
    engaged in the political differences and disagreements which are
    so fruitful in our great state.

    I still, however, retain a warm interest for the success of the
    drama, and all who are entitled to success engaged in sustaining
    it, and to none greater than to yourself, who have done more, in
    actual labour and successful efforts, than any man in America.
    That you may realize all you have promised yourself, and all
    that you are richly entitled to, is the sincere wish of

                               Dear sir,
                                    Your friend and servant,
                                                    M. M. NOAH.

Wm. Dunlap, Esq.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] John Kerr wrote "The Wandering Boys; or, The Castle of Olival"
(1823), which Dr. Atkinson believes was taken from the same French
source as Noah's piece.

[2] She Would Be A Soldier,/or the/Plains of Chippewa;/An Historical
Drama,/In Three Acts./By M. M. Noah./Performed for the first time on the
21st/of June, 1819./ New-York:/Published at Longworth's Dramatic
Repository./Shakspeare Gallery./ G. L. Birch & Co. Printers./1819./[At
one time, Edwin Forrest played the Indian in this piece.]

[3] Catherine Leesugg married James H. Hackett, the American actor, in
1819. As early as 1805, some critics in England spoke of her as the
Infant Roscius. Of her, the newspaper versifier proclaimed:

    "There's sweet Miss Leesugg--by-the-by, she's not pretty,
    She's a little too large, and has not too much grace,
    Yet there's something about her so witching and witty,
    'Tis pleasure to gaze on her good-humoured face."




[Illustration: SHE WOULD BE A SOLDIER,

OR THE

PLAINS OF CHIPPEWA;

_AN HISTORICAL DRAMA,_

IN THREE ACTS.


BY M. M. NOAH.


PERFORMED FOR THE FIRST TIME ON THE 21ST OF JUNE, 1819.


NEW-YORK:

Published at Longworth's Dramatic Repository, Shakspeare Gallery.


_G. L. Birch & Co. Printers._


1819.

FAC-SIMILE TITLE-PAGE TO 1819 EDITION]




PREFACE


The following dramatic _bagatelle_ was written in a few days, and its
reception, under every circumstance, far exceeded its merits. I had no
idea of printing it, until urged to do so by some friends connected with
theatres, who, probably, were desirous of using it without incurring the
expense of transcribing from the original manuscript. Writing plays is
not my "vocation;" and even if the mania was to seize me, I should have
to contend with powerful obstacles, and very stubborn prejudices; to be
sure, these, in time, might be removed, but I have no idea of being the
first to descend into the arena, and become a gladiator for the American
Drama. These prejudices against native productions, however they may be
deplored as impugning native genius, are nevertheless very natural. An
American audience, I have no doubt, would be highly pleased with an
American play, if the performance afforded as much gratification as a
good English one; but they pay their money to be pleased, and if we
cannot afford pleasure, we have no prescriptive right to ask for
approbation. In England, writing of plays is a profession, by which much
money is made if the plays succeed; hence a dramatic author goes to
work, _secundum artem_.--He employs all his faculties, exhausts all his
resources, devotes his whole time, capacity and ingenuity to the work in
hand; the hope of reward stimulates him--the love of fame urges him
on--the opposition of rivals animates his exertions--and the expectation
of applause sweetens his labours--and yet, nine times out of ten, he
fails. Mr. Dunlap, of this city, has written volumes of plays, and
written well, "excellent well," but he made nothing; nay, he hardly
obtained that civic wreath which he fairly earned. Barker, of
Philadelphia, whose muse is the most delicate and enticing, has hung up
his harp, which, I dare say, is covered with dust and cobwebs; and even
Harby, of Charleston, whose talents are of the finest order, and who is
a bold yet chaste poet, gained but little profit and applause from his
labours. We must not expect, therefore, more encouragement for the
American Drama than may be sufficient to urge us on. We will succeed in
time, as well as the English, because we have the same language, and
equal intellect; but there must be system and discipline in writing
plays--a knowledge of stage effect--of sound, cadences, fitness of time
and place, interest of plot, spirit of delineation, nature, poetry, and
a hundred _et ceteras_, which are required, to constitute a good
dramatic poet, who cannot, in this country, and while occupied in other
pursuits, spring up over night like asparagus, or be watered and put in
the sun, like a geranium in a flower pot.

I wrote this play in order to promote the benefit of a performer who
possesses talent, and I have no objections to write another for any
deserving object. New plays, in this country, are generally performed,
for the first time, as anonymous productions: I did not withhold my name
from this, because I knew that my friends would go and see it performed,
with the hope of being pleased, and my opponents would go with other
motives, so that between the two parties a good house would be the
result. This was actually the case, and two performances produced nearly
$2,400; I hope this may encourage Americans of more talent to attempt
something.

National plays should be encouraged. They have done everything for the
British nation, and can do much for us; they keep alive the recollection
of important events, by representing them in a manner at once natural
and alluring. We have a fine scope, and abundant materials to work with,
and a noble country to justify the attempt. The "Battle of Chippewa" was
selected, because it was the most neat and spirited battle fought during
the late war, and I wish I was able to do it more justice.

                                                                N.

New-York, July, 1819.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE[4]


GENERAL,                      Mr. Graham.
JASPER,                       Mr. Robertson.
LENOX,                        Mr. Pritchard.
HON. CAPTAIN PENDRAGON,       Mr. Simpson.
JERRY,                        Mr. Barnes.
LAROLE,                       Mr. Spiller.
JENKINS,                      Mr. Johnson.
INDIAN CHIEF,                 Mr. Maywood.
1ST OFFICER,                  Mr. Bancker.
SOLDIER,                      Mr. Nexsen.
WAITER,                       Mr. Oliff.
JAILOR,                       Mr. Baldwin.

_Soldiers, Peasants, Indians, &c._

CHRISTINE,                    Miss Leesugg.
ADELA,                        Miss Johnson.
MAID,                         Mrs. Wheatley.

_Peasant Women, &c._

FOOTNOTES:

[4] In Dr. Atkinson's copy of this play, the following cast is given: as
a note, in the handwriting of Henry Wallack:

PHILADELPHIA, 1819.

GENERAL,        Hughes.
JASPER,         ----
LENOX,          Darley, John, Jr.
PENDRAGON,      Wood, William.
JERRY,          Jefferson, Joseph.
LAROLE,         Blissett, Francis.
CHIEF,          Wallack, Henry.
CHRISTINE,      Darley, Mrs. John (Miss E. Westray).
ADELA,          Wood, Mrs. Wm. (Miss J. Westray).




SHE WOULD BE A SOLDIER,

or; the

PLAINS OF CHIPPEWA




ACT I.


SCENE I. _A Valley with a neat Cottage on the right, an Arbour on the
left, and picturesque Mountains at a distance._

_Enter from the cottage, JASPER and JENKINS._

JENKINS. And so, neighbour, you are not then a native of this village?

JASPER. I am not, my friend; my story is short, and you shall hear it.
It was my luck, call it bad or good, to be born in France, in the town
of Castlenaudary, where my parents, good honest peasants, cultivated a
small farm on the borders of the canal of Midi. I was useful, though
young; we were well enough to live, and I received from the parish
school a good education, was taught to love my country, my parents, and
my friends; a happy temper, a common advantage in my country, made all
things easy to me; I never looked for to-morrow to bring me more joy
than I experienced to-day.

JENKINS. Pardon my curiosity, friend Jasper: how came you to leave your
country, when neither want nor misfortune visited your humble dwelling?

JASPER. Novelty, a desire for change, an ardent disposition to visit
foreign countries. Passing through the streets of Toulouse one bright
morning in spring, the lively drum and fife broke on my ear, as I was
counting my gains from a day's marketing. A company of soldiers neatly
dressed, with white cockades, passed me with a brisk step; I followed
them through instinct--the sergeant informed me that they were on their
way to Bordeaux, from thence to embark for America, to aid the cause of
liberty in the new world, and were commanded by the Marquis de la
Fayette. That name was familiar to me; La Fayette was a patriot--I felt
like a patriot, and joined the ranks immediately.

JENKINS. Well, you enlisted and left your country?

JASPER. I did. We had a boisterous passage to America, and endured many
hardships during the revolution. I was wounded at Yorktown, which long
disabled me, but what then? I served under great men, and for a great
cause; I saw the independence of the thirteen states acknowledged, I was
promoted to a sergeancy by the great Washington, and I sheathed my
sword, with the honest pride of knowing, that I had aided in
establishing a powerful and happy republic.

JENKINS. You did well, honest Jasper, you did well; and now you have the
satisfaction of seeing your country still free and happy.

JASPER. I have, indeed. When the army was disbanded, I travelled on foot
to explore the uncultivated territory which I had assisted in
liberating. I purchased a piece of land near the great lakes, and with
my axe levelled the mighty oaks, cleared my meadows, burnt out the
wolves and bears, and then built that cottage there.

JENKINS. And thus became a settler and my neighbour; thanks to the drum
and fife and the white cockade, that lured you from your home.

JASPER. In a short time, Jenkins, everything flourished; my cottage was
neat, my cattle thriving, still I wanted something--it was a wife. I was
tired of a solitary life, and married Kate, the miller's daughter; you
knew her.

JENKINS. Ay, that I did; she was a pretty lass.

JASPER. She was a good wife--ever cheerful and industrious, and made me
happy: poor Kate! I was without children for several years; at length my
Christine was born, and I have endeavoured, in cultivating her mind, and
advancing her happiness, to console myself for the loss of her mother.

JENKINS. Where is Christine? where is your daughter, neighbour Jasper?

JASPER. She left the cottage early this morning with Lenox, to climb the
mountains and see the sun rise; it is time for them to return to
breakfast.

JENKINS. Who is this Mr. Lenox?

JASPER. An honest lieutenant of infantry, with a gallant spirit and a
warm heart. He was wounded at Niagara, and one stormy night, he
presented himself at our cottage door, pale and haggard. His arm had
been shattered by a ball, and he had received a flesh wound from a
bayonet: we took him in--for an old soldier never closes his door on a
wounded comrade--Christine nursed him, and he soon recovered. But I wish
they were here--it is growing late: besides, this is a busy day, friend
Jenkins.

JENKINS. Ah, how so?

JASPER. You know Jerry Mayflower, the wealthy farmer; he has offered to
marry my Christine. Girls must not remain single if they can get
husbands, and I have consented to the match, and he will be here to-day
to claim her hand.

JENKINS. But will Christine marry Jerry? She has been too well educated
for the honest farmer.

JASPER. Oh, she may make a few wry faces, as she does when swallowing
magnesia, but the dose will go down. There is some credit due to a wife
who improves the intellect of her husband; aye, and there is some pride
in it also. Girls should marry. Matrimony is like an old oak; age gives
durability to the trunk, skill trims the branches, and affection keeps
the foliage ever green. But come, let us in.

                              [_JASPER and JENKINS enter the cottage._

_Pastoral Music.--LENOX and CHRISTINE are seen winding down the
mountains--his left arm is in a sling._

CHRISTINE. At last we are at home.--O my breath is nearly gone. You
soldiers are so accustomed to marching and countermarching, that you
drag me over hedge and briar, like an empty baggage-wagon. Look at my
arm, young Mars, you've made it as red as pink, and as rough as--then my
hand--don't attempt to kiss it, you--wild man of the woods.

LENOX. Nay, dear Christine, be not offended; if I have passed rapidly
over rocks and mountains, it is because you were with me. My heart ever
feels light and happy when I am permitted to walk with you; even the air
seems newly perfumed, and the birds chaunt more melodiously; and see, I
can take my arm out of confinement--your care has done this; your voice
administered comfort, and your eyes affection. What do I not owe you?

CHRISTINE. Owe me? Nothing, only one of your best bows, and your
prettiest compliments. But I do suspect, my serious cavalier, that your
wounds were never as bad as you would have me think. Of late you have
taken your recipes with so much grace, have swallowed so many bitter
tinctures with a playful smile, that I believe you've been playing the
invalid, and would make me your nurse for life--O sinner as you are,
what have you to say for yourself?

LENOX. Why, I confess, dear Christine, that my time has passed with so
much delight, that even the call of duty will find me reluctant to quit
these scenes, so dear to memory, hospitality, and, let me add, to love.
Be serious, then, dear Christine, and tell me what I have to hope; even
now I expect orders from my commanding officer, requiring my immediate
presence at the camp; we are on the eve of a battle--Speak!

CHRISTINE. Why, you soldiers are such fickle game, that if we once
entangle you in the net, 'tis ten to one but the sight of a new face
will be sufficiently tempting to break the mesh--you're just as true as
the smoke of your cannon, and you fly off at the sight of novelty in
petticoats, like one of your Congreve rockets--No, I won't love a
soldier--that's certain.

LENOX. Nay, where is our reward then for deserving well of our country?
Gratitude may wreath a chaplet of laurel, but trust me, Christine, it
withers unless consecrated by beauty.

CHRISTINE. Well, that's a very pretty speech, and deserves one of my
best courtesies. Now suppose I should marry you, my "dear ally Croaker,"
I shall expect to see myself placed on the summit of a baggage-wagon,
with soldiers' wives and a few dear squalling brats, whose musical tones
drown e'en the "squeaking of the wry-neck'd fife;" and if I should
escape from the enemy at the close of a battle, I should be compelled to
be ever ready, and "pack up my tatters and follow the drum."--No, no, I
can't think of it.

LENOX. Prithee, be serious, dear Christine, your gaiety alarms me. Can
you permit me to leave you without a sigh? Can I depart from that dear
cottage and rush to battle without having the assurance that there is a
heart within which beats in unison with mine? a heart which can
participate in my glory, and sympathize in my misfortunes?

CHRISTINE. No--not so, Lenox; your glory is dear to me, your happiness
my anxious wish. I have seen you bear pain like a soldier, and
misfortune like a man. I am myself a soldier's daughter, and believe me,
when I tell you, that under the appearance of gaiety, my spirits are
deeply depressed at your approaching departure. I have been taught, by a
brave father, to love glory when combined with virtue. There is my
hand;--be constant, and I am ever your friend; be true, and you shall
find me ever faithful.

LENOX. Thanks--a thousand thanks, beloved Christine; you have removed a
mountain of doubts and anxious wishes from my heart: I did hope for
this reward, though it was a daring one. Love and honour must now
inspire me, and should we again be triumphant in battle, I shall return
to claim the reward of constancy--a reward dearer than thrones--the
heart of a lovely and virtuous woman.

CHRISTINE. Enough, dear Lenox; I shall never doubt your faith. But come,
let us in to breakfast--stay--my knight of the rueful countenance, where
is the portrait which you have been sketching of me? Let me look at your
progress.

LENOX. 'Tis here.                       [_Gives a small drawing book._

CHRISTINE. [_Opening it._] Heavens, how unlike! Why Lenox, you were
dreaming of the _Venus de Medici_ when you drew this--Oh, you flatterer!

LENOX. Nay, 'tis not finished; now stand there, while I sketch the
drapery.--[_Places her at a distance, takes out a pencil, and works at
the drawing._]

CHRISTINE. Why, what a statue you are making of me. Pray, why not make a
picture of it at once? Place me in that bower, with a lute and a lap
dog, sighing for your return; then draw a soldier disguised as a
pilgrim, leaning on his staff, and his cowl thrown back; let that
pilgrim resemble thee, and then let the little dog bark, and I fainting,
and there's a subject for the pencil and pallet.

LENOX. Sing, dear Christine, while I finish the drawing--it may be the
last time I shall ever hear you.

CHRISTINE. Oh, do not say so, my gloomy cavalier; a soldier, and
despair?

    THE KNIGHT ERRANT.

    _Written by the late Queen of Holland._

    It was Dunois, the young and brave, was bound to Palestine,
    But first he made his orisons before St. Mary's shrine:
    And grant, immortal Queen of Heav'n, was still the soldier's prayer,
    That I may prove the bravest knight, and love the fairest fair.

    His oath of honour on the shrine he grav'd it with his sword,
    And follow'd to the Holy Land the banner of his Lord;
    Where, faithful to his noble vow, his war-cry fill'd the air--
    Be honour'd, aye, the bravest knight, beloved the fairest fair.

    They ow'd the conquest to his arm, and then his liege lord said,
    The heart that has for honour beat must be by bliss repaid:
    My daughter Isabel and thou shall be a wedded pair,
    For thou art bravest of the brave, she fairest of the fair.

    And then they bound the holy knot before St. Mary's shrine,
    Which makes a paradise on earth when hearts and hands combine;
    And every lord and lady bright that was in chapel there,
    Cry'd, Honour'd be the bravest knight, belov'd the fairest fair.

LENOX. There, 'tis finished--how do you like it?

CHRISTINE. Why, so, so--if you wish something to remind you of me, it
will do.

LENOX. No, not so; your image is too forcibly impressed here to need so
dull a monitor. But I ask it to reciprocate--wear this for my sake
[_Gives a miniature._], and think of him who, even in the battle's rage,
will not forget thee. [_Bugle sounds at a distance._] Hark! 'tis a bugle
of our army. [_Enter a SOLDIER, who delivers a letter to LENOX and
retires--LENOX opens and reads it._]

"The enemy, in force, has thrown up entrenchments near Chippewa; if your
wounds will permit, join your corps without delay--a battle is
unavoidable, and I wish you to share the glory of a victory. You have
been promoted as an aid to the general for your gallantry in the last
affair. It gives me pleasure to be the first who announces this grateful
reward--lose not a moment.

                             Your friend,
                                             MANDEVILLE."

I must be gone immediately.

_Enter JASPER and JENKINS from the cottage._

JASPER. Ah! Lenox, my boy, good morning to you. Why Christine, you have
had a long ramble with the invalid.

CHRISTINE. Lenox leaves us immediately, dear father; the army is on the
march.

JASPER. Well, he goes in good time, and may success attend him. Ods my
life, when I was young, the sound of the drum and fife was like the
music of the spheres, and the noise and bustle of a battle was more
cheering to me, than "the hunter's horn in the morning." You will not
forget us, Lenox, will you?

LENOX. Forget ye? Never--I should be the most ungrateful of men, could I
forget that endearing attention which poured oil into my wounds, and
comforted the heart of a desponding and mutilated soldier. No, Jasper,
no; while life remains, yourself and daughter shall never cease to live
in my grateful remembrance.

                             [_CHRISTINE and LENOX enter the cottage._

_Pastoral Music.--Peasants are seen winding down the mountains, headed
by JERRY, dressed for a festive occasion, with white favours, nosegays,
&c._

JERRY. Here I am, farmer Jasper--come to claim Miss Crissy as my wife,
according to your promise, and have brought all my neighbours. How do
you do?

JASPER. Well--quite well--and these are all your neighbours?

JERRY. Yes--there's Bob Short, the tanner; Nick Anvil, the blacksmith;
Patty, the weaver's daughter--and the rest of 'em; come here, Patty,
make a curtchey to the old soger--[_PATTY comes forward._]--a pretty
girl! I could have had her, but she wanted edication--she wanted the
airs and graces, as our schoolmaster says.

JASPER. Well, farmer, you are an honest man, but I fear my Christine
will not approve this match, commenced without her advice, and concluded
without her consent. Then her education has been so different from--

JERRY. O, fiddle-de-dee, I don't mind how larned she is, so much the
better--she can teach me to parlyvoo, and dance solos and duets, and
such elegant things, when I've done ploughing.

JASPER. But I'm not sure that she will like you.

JERRY. Not like me? Come, that's a good one; only look at my
movements--why she can't resist me. I'm the boy for a race, for an
apple-paring or quilting frolic--fight a cock, hunt an opossum, or snare
a partridge with any one.--Then I'm a squire, and a county judge, and a
_brevet_ ossifer in the militia besides; and a devil of a fellow at an
election to boot. Not have me? damme, that's an insult. Besides,
sergeant Jasper, I've been to the wars since I've seen ye--got
experience, laurels and lilies, and all them there things.

JASPER. Indeed!

JERRY. Yes--sarved a campaign, and was at the battle of Queenstown. What
do you think of that?

JASPER. And did you share in the glory of that spirited battle?

JERRY. O yes, I shared in all the glory--that is--I didn't fight. I'll
tell you how it was: I marched at the head of my village sogers,
straight as the peacock in my farm yard, and I had some of the finest
lads in our county, with rifles--well, we march'd and camp'd, and camp'd
and march'd, and were as merry as grigs until we arrived at the river:
half the troops had cross'd and were fighting away like young devils:
ods life, what a smoke! what a popping of small arms, and roaring of big
ones! and what a power of red coats!

JASPER. Well, and you panted to be at them? clubb'd your rifles, and
dashed over?

JERRY. Oh no, I didn't--I was afear'd that in such a crowd, nobody would
see how I fought, so I didn't cross at all. Besides, some one said, it
were contrary to law and the constitution, to go into the enemy's
country, but if they com'd into our country, it were perfectly lawful to
flog 'em.

JASPER. And you did not cross?

JERRY. Oh no, I stood still and look'd on; it were contrary to the
constitution of my country, and my own constitution to boot--so I took
my post out of good gun shot, and felt no more fear nor you do now.

JASPER. No doubt. Admirable sophistry, that can shield cowards and
traitors, under a mistaken principle of civil government! I've heard of
those scruples, which your division felt when in sight of the enemy. Was
that a time to talk of constitutions--when part of our gallant army was
engaged with unequal numbers? Could you calmly behold your fellow
citizens falling on all sides, and not avenge their death? Could you,
with arms in your hands, the enemy in view, with the roar of cannon
thundering on your ear, and the flag of your country waving amidst fire
and smoke--could you find a moment to think of constitutions? Was that a
time to pause and suffer coward scruples to unnerve the arm of freemen?

JERRY. Bravo! bravo! sergeant Jasper; that's a very fine speech--I'll
vote for you for our assemblyman; now just go that over again, that I
may get it by heart for our next town meeting--blazing flags--fiery
cannon--smoking constitutions--

JASPER. I pray you pardon me. I am an old soldier, and fought for the
liberty which you enjoy, and, therefore, claim some privilege in
expressing my opinion. But come, your friends are idle, let us have
breakfast before our cottage door.--Ah, Jerry, my Crissy would make a
fine soldier's wife: do you know that I have given her a military
education?

JERRY. No, surely--

JASPER. Aye, she can crack a bottle at twelve paces with a pistol.

JERRY. Crack a bottle! Come, that's a good one; I can crack a bottle
too, but not so far off.

JASPER. And then she can bring down a buck, at any distance.

JERRY. Bring down a buck? I don't like that--can't say as how I like my
wife to meddle with bucks. Can she milk--knit garters--make apple butter
and maple sugar--dance a reel after midnight, and ride behind her
husband on a pony, to see the trainings of our sogers--that's the wife
for my money. Oh, here she comes.

_Enter CHRISTINE and LENOX from the cottage._

JASPER. Christine, here is farmer Mayflower and his friends, who have
come to visit our cottage, and you in particular.

CHRISTINE. They are all welcome. Good morning, Jerry--how is it with
you?

JERRY. Purely, Miss Crissy, I'm stout and hearty, and you look as pretty
and as rosy as a field of pinks on a sunshiny morning.

JASPER. Come here, farmer--give me your hand--Christine, yours--[_Joins
them._]--there; may you live long and happy, and my blessings ever go
with you.

Christine. [_Aside in amazement._] Heavens! what can this mean? [_LENOX
is agitated--pause--JASPER and group retire--LENOX remains at a
distance._]

JERRY. Why, Miss Crissy, your father has consented that I shall marry
you, and I've come with my neighbours to have a little frolic, and carry
you home with me.

CHRISTINE. And am I of so little moment as not to be consulted? Am I
thus to be given away by my father without one anxious question? [_With
decision._] Farmer, pardon my frankness; on this occasion, sincerity
alone is required--I do not like you, I will not marry you--nay, do not
look surprised. I am a stranger to falsehood and dissimulation, and thus
end at once all hopes of ever becoming my husband.

JERRY. Why, now, Miss Crissy, that's very cruel of you--I always had a
sneaking kindness for you, and when your father gave his consent, I
didn't dream as how you could refuse me.

CHRISTINE. My father has ever found me dutiful and obedient, but when he
bestows my hand, without knowing whether my heart or inclinations
accompany it, I feel myself bound to consult my own happiness. I cannot
marry you, farmer.

LENOX. [_Advancing._] All things are prepared, and I am now about to
depart. Christine, farewell! Friends, good fortune await you! [_Aside._]
Dear Christine, remember me.

                                                      [_Exit hastily._

JERRY. Lack-a-daisy! What a disappointment to me, when I had put my
house in such nice order--painted my walls--got a new chest upon
chest--two new bed quilts, and a pair of pumps, and had the pig-sty and
dairy whitewashed.--Hang me, after all, I believe, she is only a little
shy. Oh, I see it now, she only wants a little coaxing--a little
sparking or so--I've a great mind to kiss her. I will, too.

                     [_Approaches CHRISTINE, who stands at a distance,
                      buried in deep thought._

CHRISTINE. Begone--dare not touch me! Heavens, am I reserved for this
humiliation? Could my father be so cruel?

JERRY. Now, Crissy, don't be so shy--you know you like me--you know you
said t' other day, when I were out training, that I held up my head more
like a soger than anybody in the ranks; come now, let's make up; you'll
always find me a dutiful husband, and if I ever flog you, then my name's
not Jerry.

_Enter JASPER from the cottage, with a basket; PEASANTS following with
fruit._

JASPER. Come, let us have breakfast in the open air--help me to arrange
the table.

JERRY. Breakfast! Oh, true, I've a powerful appetite.

                                                           [_Assists._

CHRISTINE. [_Aside._] What is to be done? I have not a moment to lose;
my father is stern and unyielding--I know his temper too well, to hope
that my entreaties will prevail with him--the farmer is rich, and gold
is a powerful tempter. I must be gone--follow Lenox, and in disguise, to
avoid this hateful match. I'll in, whilst unobserved.

                                                [_Enters the cottage._

JASPER. Come, sit down, farmer and neighbours; and you, my pretty lads
and lasses, let's have a dance. Ah, here is a foraging party.

                                                    [_Enter SOLDIERS._

_Party dance--several pastoral and fancy dances--and as the whole
company retires, CHRISTINE comes from the cottage with cautious
steps--she is dressed in a frock coat, pantaloons and hat._

CHRISTINE. They are gone--now to escape. Scenes of my infancy--of many a
happy hour, farewell! Oh, farewell, forever!

                                                              [_Exit._

_JASPER and JERRY return._

JERRY. She refused me plumply.

JASPER. Impossible!

JERRY. No, it's quite possible. Farmer, said she, I will _not_ marry
you--and hang me if there's any joke in that.

JASPER. Refuse an honest man? A wealthy one, too? And one whom her
father gives to her? Trifling girl! Insensible to her happiness and
interest. What objections had she to you, farmer?

JERRY. Objections! Oh, none in the world, only she wouldn't marry me;
she didn't seem struck at all with my person.

JASPER. Mere coyness--maiden bashfulness.

JERRY. So I thought, sergeant Jasper, and was going to give her a little
kiss, when she gave me such a look, and such a push, as quite astounded
me.

JASPER. I will seek and expostulate with the stubborn girl. Ah, Jerry,
times have strangely altered, when young women choose husbands for
themselves, with as much ease and indifference, as a ribbon for their
bonnet.

                                                [_Enters the cottage._

JERRY. So they do--the little independent creatures as they are--but
what Miss Crissy could see in me to refuse, hang me if I can tell. I'm
call'd as sprightly a fellow as any in our county, and up to
everything--always ready for fun, and perfectly good-natured.

                           [_Enter JASPER from the cottage, agitated._

JASPER. She is nowhere to be found--she has gone off and left her poor
old father. In her room, I found these lines scrawled with a pencil:
"You have driven your daughter from you, by urging a match that was
hateful to her. Was her happiness not worth consulting?" What's to be
done? Where has she gone? Ah, a light breaks in upon me--to the camp--to
the camp!

JERRY. Oho! I smell a rat too--she's gone after Mr. Lenox, the infantry
ossifer. Oh, the young jade! But come along, old soger--get your hat and
cane, and we'll go arter her--I'm a magistrate, and will bring her back
by a habes corpus.

                                            [_They enter the cottage._


SCENE II. _A Wood._

_Enter CHRISTINE in haste, looking back with fear._

CHRISTINE. On, on, or I shall be pursued and o'ertaken--I have lost my
way. Ah, yonder is the camp--I see the flags and tents--a short time and
I shall be with you, dear Lenox.

                                                              [_Exit._

_Enter JASPER, JERRY and PEASANTS._

JERRY. We're on the right track, farmer; I know all tracks--used to 'em
when I hunt 'possums.

JASPER. Cruel girl! to desert her old father, who has ever been kind and
affectionate.

JERRY. Cruel girl! to desert me, who intended to be so very
affectionate, if he had given me a chance.

JASPER. We cannot be far from the outposts, let us continue our search.

                                                            [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _A Camp. A row of tents in the rear with camp flags at equal
distances; on the right wing is a neat marquee, and directly opposite to
it another. Sentinels on duty at each marquee._

_Enter from the marquee, LENOX and ADELA._

LENOX. I never was more surprised! just when I had brush'd up my arms,
and prepared to meet the enemy, who should I find in camp but you, my
old hoyden scholar. Why Adela, you have grown nearly as tall as a
grenadier, and as pretty--zounds, I would kiss you, if I dare.

ADELA. I am delighted to see you, dear Lenox; you are still as gay and
amiable as when you taught your little Adela to conjugate verbs, and
murder French; I heard of your gallantry and wounds, and imagined I
should see you limping on crutches, with a green patch over one eye, and
a wreath of laurel around your head, a kind of limping, one-eyed cupid;
but I find you recovered from your wounds, and ready for new ones, my
soldier.

LENOX. Bravo! the little skipping girl, who was once so full of
mischief, has grown a tall and beautiful woman. But what brings you to
camp, Adela? What have you to do with "guns and drums? heaven save the
mark!"

ADELA. Why, my father wrote for me, expecting that the campaign was
drawing to a close; but scarcely had I arrived here, when intelligence
reached us that the enemy, in force, had occupied a position near
Chippewa; it was too late to return, so I remained to see a little
skirmishing.

LENOX. And are you prepared to endure the privations of a camp?

ADELA. Oh, it is delightful! it is something out of the common order of
things, something new--such echoing of bugles--glistening of fire-arms,
and nodding of plumes--such marchings and countermarchings--and such
pretty officers too, Lenox; but then a terrible accident happened to me
the other day.

LENOX. Aye, what was it?

ADELA. Why you must know, that I accompanied my father, who with his
suite, and a small detachment, went out on a reconnoitering
project.--Just as we _debouched_ from the wood, according to the
military phrase, we came suddenly and unexpectedly on a foraging party
of the enemy, who began to fight and retreat at the same time.

LENOX. Well?

ADELA. My horse happening to be an old trooper, the moment the bugles
sounded, and he heard the prattle of the small arms, he dashed in
amongst them, and there was I screaming in a most delightful style,
which, by some, must have been mistaken for a war-whoop, and to mend the
matter, a very polite and accomplished Indian took aim at me with his
rifle, and actually shot away the plume from my hat, which, I dare say,
was as valuable a prize to him as I should have been.

LENOX. And how did you escape from your perilous situation?

ADELA. Oh, I soon recovered my fright, and reined in my old horse; my
father and a few soldiers cut in before me, and covered my retreat, so
that in the conclusion of this little affair, I gained a feather in my
cap, though the enemy carried off the plume; and I found myself at last
on the field of battle, as cool as any hero in the army.

LENOX. And so, my lively Adela, you have been fairly introduced to Mars
and Bellona; how do you like them?

ADELA. Prodigiously. I find, after all, that courage is something like a
cold bath; take the first plunge, and all is over. Lord, Lenox, how
delightful it would have been, had I been armed and fought gallantly in
that affair; my name would have been immortalized like Joan of Arc's.
Congress would have voted me a medal, I should have had a public dinner
at Tammany-Hall, and his honour the mayor would have made me one of his
prettiest speeches, in presenting me with the freedom of the great city
in a gold box.

LENOX. And so, then, you admire a military life?

ADELA. Oh, I'm in raptures with it! I am a perfect female Quixote, and
would relinquish a thousand dandy beaux for one brave fellow; and,
therefore, Lenox, don't be surprised, if you should see me going about
from tent to tent, chaunting the old songs of

    _"Soldier, soldier, marry me,
    With your fife and drum."_

_CHRISTINE suddenly appears in the background and surveys the party with
astonishment._

CHRISTINE. Heavens! what do I see? Lenox, and with a female so
affectionately?

LENOX. Your spirits charm me, dear Adela, and revive those feelings for
you, that time has impaired, but not destroyed. But come, let us in and
see your worthy father.

                               [_Leads her into the tent to the left._

CHRISTINE. Cruel, unkind, false Lenox! Are these your vows of constancy?
are these your protestations of love? Scarcely are you free from our
cottage, when your vows and pledges are but air. Wretched Christine!
what will become of you? I have deserted my father's house to avoid a
hateful match, and seek the protection of the man I love; he is false,
and I am lost. What's to be done? Return home a penitent, and meet the
frowns of my father, and be wedded to the man I hate? Never. Seek out
Lenox, and upbraid him with his falsehood? No, pride and wounded honour
will not permit me. Let him go--he is a wretch who trifles with the
affections of a woman. I care not what becomes of me, despair is all
that I have left. Ha! a thought strikes me with the lightning's
force--the army--I will enlist--this disguise is favourable, and in the
battle's rage, seek that death which quickly awaits me--'tis resolved.
[_CORPORAL passes over the stage._] Hist, corporal.

CORPORAL. Well, my lad, what would ye?

CHRISTINE. I would enlist, good corporal, and serve my country.

CORPORAL. Enlist! As a drummer or fifer, I suppose.

CHRISTINE. No; in the ranks--and though small, you will find me capable.
Give me your musket. [_CHRISTINE takes the musket, shoulders, presents,
and goes through a few motions._]

CORPORAL. Well done, my little fellow; you'll do, if it's only for a
fugelman; come along to our sergeant, and receive the bounty.

                                                              [_Exit._

CHRISTINE. Now, Lenox, now am I fully revenged for your cruel desertion.

                                                           [_Follows._

_End of the First Act._




ACT II.


SCENE I. _York, in Upper Canada; a Tavern meanly furnished._

_Enter LAROLE, in pursuit of the chambermaid._

LAROLE. Come here, you littel demoiselle--you bootiful sauvage, vy you
run vay from me--hay?

MAID. I wish you would let me alone, mounsure, you officers' gentlemen
are very disagreeable things.

LAROLE. Disagreeable? ma foi! I am one joli garcon, one pretti
batchelor; disagreeable? I vill tell you, ma belle grizette, I am maitre
de mode, I give de lecons for dance, to speake de English, and de
Francaise aussi; I can fence, aha! or fight de duel, or de enemi, je
suis un soldat.

MAID. Well, if you're a soldier, you have no business to be following me
up and down the house like a pet lamb. Why don't you go to camp?

LAROLE. Camp? vat is de camp? Oho, le champ de bataille; I shall tell
you, mademoiselle, I did fight at the bataille de Vittoria, com un
diable, like littel devil. I did kill beaucoup d'Anglais. Mai my maitre,
le capitain, he did give me a dam tump on my head wis his rapier, and
did knock me down from on top of my horse, and make a me von prisonier.

MAID. Poor fellow! And so, mounsure, you were made prisoner?

LAROLE. Oui, ven I could not run avay, begar I surrender like von brave
homme, and now I am jentiman to capitain Pendragoon; I do brus his coat,
poudre his hair, and pull his corset tight, and ven he was order to come
to Amerique, and fight wis de Yankee Doodel, begar me come too. I arrive
ici, I am here, to make a littel de love to you.

MAID. Well now, once for all, I tell you not to be following me; I don't
like Frenchmen--I can't parlyvoo.

LAROLE. You no like de Frenchiman? O quell barbare! vy you ave von
abominable gout, mademoiselle, von shockin taste. I shall tell you,
mademoiselle, en my contree, en France, de ladies are ver fond of me. O
beaucoup, I am so charmant--so aimable, and so jentee, I have three five
sweetheart, ami de coeur, mai for all dat I do love you ver mush, par
example.

MAID. Let me go! [_Bell rings._] There, your master calls you.

                                                              [_Exit._

LAROLE. Dam de littel bell, I vill not come; mon maitre he always
interrupt me ven I make de love to the pretti ladi, he be jealous, begar
I vill not come.

                                                [_Exit opposite side._

_Enter CAPTAIN PENDRAGON, dressed in the British uniform, but in the
extreme of fashion--throws himself into a chair._

PENDRAGON. Oh, curse such roads! My bones are making their way out of
their sockets--such vile, abominable, detestable--Waiter!--If my friends
at Castle Joram only knew the excruciating fatigues which I am
undergoing in this barbarous land--Why, waiter!--or if his highness the
commander-in-chief was only sensible of my great sacrifices to--Why,
waiter! where the devil are you?

_Enter WAITER._

WAITER. Here I be, sir.

PENDRAGON. Why didn't you come when I first called? Do you think I've
got lungs like a hunter? I'm fatigued and hungry. Get me an anchovy, a
toast, and a bottle of old port.

WAITER. A what, sir? an ancho--

PENDRAGON. Yes, sir, an anchovy--small ones--delicate.

WAITER. Why, sir, we don't know what these are in this country.

PENDRAGON. The devil you don't! Then pray, sir, what have you to eat in
this damn'd house fit for a gentleman?

WAITER. Why, sir, not much--the army eats us out of house and home. We
have some very excellent fresh bear meat, sir.

PENDRAGON. Bear meat! Why, what the devil, fellow, do you take me for a
Chickasaw, or an Esquimau? Bear meat! the honourable captain Pendragon,
who never ate anything more gross than a cutlet at Molly's chop-house,
and who lived on pigeons' livers at Very's, in Paris, offered bear meat
in North America! I'll put that down in my travels.

WAITER. Why, sir, it is considered here a great delicacy.

PENDRAGON. The devil it is! Then pray, sir, what are your ordinary
fares, if bear's meat is considered a delicacy?

WAITER. Why, truly, sir, this is but a young country, and we have to
live upon what we can catch. Pray, would you fancy some 'possum fat and
hominy?

PENDRAGON. Oh, shocking! begone, fellow--you'll throw me into a fever
with your vile bill of fare. Get me a cup of tea--mix it, hyson and
souchong, with cream and muffins.

WAITER. We can't give you any of those things, sir.--However, you can
have an excellent cup of sage tea, sweetened with honey.

PENDRAGON. Sage tea! Why, you rascal, do you intend to throw me into a
perspiration by way of curing my hunger? or do you take me for a goose
or a duck, that you intend stuffing me with sage? Begone, get out, you
little deformed fellow! [_Exit WAITER._] I shall perish in this
barbarous land--bear meat, 'possum fat, and sage tea! O dear St. James!
I wish I was snug in my old quarters. LaRole! [_Enter LAROLE._] Where
the devil do you hide yourself in this damn'd house? Why, I shall
starve--there's nothing to eat, fit for a gentleman.

LAROLE. Oui, monsieur, dis is von damn contree, I can find nosing to
eat. I did look into all de pantri, mai parbleu, I find only a ver
pretti demoiselle, mai, I could not eat her.

PENDRAGON. We must be off to the camp, LaRole, my quarters there will be
infinitely more agreeable. I shall get the blue devils in this cursed
place.

LAROLE. Vell, sair, I have all de devils ventre bleu, das you can
imagine; dere is no politesse, no respect, nosing paid to me.

PENDRAGON. My fit of the blues is coming on me; sing me a song, LaRole.

LAROLE. A chanson? Vell, sair, I shall sing to frighten avay de littel
blue devil; vill you I shall sing de English or de Francaise?

PENDRAGON. Oh, English, by all means--curse your foreign lingo.

LAROLE. Ahem! Ahem! you shall understand.

    _Vat is dis dull town to me,
      Robin Hadair?
    Vere is all de joys on earth, dat
    Make dis town_--

                                            [_A bugle sounds without._

Ha! what is dat? who de devil intrup me in my chanson?

INDIAN CHIEF. [_Speaks without._] Have them all ready, with their rifles
and tomahawks in order; [_Enters with another INDIAN._] and you,
Coosewatchie, tell our priests to take their stand on yonder hill, and
as my warriors pass them, examine whether they have fire in their eyes.
[_Exit INDIAN._] How now, who have we here?

PENDRAGON. [_Examining him with his glass._] Where the devil did this
character come from? he's one of the fancy, I suppose.

INDIAN. Who and what are you?

PENDRAGON. Who am I? Why, sir, I am the honourable captain Pendragon, of
his majesty's guards, formerly of the buffs.

INDIAN. [_Aside._] The officer who is to be under my command. Well sir,
you have lately arrived from across the great waters: How did you leave
my father, the King of England?

PENDRAGON. How! call my most gracious sovereign your father? Why, sir,
you are the most familiar--impertinent--'sdeath! I shall choke--What the
devil do you mean?

INDIAN. [_Coolly._] What should I mean, young man, but to inquire after
the health of my father, who commands my respect, who has honoured me
with his favours, and in whose cause I am now fighting.

PENDRAGON. Well, sir, if you have the honour to hold a commission from
his majesty, I desire that you will speak of him with proper awe, and
not call him your father, but your gracious master.

INDIAN. Young man, the Indian warrior knows no master but the Great
Spirit, whose voice is heard in thunder, and whose eye is seen in the
lightning's flash; free as air, we bow the knee to no man; our forests
are our home, our defence is our arms, our sustenance the deer and the
elk, which we run down. White men encroach upon our borders, and drive
us into war; we raise the tomahawk against your enemies, because your
king has promised us protection and supplies. We fight for freedom, and
in that cause, the great king and the poor Indian start upon equal
terms.

PENDRAGON. A very clever spoken fellow, pon honour; I'll patronise him.

LAROLE. Parbleu, he is von very sensible sauvage; vill you take von
pinch snuff?

INDIAN. Pshaw!

LAROLE. He say pshaw, I see he is born in de voods.

PENDRAGON. And are you prepared to fan these Yankees? We shall flog them
without much fatigue, I understand.

INDIAN. Not so fast, young soldier; these pale-faced enemies of ours
fight with obstinacy; accustomed to a hardy life, to liberty and laws,
they are not willing to relinquish those blessings on easy terms; if we
conquer them, it must be by no moderate exertions: it will demand force
and cunning.

PENDRAGON. Oh, dry dogs, I suppose, not to be caught napping; well, I'm
up to them, we'll fan them in high style; the ragged nabobs, I
understand, are not far off, and our troops are in fine preservation.

INDIAN. True, preparation must be made to meet them. You are under my
orders.

PENDRAGON. The devil I am!

INDIAN. Aye, sir; your general, at my request, has ordered you here to
take command of a company of my warriors; but you must not appear in
that dress: change it quickly, or they will not be commanded by you;
they are men, and fight under the orders of men.

PENDRAGON. Change my dress! why what the devil do you mean, sir?

INDIAN. Mean? that you should appear in the ranks like a warrior, and
not like a rabbit trussed for dressing--off with these garments, which
give neither pleasure to the eye nor ease to the limbs--put on
moccasins, wrap a blanket around you, put rings through your nose and
ears, feathers in your head, and paint yourself like a soldier, with
vermilion.

PENDRAGON. Why, this is the most impertinent and presuming savage in the
wilds of North America. Harkee, sir, I'd have you to know, that I am a
man of fashion, and one of the fancy--formerly of the buffs, nephew of a
peer of the realm, and will be a member of parliament, in time; an
officer of great merit and great services, Mr.--Red Jacket. Paint my
face, and fight without clothes? I desire, sir, that you will please to
take notice, that I fought at Badahoz with the immortal Wellington, and
had the honour to be wounded, and promoted, and had a medal for my
services in that affair, Mr.--Split-log. Put rings in my nose? a man of
taste, and the _ne plus ultra_ of Bond-street, the very mirror of
fashion and elegance? Sir, I beg you to observe, that I am not to be
treated in this manner--I shall resent this insult. Damme, I shall
report you to the commander-in-chief at the Horse Guards, and have you
courtmartialled for unfashionable deportment--Mr.--Walk-in-the-Water.

INDIAN. Come, come, sir, enough of this trifling; I do not understand
it; you have heard my orders--obey them, or, after the battle, I'll
roast you before a slow fire!

                                                              [_Exit._

LAROLE. O le barbare! O de dam sauvage! dis is de most impertinent dog
in de vorld. Roast before de fire! Parbleu, mon maitre, ve are not de
littel pig.

PENDRAGON. I'm horrified! lost in amazement! but I'll resent it. Damme,
I'll caricature him.

LAROLE. Oh, I vish I vas fight encore at Saragossa, vis mi lor
Villainton; par example, I did get some hard tumps, mai I did get plenti
to eat; but ici I ave nosing but de little bear to mange.

PENDRAGON. Come along--courage, LaRole. We'll fan the Yankee Doodles in
our best style, and then get a furlough, and be off to White-Hall, and
the rings in our noses will afford anecdotes for the bon-ton for a whole
year. Allons.

                                                            [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _The American Camp at daybreak. The drum and fife plays the
reveille. Sentinels on duty before the tents._

_LENOX enters from the tent on the right, GENERAL and ADELA from the
left._

LENOX. Good morning, general; you are "stirring with the lark"--and you
also, Adela.

GENERAL. The times require the utmost vigilance, Lenox: the enemy cannot
escape a battle now, and we must be prepared at all points to meet him.
Decision and energy cannot fail to promote success.

ADELA. And what is to become of me, father, in the battle? Am I to ride
the old trooper again, and run the risk of having the tip of my nose
carried away by a musket ball, and left on the field of battle in all my
glory?

GENERAL. You shall be taken care of, dear Adela; we will place you in
the rear, among the baggage-wagons.

ADELA. And if they should be captured, I become also a prisoner, and
probably a prize to some gallant Indian chief, who will make me his
squaw, and teach me to kill deer. O delightful thought!

                                                      [_Bugles sound._

GENERAL. The troops are under arms, and approaching.

[_Quick march--the GENERAL, LENOX and ADELA pass to the left, and stand
near the tent; the troops advance; CHRISTINE is among them, dressed in
uniform; they pass round the stage in regular order, then form the line
two deep; CHRISTINE is in front on the right, and keeps her eye fixed
anxiously on LENOX; drum beats the roll; the troops come to an order,
and then proceed through the manual by the tap of drum, and finally to a
present; the GENERAL, LENOX, and other officers advance, and pass
through the line in review; the flags wave, and the band strikes up
"Hail Columbia."_]

GENERAL. Well--everything is right. And now, soldiers, to your posts;
remember, discipline, subordination, courage, and country, and victory
will be ours. [_GENERAL, LENOX and ADELA, enter the tent to the left.
The troops march off. CHRISTINE and a SOLDIER, headed by a CORPORAL,
return to relieve guard at each tent. Port arms and whisper the
countersign. CHRISTINE is placed before the tent on the right, her
comrade on the left. CORPORAL retires with the two relieved sentries.
After a pause, she beckons to her comrade._]

CHRISTINE. Hist--comrade!

SOLDIER. Well, what is it?

CHRISTINE. Will you exchange places? There is no difference--and the sun
will be too powerful for me presently. Look, here is a dollar.

SOLDIER. With all my heart. [_They cross quickly, the SOLDIER receives
the money--CHRISTINE now paces before the tent into which LENOX, ADELA
and the GENERAL have retired._]

CHRISTINE. Could I but see the false, perfidious LENOX, and upbraid him
with his cruelty! [_She is in great uneasiness, pauses occasionally, and
looks into the tent--her comrade is watching her. LENOX sings within._]

    Shall the pleasures of life unknown fade away,
    In viewing those charms so lovely and gay?
    Shall the heart which has breath'd forth rapturous flame,
    Be hid from the world and unsought for by fame?

    Thus spoke the fond Roscoe to Scylla the fair,
    As he gaz'd on her charms, with a love-soothing care:
    Hear now the last wish, that fondly I sigh,
    I'll conquer in love, or in battle I'll die.

    He girded his armour and flew to the field,
    Determin'd while life flow'd never to yield;
    The foe was subdued, but death's cruel dart
    Was aim'd at the valiant and fond Roscoe's heart:

    But the blow was defeated--he lived to enjoy
    The sight of his Scylla, no longer so coy,
    And his laurels fresh bloom'd, as she smil'd on the youth,
    And gave her fair hand in reward for his truth.

CHRISTINE. Ha, that false voice! I can no longer bear it! [_Throws down
her gun, and is about entering the tent, when her comrade, who has been
attentively regarding her movements, rushes over and seizes her._]

SOLDIER. Where are you going?

CHRISTINE. Unhand me this instant!                       [_Struggles._

SOLDIER. Guards, there!

_Enter an OFFICER with SOLDIERS, who attempts to seize CHRISTINE--she
draws her sword and stands on the defensive, and after some resistance,
escapes._

OFFICER. Pursue him quickly!                       [_SOLDIERS pursue._

SOLDIER. He crosses the bridge.

OFFICER. The sentinels will reach him with their guns.

                                                [_Muskets discharged._

SOLDIER. They have him--he is not hurt.

_GENERAL, ADELA and LENOX rush from the tent._

GENERAL. What means this confusion?

2ND OFFICER. The sentinel who was placed here on duty, attempted, for
some desperate purpose, to enter your tent; but being discovered, he
refused to surrender, drew his sword on me and the guard, and, after
some resistance, has been disarmed and secured.

LENOX. Good heavens! What object could he have had?

2ND OFFICER. I know not--but he is a new recruit, probably a spy from
the enemy.

GENERAL. It must be so--see that a court martial be called to try him,
and bring the result to me without delay. If he is guilty, a dreadful
example shall be made of him. Begone.

                                      [_Exeunt GENERAL, SOLDIERS, &c._


SCENE III. _Another Part of the Camp._

_Enter JASPER, JERRY and PEASANTS._

JASPER. Nowhere to be found. I have asked everybody in the camp in
vain--she is lost to me. Unhappy, cruel girl! to quit her old and fond
father thus.

JERRY. Unhappy girl! to leave me in such an ungenteel manner too, run
away from me on my wedding day! but I'll find her out.

JASPER. Impossible! we must return, dejected and disappointed.

JERRY. I'll peep into every tent, bribe the sogers--I've got a little
money left. [_JASPER and PEASANTS retire. CORPORAL crosses the stage._]
Hist, corporal!

CORPORAL. Well, what would you?

JERRY. Why no, sure--it isn't--yes, it is--why Corporal Flash, how do
you do? Don't you know me?

CORPORAL. Can't say I do, sir.

JERRY. Why, not know Jerry Mayflower? Don't you remember me at the
battle of Queenstown, when you were in the boat and I on land, and you
were crossing to fight Johnny Bull, and I didn't cross at all?

CORPORAL. Oh, I remember you now--I remember calling you a cowardly
rascal at the time.

JERRY. So you did--how have you been? I am very glad to see you--you're
not killed, I take it?

CORPORAL. No, not exactly killed--but I was wounded--an honour which you
didn't seem to care much about.

JERRY. No, not much; I'm not very ambitious that way.

CORPORAL. What brings you to the camp, just when we are about having
another brush with the enemy--do you want to run away again? Zounds! you
deserve a round hundred at the halberts.

JERRY. Yes, I deserve many things that I don't get--but pray, corporal,
mout you have seen a young woman in this here camp lately?

CORPORAL. Oh, plenty, among the suttlers.

JERRY. No, a kind of a pretty girl, a little lady-like, parlyvoos, and
carries her head up straight.

CORPORAL. No--I've seen no such person.

JERRY. Well, Corporal Flash, I've a little cash, and what say you to a
jug of whiskey punch? Brave men, you know, like you and I, should drink
with one another.

CORPORAL. With all my heart; you're good for nothing else but to drink
with.

JERRY. Then come along, my boy; we'll drown care, raise our spirits, and
swallow the enemy in a bumper.

                                                            [_Exeunt._


SCENE IV. _A Prison._

_Enter two OFFICERS, GUARDS and CHRISTINE. OFFICERS seat themselves at a
table, with pens and ink._

1ST OFFICER. Young man, come forward. You have been charged with an act
of mutiny, and with an attempt, for some unknown cause, to force your
way, with arms in your hand, into the tent of the commanding general. We
are convened for your trial--we have examined the testimony; and as you
are a stranger in our ranks, no feelings of prejudice could have given a
false colouring to that testimony. What have you to say?

CHRISTINE. Nothing.

OFFICER. Nothing?

CHRISTINE. Nothing! [_With firmness._] I am guilty!

OFFICER. Have a care, pause before you make this avowal of your guilt.

CHRISTINE. [_With settled firmness._] I have considered it well, and am
ready to meet the consequences. I am guilty. [_With a burst of
anguish._] Oh, most guilty!

OFFICER. Unhappy young man, what could have tempted you to this act? Who
set you on?

CHRISTINE. Seek not to know the cause, 'tis buried here. Do your duty--I
am prepared for the result.

OFFICER. [_To the Board._] The charge is fully admitted, and the rules
of war prescribe the punishment. The object he had in view must yet be
discovered; 'tis plain, however, that he is a spy, and has no hope of
pardon. Record the verdict and sentence, for the inspection and
concurrence of the general. [_OFFICER writes. The company rise from the
table, and one approaches CHRISTINE, who appears buried in thought._]

OFFICER. Young man, I deeply commiserate your unhappy situation, but the
rules of war are rigid, and must be enforced. You must prepare to die!

CHRISTINE. [_Starts, but recovers herself quickly._] I am ready.

OFFICER. I would offer you hope, but acts of mutiny, and when covering
such suspicious motives as yours, cannot be pardoned. You have but a day
to live. I deeply regret it, for you appear to have qualities which, in
time, would have made you a valuable citizen. You are cut off in youth,
probably from the hopes of a fond parent.

CHRISTINE. [_In agony._] Oh, no more--no more!

OFFICER. All the sympathy and indulgence which can be offered you shall
be yours! Farewell.

                                         [_Exit OFFICERS, GUARDS, &c._

CHRISTINE. At length 'tis concluded, and an ignominious death terminates
my unmerited sufferings. Cruel father! and still more cruel Lenox! thus
to have wounded the heart that loved you. Oh, what a situation is mine!
separated from all I hold dear, sentenced to die, and in this disguise;
to leave my poor father, and to know that death, alone, can tell my sad
story. What's to be done? Discover all? No, no. Expose my weakness and
folly--to see the false Lenox wedded to another, and I forced to accept
the hand I loathe--to be pointed at for one who, lost to the delicacy of
her sex, followed a perfidious lover in disguise, and, tortured by
jealousy, enlisted, was mutinous, and sentenced to die; but who, to save
a miserable life, avowed her situation, and recorded her disgrace at
once? Never, never! let me die, and forever be forgotten--'tis but a
blow, and it will end the pangs which torment me here. [_Enter a
SOLDIER, who beckons._] I am ready, lead the way.

                                                              [_Exit._


SCENE V. _Another part of the Prison._

_Enter the JAILOR, driving JERRY before him._

JAILOR. In, in, you mutinous dog! do you come here to breed a riot in
our camp?

JERRY. Now, my dear good-natured jailor, only have pity on me, and I'll
tell you all about it.

JAILOR. I won't hear you--didn't you breed a riot?

JERRY. Why no, it was not me. I am as innocent as a young lamb. I'll
tell you how it was--come, sit down on this bench with me. [_They sit._]
You must know that I'm a farmer, pretty well off, as a body mout say,
and I wanted a wife; hard by our village, there lived an old soger with
a pretty daughter, so I courted the old man for his daughter, and he
consented to the match.

JAILOR. Well?

JERRY. And so I got together all my neighbours, and, with music, went to
the old soger's to get my sweetheart, when, lo and behold! after all my
trouble, she refused me plump.

JAILOR. No, did she?

JERRY. Ay, indeed; she didn't seem stricken with the proposal--and for
fear her father would force her to marry me, egad, she run away.

JAILOR. And where did she go?

JERRY. I can't say, but her father and a whole _posse comitatus_, as we
justices call 'em, went in search of her to the camp, and when I came
here, I found some of my old comrades who fought with me at Queenstown;
and so having a little money, we went to take a comfortable pitcher of
whiskey punch together, and so, while over our cups, they doubted my
valour, and hinted that I run away before the battle.

JAILOR. Well, and what did you do?

JERRY. Why, I offered to fight 'em single-handed all round, and we got
into a dispute, and so when my money was all gone, they tweaked my nose,
boxed my ears, and kick'd me out of the tent. So I then kick'd up a row,
and--that's all.

JAILOR. A very pretty story, indeed! You look like a mutinous dog--so
come, get into the black hole.

JERRY. Now, my dear jailor, do let me escape, and I'll give you the
prettiest little pig in my farmyard.

JAILOR. What! bribe an honest and humane jailor, and with a pig? In with
you.

JERRY. Well, but I've nothing to eat--I shall be half starved.

JAILOR. Oh no, you shall have something to employ your grinders on.
[_Goes out, and returns with a black loaf, and a pitcher of water._]
There!

JERRY. O dear, nothing else but black bread and cold water? Can't you
get me a pickle?

JAILOR. I think you're in a devil of a pickle already--come, get in!
[_Removes a board from the scene, which discovers a small dark hole.
JERRY supplicates._]

JERRY. How long am I to be here, Mr. Jailor, in company with myself?

JAILOR. That depends on your good behaviour. [_Cannon are heard._]
There! the battle has commenced.

JERRY. [_Putting his head out of the hole._] O dear, what's that? The
great guns are going off. Are you sure, my dear jailor, that this prison
is bomb proof?

JAILOR. Take your head in, you great land turtle.

JERRY. Oh, what will become of me?

_End of the Second Act._




ACT III.


_Scene in front of a pavilion tent; trumpets and drums sounding._

_Enter GENERAL, LENOX, SOLDIERS, OFFICERS, &c._

GENERAL. At length victory has crown'd our arms, and the result of this
action will keep alive the spirits of our troops, and the hopes of our
country. Hark! the bugles are sounding a retreat, and the enemy has
abandoned the field and taken to his entrenchments. Lenox, your
hand--your conduct this day has confirmed our hopes--allow me in the
name of our country to thank you.

LENOX. Not a word, dear general, not a word; I have merely done my duty,
and done no more than every soldier in our ranks.

GENERAL. What is the result of this day's action?

LENOX. The enemy has lost upwards of 500 in killed and wounded, and
several principal officers have been taken prisoners.

GENERAL. In what position were they when the attack became general?

LENOX. The British commander, pressed by our artillery under Towson,
issued in all his force from his entrenchments. It was a gallant sight,
to see his solid columns and burnished arms advance on the margin of the
river, and his cavalry, with lightning's force, dart on our flanks to
turn and throw them into confusion: but they were met by the volunteers
under the brave Porter, and gallantly repulsed.

GENERAL. Go on.

LENOX. The enemy then condensed his forces and crossed the bridge, and
was encountered on the plains of Chippewa by Scott, with his brigade,
when the action became severe and general. No ambuscade or masked
batteries were held in reserve--the enemy was not a moment concealed
from our view--no tangled thicket or umbrageous groves gave effect or
facility to our rifles: the battle was fought on a plain--where man
grappled man, force was opposed to force, skill to skill, and eye to
eye, in regular, disciplined, and admirable order.

GENERAL. How near were you to the British general?

LENOX. In sight and hearing. Charge the Yankees! said a hoarse voice
which I knew to be his. Charge away! said our ardent troops, as they
advanced with fixed bayonets; the fire became dreadful, and our stars
and stripes were seen waving in the blaze. Scott rode through the lines
cheering the men, and gallantly leading them on; Jessup and his third
battalion turned the right flank of the enemy after a dreadful conflict;
Ketchum had kept up a cross and ruinous fire; and Towson, from his dread
artillery, scattered grape like hail amongst them. On, on! cried
Leavenworth, the day's our own, my boys! Just then a shot struck down my
comrade, Harrison, and shattered his leg.

GENERAL. Well?

LENOX. He grasped his sword and fought on his stump, clinging to the
spot like fire-eyed Mars; the enemy, pressed on all sides, gave way; our
troops pursued, and the flight became general. At length we drove them
to their entrenchments, and remained masters of the field. Our trumpets
sounded their retreat; victory perched on our eagles, and our bands
struck up the soul-inspiring air of "Hail, Columbia, happy land!"

GENERAL. Well done, my brave fellows! This action will teach the enemy
to respect that valour which they cannot subdue. See that the wounded
prisoners are taken care of: give them all succor: victory loses half
its value, when it is not tempered with mercy.

                                                      [_Exit GENERAL._

LENOX. Now to my dear Christine, to receive from her the reward which I
hope I have fairly earned, and seek with her the joys of tranquillity
and love.

_Enter a SOLDIER._

SOLDIER. Towards the conclusion of the battle we made two Indian
warriors prisoners, who were fighting desperately; we have them with us.

LENOX. Bring them in; I will examine them, touching the number and force
of their tribe. [_Exit SOLDIER, who returns with PENDRAGON and LAROLE,
with a file of men; both are painted and dressed as Indians; PENDRAGON
preserves his opera-glass, and LAROLE his snuff-box._]

PENDRAGON. What are we brought here for, fellow?

LENOX. Warriors, the fate of battle has placed you in our power; yet
fear nothing, we shall treat you like men and soldiers. Deeply do we
regret to see you take up arms against us, instigated by foreign
influence, and bribed by foreign gold. How numerous is your tribe?

PENDRAGON. Why what the devil, sir, do you take us for Choctaws? Can't
you tell a man of fashion in masquerade?

LENOX. Who and what are you?

PENDRAGON. I am the honourable Captain Pendragon, of his Majesty's
Coldstream guards.

LENOX. The _honourable_ Captain Pendragon, and taken prisoner fighting
in the ranks with Indians, and in disguise? A man of rank and fashion,
and a soldier, changing his complexion, his nature and his
character--herding with savages--infuriating their horrid passions, and
whetting their knives and tomahawks against their defenceless prisoners?
Impossible! And who are you, sir?                        [_To LAROLE._

LAROLE. [_Taking snuff._] Begar, sair, I am von man of fashion aussi, I
am valet de sham to capitain Pendragoon; ve are in de masquerade, sair.

PENDRAGON. It's very true, sir, 'pon honour--we are in masquerade,
though you look as if you doubt it. War, sir, is a kind of a--a singular
science, and if you are to be knock'd on the head, 'tis of very little
consequence whether your nose is tipped with blue or red, damme. I am in
your power, sir, and a man of fashion, 'pon honour.

LENOX. Well, sir, if your example is to govern men of honour or men of
fashion, I hope I am ignorant of the attributes of the one, or the
eccentricities of the other. However, mercy to prisoners, even when they
have forfeited mercy, may teach your nation lessons of toleration and
humanity. Your life is safe, sir.

PENDRAGON. Sir, you speak very like a gentleman, and I shall be happy to
taste Burgundy with you at the Horse Guards.

LENOX. I thank you, sir.

LAROLE. Par example, dis Yankee Doodel is von very pretti spoken jeune
gentiman, I will give him de encouragement. Sair, I vill be ver happy to
serve you en my contree, to take un tasse de caffee at de Palais Royale
en Paris wid you, to dress your hair, or pull your corset tight.

_Enter GENERAL, ADELA and OFFICER._

GENERAL. Who have we here?

LENOX. Prisoners, sir, and in disguise.

ADELA. As I live, an Indian dandy!

PENDRAGON. A lady? [_With an air of fashion._] Ma'am, your most devoted
slave--inexpressibly happy to find a beautiful creature in this damn'd
wilderness. You see, ma'am, I am a kind of a prisoner, but always at
home, always at my ease, _a-la-mode_ St. James--extremely rejoiced to
have the honour of your acquaintance. A fine girl, LaRole, split me!

LAROLE. Oh, oui, she is very fine, I like her ver mush.

ADELA. Pray, sir, may I ask how came you to fancy that disguise?

PENDRAGON. Oh, it's not my fancy, 'pon honour, though I am one of the
fancy; a mere _russe de guerre_. We on the other side of the water, have
a kind of floating idea that you North Americans are half savages, and
we must fight you after your own fashion.

ADELA. And have you discovered that any difference exists in the last
affair in which you have been engaged?

PENDRAGON. Why, 'pon my soul, ma'am, this Yankee kind of warfare is
inexpressibly inelegant, without flattery--no order--no military
arrangement--no _deploying_ in solid columns--but a kind of
helter-skelter warfare, like a reel or a country-dance at a village inn,
while the house is on fire.

ADELA. Indeed?

PENDRAGON. All true, I assure you. Why, do you know, ma'am, that one of
your common soldiers was amusing himself with shooting at me for several
minutes, although he saw from my air, and my dodging, that I was a man
of fashion? Monstrous assurance! wasn't it?

ADELA. Why ay, it was rather impertinent for a common soldier to attempt
to bring down a man of fashion.

LAROLE. Oui--it is dam impertinent, mai par example, de littel bullet of
von common soldat, he sometime kill von great general.

PENDRAGON. Pray, ma'am, will you permit me to ask, when you arrived from
England, and what family has the honour to boast of so beautiful a
representative?

ADELA. Sir, I am not of England, I stand on my native soil.

PENDRAGON. Oh.

ADELA. And much as I esteem English women for their many amiable
qualities, I hope that worth and virtue are not wholly centered in that
country.

PENDRAGON. Why, 'pon my soul, ma'am, though it is not fashionable this
year to be prejudiced, yet were I to admit that I saw any beauty or
elegance in America, my Bond-Street friends would cut me--split me!

ADELA. I cannot admire their candour. Merit is the exclusive property of
no country, and to form a just estimate of our own advantages, we should
be ever prepared to admit the advantages possessed by others.

_Enter a SOLDIER._

SOLDIER. We have surprised and made captive the celebrated Indian chief,
who fought so desperately against us.

GENERAL. Bring him before us. [_Exit SOLDIER._] He has long been the
terror of the neighbourhood, and the crafty foe of our country.

_Enter SOLDIERS with the INDIAN CHIEF._

INDIAN. Who among you is the chief of these pale-faced enemies of our
race?

GENERAL. I am he.

INDIAN. 'Tis well, sir; behold in me your captive, who has fallen into
your power after a resistance becoming a warrior. I am ready to meet
that death which I know awaits me.

GENERAL. Chief, your fears are groundless; we intend you no harm, but by
our example, teach you the blessings of valour and mercy united.

INDIAN. Wherefore show me mercy? I ask it not of you.--Think you that I
cannot bear the flames? that a warrior shrinks from the uplifted
tomahawk? Try me--try how a great soul can smile on death. Or do you
hope that I will meanly beg a life, which fate and evil fortune has
thrown into your hands?

GENERAL. We ask no concessions of you, warrior; we wish to see you
sensible of the delusions into which foreign nations have plunged you.
We wish to see you our friend.

INDIAN. Your friend? Call back the times which we passed in liberty and
happiness, when in the tranquil enjoyment of unrestrained freedom we
roved through our forests, and only knew the bears as our enemy; call
back our council fires, our fathers and pious priests; call back our
brothers, wives and children, which cruel white men have
destroyed.--Your friend? You came with the silver smile of peace, and we
received you into our cabins; we hunted for you, toiled for you; our
wives and daughters cherished and protected you; but when your numbers
increased, you rose like wolves upon us, fired our dwellings, drove off
our cattle, sent us in tribes to the wilderness, to seek for shelter;
and now you ask me, while naked and a prisoner, to be your friend!

GENERAL. We have not done this, deluded man; your pretended advocates,
over the great waters, have told you this tale.

INDIAN. Alas! it is a true one; I feel it here; 'tis no fiction: I was
the chief of a great and daring tribe, which smiled on death with
indifference and contempt; my cabin was the seat of hospitality and of
love; I was first in council, and first in the field; my prosperity
increased, my prospects brightened; but the white man came, and all was
blasted.

GENERAL. What has been done, was the result of war.

INDIAN. Wherefore wage war against us? Was not your territory
sufficiently ample, but did you sigh for our possessions? Were you not
satisfied with taking our land from us, but would you hunt the lords of
the soil into the den of the otter? Why drive to desperation a free and
liberal people? Think you I would be your enemy unless urged by powerful
wrongs? No, white man, no! the Great Spirit whom we worship, is also the
God whom you adore; for friends we cheerfully lay down our lives; but
against foes, our lives are staked with desperation. Had I taken you
prisoner, death should have been your portion; death in cruel torments.
Then why spare me? why spare the man whose knife was whetted against
your life?

GENERAL. To show, by contrast, the difference of our principles. You
would strike down the captive who implores your protection: we tender
life and liberty to the prisoner, who asks himself for death.

INDIAN. Is this your vengeance?

GENERAL. It is. The Great Spirit delights in mercy. Be thou our friend,
warrior; bury thy tomahawk deep in earth; let not jealous foreigners
excite thy vengeance against us; but living as we do in one territory,
let us smoke the calumet of peace, you and all your tribe, and let
concord hereafter reign amongst us.--Be this the token.

                                            [_Gives a belt of wampum._

INDIAN. Brother, I accept the token; forgive my rage, and pardon my
unjust anger. Protect our warriors and wives; guard their wigwams from
destruction; soften their prejudices and remove their jealousies. Do
this, and the red man is your friend. I have urged you far to end my
life: you have tempered your passions with mercy, and we are no longer
foes. Farewell!

                                                              [_Exit._

LAROLE Parbleu, dis general is like von great Roman. I vill speak von
vord pour myself, I vill make de speech like de sauvage.

GENERAL. [_To LAROLE._] And you, sir, it appears, are in disguise,
unlike a civilized soldier; you have been taken in the ranks with
Indians.

LAROLE. Sair, mon general, you sall here vat I am goin to say. I am von
Frenchiman; in my contree every Frenchiman he is von soldat.

GENERAL. Well?

LAROLE. Begar, sair, I must fight vid somebody, because it is my
bisness. In de Egypt I did fight 'gainst de Turc; in Europe I did fight
de whole vorld vis de Grand Napoleon, and in Amerique I did fight
against you vid myself. Mais, you take a me de prisonier, I can fight no
more; I vill trow myself on de protection of dis contree; I vill no more
fight contree de Yankee Doodel; I vill stay here and eat de ros beef vid
you, and mon capitain la, he may go to de devil.

GENERAL. Admirably concluded. And you, sir, what can we do to lighten
your captivity?

PENDRAGON. Why sir, if war was not my profession, I'd sell out; but it's
always my maxim to obey orders, whatever they may be: therefore, shall
be happy to have a brush with you in war, and equally happy to crack a
bottle of Burgundy with you in peace; a flash in the pan in one way, or
a puff from a segar in another; a bullet under the ribs in battle, or a
country dance in a ball-room; all's one to me, if it's only fashionably
conducted.

GENERAL. Well, let's into my tent and partake of some refreshment. We
may not always meet as enemies.

PENDRAGON. [_To ADELA._] Allow me the felicity of your little finger.
[_Aside._] She's struck with my figure, split me! LaRole, take notice.

LAROLE. Oh, you are de littel devil among de ladies.

                                                            [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _A Prison._

_CHRISTINE seated on a bench; her appearance betrays grief and despair._

CHRISTINE. At length the weary night has passed away, and day dawns, but
brings no joy or comfort to my aching heart. Alas! alas! Christine,
where are all the bright visions thy fond fancy painted? where is that
content and love which gleamed through the casement of our cottage, when
my dear father smiled on his child, and entwined around her his
protecting arms: when the false Lenox, too, with honeyed lips, and tones
soft as zephyrs, vow'd eternal love? Let me not think of them, or I
shall go mad. Oh, what a contrast! pent up in a vile prison, and in
disguise! condemned to die, and perishing unknown and unprotected. On
the one side, my grave yawns for me; and on the other, a false lover,
and a cruel father, drive me to despair. My brain is on fire! [_Hurries
about with rapid strides. Music loud and violent._] Ha! what is this?
[_Tears the miniature from around her neck._] Lenox, these are thy
features! thy mild looks beam hope and joy upon me. [_Kisses it._] Could
such a face be false? Away with it! even now he weds another. [_Throws
the miniature indignantly from her._] So, 'tis gone, and I am left alone
in darkness and despair. [_She stands transfixed with grief--muffled
drum rolls--she starts._] Ha! they come for me! Be firm, my heart!

_Enter an OFFICER and a file of SOLDIERS._

OFFICER. Young man, your hour has arrived; the detachment waits without
to receive you.

CHRISTINE. [_Faintly._] I am ready.

OFFICER. Can I serve you in any manner? Is there no letter--no
remembrance that you would wish sent to father or friend?

CHRISTINE. Oh, forbear!

SOLDIER. [_Picking up the miniature._] See, sir, here is a miniature.

OFFICER. [_Examining it._] By Heavens, they are the features of Captain
Lenox! How came you by this? What! a thief too? 'Tis well your career is
cut short.

CHRISTINE. Oh no, no! Give it me, I implore you; 'tis mine.

OFFICER. I shall restore it to the rightful owner. Come, we wait.

CHRISTINE. Lead on. A few fleeting moments, and all my troubles will be
at an end.

                                                            [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _Before the Tent._

_Enter GENERAL, SOLDIERS, &c., with papers._

GENERAL. He has not confessed who set him on?

OFFICER. He has not, but admits the crime.

GENERAL. [_Returning papers._] 'Tis well--see him executed according to
the sentence. Hard and imperious duty, which, at once, shuts out hope
and mercy!

                                                      [_Exit GENERAL._

OFFICER. Now to seek for Lenox, and restore to him his miniature.

                                                              [_Exit._


SCENE IV. _The Camp, as in Act I, Scene III; the stage is thrown open,
drums roll, and the procession enters for the execution of CHRISTINE;
she is in the centre, between the two detachments; her coat is off, and
the stock unloosened from her neck--her step is firm, until she reaches
the tent of LENOX, when she clasps her hands and hangs down her head in
despair. Procession makes the circuit of the stage with slow steps, and
when opposite the tent she kneels; an OFFICER places the bandage over
her eyes, and gives a sign to a detachment of four to advance; they step
forward, and level their muskets at her; at the moment, LENOX rushes
from the tent with the miniature in his hand and strikes up their guns._

LENOX. Hold! for your lives! [_Rushes down to CHRISTINE, and tears the
bandage from her eyes._] 'Tis she! 'tis she! 'tis my own, my beloved
Christine!

                                 [_Holds her in his arms; she faints._

2ND OFFICER. What means this?

LENOX. Stand off, ye cruel executioners, would you destroy a woman?

OFFICER. A woman? Heavens! how did this happen?

_Enter GENERAL, ADELA, LAROLE, SOLDIERS, &c._

LENOX. Support her, Adela, support my dear Christine!

                                                     [_ADELA assists._

CHRISTINE. [_Recovering._] Where am I? [_Sees LENOX and ADELA._] Hide
me, save me from that horrid sight!

LENOX. Do you not know me, dear Christine?

CHRISTINE. Traitor, begone! let me die at once! Is she not your bride?

LENOX. No, by Heavens, no! 'tis my early friend, my dear companion.
Could you doubt my love?

CHRISTINE. Not married? not your betrothed? O Lenox, are you then
faithful?

LENOX. Could Christine doubt my vows?

CHRISTINE. I see it all--I have been deceived. Pardon me, dear Lenox;
but driven to despair by your supposed perfidy, I enlisted, and rushed
on my fate--which in a moment (horrid thought!) would have terminated.
But you are true, and I am happy.

                                                           [_Embrace._

LAROLE. Parbleu! it is a littel voman vidout de petticoat. Suppose she
take a me von prisonier, O quell disgrace!

_Enter JASPER, JERRY and PEASANTS._

JASPER. Where is she? where is my daughter?

CHRISTINE. My father? I dare not look upon him.

JASPER. Come to my arms, dear wanderer. Could you leave your poor old
father thus? You've nearly broke my heart, Christine.

CHRISTINE. My sufferings have been equally severe; but do you pardon
your child?

JASPER. I do--I do! and further prove my love, by making you happy. Take
her, Lenox, she is yours; and never let father attempt to force his
child into a marriage which her heart abhors.

JERRY. Well, I vow, Miss Crissy, you look very pretty in pantaloons, and
make a fine soger; but after all, I'm glad to have escaped a wife who
wears the breeches before marriage--so I consent that you shall have the
infantry ossifer, because I can't help it; and so I'll marry Patty, the
weaver's daughter, though she can't crack a bottle nor bring down a
buck.

GENERAL. All things have terminated happily. Our arms have been
triumphant, and our gallant soldiers rewarded with the approbation of
their country. Love has intwined a wreath for your brows, Lenox, and
domestic peace and happiness await you; and when old age draws on apace,
may you remember the PLAINS OF CHIPPEWA, and feel towards Britain as
freemen should feel towards all the world: "_Enemies in war--in peace,
friends._"

_Finis._





End of Project Gutenberg's She Would Be a Soldier, by Mordecai Manuel Noah

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHE WOULD BE A SOLDIER ***

***** This file should be named 29231.txt or 29231.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/2/3/29231/

Produced by David Starner, Brownfox and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
