The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Succinct View of the Importance and
Practicability of Forming a Ship Canal across the Isthmus of Panama, by H. R. Hill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Succinct View of the Importance and Practicability of Forming a Ship Canal across the Isthmus of Panama

Author: H. R. Hill

Release Date: June 29, 2009 [EBook #29269]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FORMING A SHIP CANAL ***




Produced by Adrian Mastronardi, Richard J. Shiffer and The
Philatelic Digital Library Project at http://www.tpdlp.net
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)





[Transcriber's Note: Every effort has been made to replicate this text
as faithfully as possible, including obsolete and variant spellings
and other inconsistencies. Text that has been changed to correct an
obvious error is noted at the end of this ebook.]




A

SUCCINCT VIEW

OF THE

IMPORTANCE AND PRACTICABILITY

OF FORMING

A SHIP CANAL

ACROSS THE

ISTHMUS OF PANAMA.



By H. R. HILL.



_LONDON:_

WM. H. ALLEN, & CO.,

7, LEADENHALL-STREET.



1845.



W. LEWIS AND SON, PRINTERS, 21, FINCH-LANE, LONDON.




ADVERTISEMENT.


The following observations were thrown together as the result of
communications with several gentlemen locally acquainted with the
Isthmus of Panama, and who expressed to the writer their astonishment,
that amidst the numerous undertakings, of more or less utility, which
science has realised in our time, one so important to the whole
commercial world, so easy of accomplishment, and so certain to be
productive of ample remuneration to the undertakers, as a Ship Canal
through that Isthmus, had not been taken up. The idle objection, that
if practicable it would not have been left unattempted for the last
three hundred years, they considered, would have no weight in an age
in which we have seen accomplished works that in our fathers' time,
nay, even within our own memory, it would have been considered madness
to propose,--witness steam-navigation and railways. It is not twenty
years since Dr. Lardner, the author of a popular work on the
steam-engine, then supposed to be a most competent authority,
declared in his lectures that the application of steam-navigation to
the voyage across the Atlantic was a mere chimera. So it has been with
railways. Would not any man who fifty, or even twenty years ago, had
predicted that the journey from London to Exeter would be accomplished
_in five hours_, have been deemed a fit tenant for Bedlam? To contend
that because a great undertaking has remained unattempted for a long
series of years, _therefore_ it is impracticable, is to put a stop to
all improvement. At the suggestion of the friends before referred to,
the writer is induced to print the following pages, with the hope of
drawing to the subject of which they treat the attention of the
mercantile and shipping interests. If they awaken an interest in the
subject in those quarters, they will not be thrown away, and he is
fully convinced that the more the subject is examined the stronger
will be the conviction of the practicability of the undertaking.

  _23, Throgmorton Street_,
    _February, 1845_.




A SUCCINCT VIEW, &c.


From the first discovery of the American continent down to the present
time, a shorter passage from the North Atlantic to the Pacific ocean
than the tedious and dangerous voyage round Cape Horn has been a
desideratum in navigation. During the dominion of old Spain in the New
World the colonial policy and principles of that jealous nation, to
which Central America belonged, opposed insurmountable obstacles to
any proposal for effecting this great object; but the emancipation of
the Spanish Colonies, and the erection of independent States in their
stead, has broken down the barrier which Spanish jealousy had erected.
The rulers of these states are not devoid of discernment to perceive
that the exclusion of European Nations from the shores of the Pacific
would be productive of immense injury to themselves, and that by
making their own territory the high-road to the countries which are
becoming important marts for the commerce of Europe, they are bringing
wealth to their own doors, and increasing their own political
importance.

In this, as in most other cases, individual and general benefit go
hand in hand; for it cannot be doubted that were such a communication
between the two Oceans made through Central America, it would prove of
incalculable utility to all nations engaged in maritime commerce,--and
sooner or later it will unquestionably be opened. This would be the
shortest route from Europe, North America, and the western coast of
Africa to every part of the western coast of the New World, to
Australia, New Zealand, the numerous islands of the Pacific and the
eastern coast of Asia,[1] as will be seen by a glance at the outline
map of the world on Mercator's projection annexed to this pamphlet.
The advantage of a Canal of sufficient size to allow large vessels to
proceed through the Isthmus is therefore obvious.

But by whom is this work to be undertaken? the question is certainly
not a British one alone, although the British Trade would derive
immense benefit from its solution: it is a question in which the whole
commercial world is more or less interested.

There must be either a combination of governments formed to defray so
much each of the expense, or the work must be accomplished by a Joint
Stock Company of individuals, who will indemnify themselves for their
outlay by levying tolls upon those who avail themselves of the
communication. As to such a combination of governments, the difficulty
of procuring a sufficient grant of public money opposes a great
obstacle to the realization of any such project.

To private enterprize chiefly then it must be committed; yet it may
reasonably be expected that such countenance and support as the
governments of the principal maritime powers can give, will be readily
yielded to any association that will undertake the work.

There are several considerations which point out the present as the
most auspicious moment for attaining the object in view. The profound
peace with which Europe and the whole civilized world is now blessed,
the abundance of capital in the money market, the present low rate of
interest, and the difficulty of finding investments, are all favorable
to the raising of the necessary funds; the immense strides which
science has made in overcoming natural difficulties, once deemed
insuperable, add to the means of accomplishment, while the growing
importance of British Colonies in and about New Zealand, the
inevitable impulse that recent events must give to the China trade,[2]
and the efforts of all maritime nations to make establishments in the
Polynesian Islands will render the Canal a certain source of profit
and honor to those who will aid in its formation.

Several parts of the Isthmus of America have been proposed for the
communication between the two seas, such as the Province of Nicaragua,
the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, &c.; but invincible obstacles occur in all
those localities, while on the contrary the Isthmus of Panama is
beyond doubt the most favorable point, according to the opinion of all
the scientific and practical men who have visited that part of the new
world.[3] We shall proceed, therefore, to describe that Isthmus as
far as is necessary for the present purpose.

The Isthmus of Panama[4] may be considered as extending from the
Meridian of 77 deg. to that of 81 deg. W. of Greenwich. Its breadth at the
narrowest point, opposite to the city of Panama, is about thirty
miles. The general feature of the Isthmus on the map is that of an
arc, or bow, the chord of which lies nearly east and west. It now
forms a province of the republic of New Granada.

It may appear strange, yet it is now well known to be the fact, that
although the small width of the Isthmus was ascertained soon after the
discovery of America, its natural features remained entirely unknown
for three hundred years. Robertson, in his History of America, states
that the Isthmus is traversed in all its length by a range of high
mountains, and it was reserved for our scientific countryman, Lloyd,
who surveyed the Isthmus in 1828 and 1829, by direction of Bolivar,
then president of the Republic of Colombia, to dispel the illusion.
From his observations, confirmed by more recent travellers, it is now
ascertained that the chain of the Andes terminates near Porto Bello to
the east of the Bay of Limon, otherwise called Navy Bay, and that the
Isthmus is, in this part, throughout its whole width, a flat country.
It was also long supposed that there was an enormous difference
between the rise and fall of the tide in the Pacific and Atlantic
Oceans on either side of the Isthmus, and that the opening of a
communication between the two seas would be productive of danger to a
large portion of the American continent. It is now, however,
ascertained that the difference of altitude is very trifling, not more
than thirteen feet at high water.[5] The prevalence of these errors
may have tended, in combination with Spanish jealousy, unhealthiness
of climate on the Atlantic side, the denseness of the forests, and the
unsettled state of the Government for some years after the Spanish
yoke was shaken off, to prevent the undertaking now proposed from
being seriously considered.

Panama is the principal city on the Isthmus. Its site has been once
changed. When the Spaniards first visited the Isthmus in 1512, the
spot on which the old city was afterwards built, was already occupied
by an Indian population, attracted by the abundance of fish on the
coast, and who are said to have named it "Panama" from this
circumstance, the word signifying much fish. They, however, were
speedily dispossessed; and even so early as 1521, the title and
privileges of a city were conferred on the Spanish town by the
emperor, Charles the Fifth. In the year 1670, it was sacked and
reduced to ashes by the buccaneer, Morgan, and was subsequently built
where it now stands.

The position of the present town of Panama is in latitude 8 deg. 57' N.;
longitude 79 deg. 30' W. of Greenwich, on a tongue of land, shaped nearly
like a spear head, extending a considerable distance out to sea, and
gradually swelling towards the middle. Its harbour is protected by a
number of islands, a short distance from the main land, some of which
are of considerable size, and highly cultivated.

There is good anchorage at each of these islands, and supplies of
ordinary kinds, including excellent water, which may be obtained from
several of them.[6]

The city of Panama was, in the 17th century, a place of great
importance, but has gradually sunk into comparative insignificance.
The policy of the present Government of New Granada is to restore this
city to its pristine importance, and for this reason, one terminus of
the intended Ship Canal should be at, or as near as conveniently may
be to, this position.

The natural obstacles to be overcome in forming a Canal between
Panama, and the _nearest point_ of the opposite coast, which is the
Gulph of San Blas (likewise called the Bay of Mandingo), render it
expedient to select a position west of that line, and the happy
coincidence of two navigable rivers, traversing the low lands to the
west of Porto Bello, the one falling into the Atlantic, and the other
into the Pacific Ocean, which may either form part of the navigation,
or be used to feed the Canal, renders that part of the Isthmus the
most eligible for this purpose. The rivers alluded to, are the
Chagres and the Rio Grande.

The town of Chagres, at the mouth of the river of the same name, is
about thirty-two miles west of Porto Bello (Puerto Velo); it is
situated on the north bank of the river, which falls into the
Caribbean Sea. The harbour formed by the mouth of the river having
been greatly neglected, has been much choked up; but it would be
unnecessary to incur the expense of improving it, for Navy Bay, called
also the Bay of Limon, lying immediately to the eastward of Chagres,
is a large and spacious harbour, being three miles wide at the mouth,
and having sufficient draught of water for the largest ships in the
British Navy. The river Chagres approaches within three miles of the
head of this Bay; the ground between is a dead level,[7] and all
writers agree that, the difficulties of the harbour being surmounted,
there is abundance of water in the Chagres. It is, therefore, proposed
either to cut a Canal from Navy Bay to the Chagres, and then to ascend
that river as far as its junction with the river Trinidad, and after
traversing a part of the latter, to construct a canal which shall
connect the Trinidad with the River Farfan, a branch of the Rio
Grande, and to proceed by that river to Panama; or should the Bay of
Chorrera, which is laid down in the plan, be deemed a preferable
harbour, to branch off to that bay; or to make the Canal across the
whole width of the isthmus, from the Bay of Limon to that of Panama,
using the rivers Trinidad, Farfan, and Bernardino, and other streams
which cross the line, for the supply of the Canal.

The plan annexed to this pamphlet will exhibit the two lines, and the
reader will perceive that a small Lake, called the Lake of Vino Tinto,
may, if the first proposal is adopted, be made available, and so
lessen the extent of the Canal. If the Rivers are used as a part of
the Navigation, the distance between that point of the River Trinidad
at which the Canal would commence, as shewn in the plan, and the point
where the Farfan ceases to be navigable, is only 25 miles, and there
is no high land intervening, the chain of the Andes terminating
several miles to the eastward of the valley of the Chagres, as before
mentioned. If the other plan be adopted, the length of the Canal will
be 58 miles.

Although at first sight it may appear to be a work of supererogation,
to carry the Canal over that part of the Isthmus which is traversed by
navigable rivers, it is by many engineers considered preferable in
forming a Canal, to use the rivers in its vicinity only for the
purpose of supplying the Canal with water, and not as a continuation
of the inland navigation, on account of the variation in the depth of
rivers from floods, or other accidents. Which of these two courses
would be most expedient in the present instance, may be safely left to
the determination of the engineer selected to carry out the
undertaking;--it is sufficient to know that _either is practicable_,
and that the expense of cutting the Canal the whole width of the
isthmus would meet with a corresponding return to the undertakers.

The principal difficulty anticipated in the execution of the work,
arises from the unhealthiness of the climate on the Atlantic side of
the isthmus--a difficulty to which the writer is by no means
insensible. It has, however, been exaggerated, and by proper
arrangements may be surmounted. The causes of this unhealthiness are
chiefly the swampy state of the ground on the Atlantic side of the
Isthmus (which the Canal itself, acting as a drain upon the
surrounding country, will greatly tend to remove), and the malaria
engendered by the closeness of the woods, and by the accumulation of
decayed vegetable substances, which the opening of the country,
incidental to the formation of the Canal now proposed, and the road
afterwards adverted to, will tend to alleviate; and after all, those
who have visited this part of the Isthmus, concur in stating that the
mortality in the low lands about Chagres is principally owing to the
imprudence of the Europeans visiting the country, in exposing
themselves to the night dews by sleeping in the open air, and
indulging in habits of intemperance.[8] If an association were formed
for carrying out the work now projected, one of the first cares of the
managers should be to erect huts or barracks for the protection of the
workmen against exposure to the weather, and the appointment of a
medical officer, who should be entrusted with sufficient powers to
ensure obedience to his regulations.

If the industry of the native population could be depended upon, there
would be no want of labourers inured to the climate, but the inertness
of the natives renders it inexpedient to rely upon them alone;
although, working in conjunction with Europeans, and stimulated by
their example, and by the love of gain, their services may, no doubt,
be made available. There is, however, no difficulty in collecting from
the Southern States of North America a sufficient number of Irish
labourers inured to a tropical climate, as was lately clearly shewn by
the formation of a railway at the Havanna, which was almost entirely
constructed by this class of men.

Any deficiency of labourers, it is considered, could easily be drawn
from the mining districts of Cornwall, from Ireland itself, or from
Scotland, or the North of England.

The next consideration is the expense of constructing a Ship Canal
across the Isthmus, and the probable returns. The estimates which have
been made, and of which the result is given below, suppose the Canal
to be cut through the whole width of the Isthmus, from the Bay of
Limon to that of Chorrera, and they include a large outlay for
improving the harbours formed by the two bays.

The first item that would occur in an undertaking of the same nature
_in this country_, would be the purchase of the land. Here a great
advantage presents itself in the present enterprise; for the
Government of New Granada, fully appreciating the permanent
advantages to be derived to the state from the execution of a work,
which it is unequal to accomplish by its own resources, has repeatedly
offered to grant the land required, for 60, 70, or 80 years, according
to the magnitude of the works, free of rent, or burdens of any kind,
and to admit the importation, free of duty, of all materials and
provisions necessary for the undertaking.


EXPENSES.

  The expenses of cutting the Canal,
  and of the direction and management of
  a Company constituted for that purpose,
  up to the period of the opening of the
  Canal have been estimated at[9]                    L1,713,177

  But if it be deemed expedient to raise
  two millions, in order to provide for any
  unforseen casualties, the difference will
  be                                                    286,823
                                                     ----------
      Total outlay                                   L2,000,000


RETURNS.

From information derived from official sources in England, France, and
the United States of America, it is estimated that the tonnage of
vessels belonging to those countries and to Holland, trading in
countries to which the Canal through the Isthmus will be the shortest
voyage, amount to 799,427 tons per annum; and there can be no doubt
that the opening of the Canal would create a great extension of trade
to the South Seas, as well as induce the owners of many of the vessels
now using the navigation by the Cape of Good Hope to prefer the
shorter voyage through the Isthmus; and when we add to this
consideration, the fact that the above calculations do not include the
vessels belonging to Spain, Sardinia, the Hanse Towns, and other
nations of minor importance as maritime powers, but possessing in the
aggregate a trade not altogether inconsiderable, nor the traffic that
may be expected to flow to the Pacific from the West Indies, the
British Colonies in North America, and the countries on the north east
coast of South America, the tonnage of vessels that will be attracted
to the Canal may be fairly estimated at 800,000 tons.

  A tonnage duty of $2 per ton, on
  800,000 tons will produce $1,600,000,
  equal, at 4s. 2d., to                                L333,333

  Allowing a deduction for the annual
  expenses of a sum much larger than will
  probably be required, say                              40,000
                                                       --------
  There will remain a Balance of annual
  profit of                                            L293,333

This in turn will give upwards of 14-1/2 per cent. profit on the above
outlay of L2,000,000.

The Isthmus has recently been surveyed by M. Garella, an eminent
French Engineer, whose opinions will be found in the extract from the
_Moniteur_, contained in the Appendix. He was employed to make the
survey by the French Government, and his official Report has not yet
been made public. He differs in several material points from M. Morel,
another French gentleman, who is stated to have lately surveyed the
Isthmus;[10] but if the formation of a canal should be undertaken by
an English company, the parties engaged in the enterprize would
doubtless be guided by the English engineer whom they would employ, in
the selection of the most eligible line, while the labours of his
predecessors would greatly aid him in his survey.

As subservient to the grand project of a Ship Canal, an improved road
across the Isthmus has been projected. The abundance of hard wood to
be found on the spot, would furnish a cheap material for converting it
into a tram-road. The expense has been estimated by French engineers
at L40,000 sterling, and the returns, even according to the present
transit of goods and passengers across the Isthmus by the miserable
road now existing from Cruces to Panama, would, at a very moderate
toll, be enormous on that outlay.




APPENDIX.


The following Extracts from Authors who have treated of the Isthmus of
Panama will tend to illustrate the subject of the foregoing pages.


_Dampier, (1681)._

"Panama enjoys a good air, lying open to the sea-wind. There are no
woods nor marshes near Panama, but a brave dry champaign land, not
subject to fogs nor mists."


_Humboldt, (1803)._

"It appears that we find a prolongation of the Andes towards the South
Sea, between Cruces and Panama. However, Lionel Wafer assures us that
the hills which form the central chain, are separated from one another
by valleys, which allow free course for passage of the rivers; if this
last assertion be founded, we might believe in the possibility of a
canal from Cruces to Panama, of which the navigation would only be
interrupted by a very few locks."


_The Edinburgh Review, for Jan. 1809, Art. II. page 282._

"In enumerating, however, the advantages of a commercial nature which
would assuredly spring from the emancipation of South America, we have
not yet noticed the greatest, perhaps, of all,--the mightiest event
probably in favor of the peaceful intercourse of nations which the
physical circumstances of the globe present to the enterprise of
man,--we mean the formation of a navigable passage across the Isthmus
of Panama, the junction of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. It is
remarkable that this magnificent undertaking, pregnant with
consequences so important to mankind, and about which so little is
known in this country, is so far from being a romantic or chimerical
project, that, it is not only practicable but easy. The River Chagres,
which falls into the Atlantic at the town of the same name, about 18
leagues to the westward of Porto Bello is navigable as far as Cruces,
within five leagues of Panama; but though the formation of a Canal
from this place to Panama, facilitated by the valleys through which
the present road passes, appears to present no very formidable
obstacles, there is still a better expedient. At the distance of about
five leagues from the mouth of the Chagres it receives the river
Trinidad, which is navigable to Embarcadero; and from that place to
Panama is a distance of about 30 miles, through a level country, with
a fine river,[11] to supply water for the Canal, and no difficulty
whatever to counteract the noble undertaking. The ground has been
surveyed, and not the practicability only, but the facility of the
work completely ascertained. In the next place, the important
requisite of safe harbours, at the two extremities of a Canal, is here
supplied to the extent of our utmost wishes. At the mouth of the
Chagres is a fine Bay, which received the British 74 gun-ships in
1740, and at the other extremity is the famous harbour of Panama."


_J. A. Lloyd, F. R. S._

"It is generally supposed in Europe that the great chain of mountains,
which in South America forms the Andes, and in North America the
Mexican and Rocky Mountains, continues nearly unbroken through the
Isthmus. This, however, is not the case: the Northern Cordillera
breaks into detached mountains on the eastern side of the province of
Veragua. These are of considerable height, extremely abrupt and
rugged, and frequently exhibit an almost perpendicular face of bare
rock. To these succeed numerous conical mountains rising out of
Savannahs and plains, and seldom exceeding from 300 to 500 feet in
height. Finally between Chagres on the Atlantic side, and Chorrera on
the Pacific side, the conical mountains are not so numerous, having
plains of great extent interspersed, with occasional insulated ranges
of hills of inconsiderable height and extent. From this description it
will be seen that the spot where the continent of America is reduced
to nearly its narrowest limits, is also distinguished by a break for a
few miles of the Great chain of Mountains, which otherwise extends,
with but few exceptions, to its extreme northern and southern limits.
_This combination of circumstances points out the peculiar fitness of
the Isthmus of Panama for the establishment of a communication
across._"

              _Philosophical Transactions, 1830, Part I., p. 65._


"Should a time arrive when a project of a water communication across
the Isthmus may be entertained, the river Trinidad will probably
appear the most favourable route. The river is for some distance both
broad and deep. Its banks are also well suited for wharfs."

                       _Philosophical Transactions, ibid, p. 66._


"The river, its channel, and the banks, which, in the dry season,
embarrass its navigation, are laid down in the manuscript plan with
great care and minuteness. It is subject to one great inconvenience,
that vessels drawing more than 12 feet water, cannot enter the river,
even in perfectly calm weather, on account of a stratum of slaty
limestone, which runs at a depth at high water of fifteen feet, from a
point on the main land to some rocks in the middle of the entrance of
the harbour, and which are just even with the water's edge; which,
together with the lee current that sets on the southern shore,
particularly in the rainy season, renders the entrance extremely
difficult and dangerous....

"The value of the Chagres, considered as the port of entrance for
all communications, whether by the river Chagres, Trinidad, or
by railroads across the plains, is greatly limited from the
above mentioned cause. It would prove in all cases a serious
disqualification, _were it not one which admits of a simple and
effectual remedy, arising from the proximity of the Bay of Limon_,
otherwise called Navy Bay, with which the river might easily be
connected. The coves of this bay afford excellent and secure anchorage
in its present state, and the whole harbour is capable of being
rendered, by obvious and not very expensive means, one of the most
commodious and safe harbours in the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

"By the good offices of H. M. Consul in Panama,[12] and the kindness
of the Commander of H. M. Ship Victor, I obtained the use of that ship
and her boats in making the accompanying plan of this bay.... The
soundings were taken by myself, with the assistance of the master. It
will be seen from this plan, that the distance from one of the best
coves (in respect to anchorage), across the separating country from
the Chagres, and in the most convenient track, is something less than
three miles to a point in the river about three miles from its mouth.
I have traversed the intervening land which is particularly level, and
in all respects suitable for a canal, which, being required for so
short a distance, might well be of sufficient depth to admit vessels
of any reasonable draft of water, and would obviate the inconvenience
of the shallow water at the entrance of the Chagres."

                                                   _Ibid, p. 68._


_Extract from the Moniteur Parisien of Monday, October 14, 1844._

"Some of the public papers in announcing the return of M. Garella to
Paris, have asserted that the surveys made by that Engineer on the
Isthmus of Panama have led him to conclude that the formation of a
canal in that Country which should unite the two oceans is impossible.
This assertion is completely erroneous. The Report that this Engineer
intends to lay before the Ministers is not yet completed; but the
principal results of his voyage are already known, and which far from
having established the impossibility of the execution of the projected
work, prove on the contrary that the soil of this portion of the
Isthmus is not such as to threaten any serious obstruction to the
performance of a work of the kind.

"The line which has been explored by M. Garella, seems to be about 76
kilometres (46-1/2 miles) in length. Its point of termination upon the
side of the Atlantic is in the Bay of Limon (Puerto de Naos) situated
a little east of the mouth of the Rio Chagres, and already indicated
five years ago by Mr. Lloyd, where there is a depth of water of 10
metres (35 ft. 5 in.), and where it will be easy to form an excellent
port at a small expense. By this means may be avoided the village of
Chagres, situated at the month of the river of that name, but of
which the real unhealthiness has been so much exaggerated, as to
create an unfounded alarm among too many travellers. On the Pacific
Ocean the Canal should terminate at a little bay named Ensenada de
Voca de Monte, situated between Panama and the mouth of the Caimito,
where there is four metres (13 ft. 1 in.) depth of water at low tide,
which, with 3 metres 20 centimetres (10-1/2 ft.), which represent the
difference at high tide, gives a sufficient depth of water for the
largest merchant ships.

"The rigidly exact levellings which have been taken by M. Garella,
establish that the mean level of the Pacific Ocean is two metres 80
centimetres (9 ft. 2 in.) higher than that of the Atlantic, and that
the minimum point of the chain to overcome, which will be the most
elevated point of the line of the work, is 120 metres (131 yards[13])
above the height of the sea at Panama. The surveys which have been
made, prove at the same time that the height may be reduced to 90
metres (90 yards and a half) by a trench from four to five kilometres
(between two and three miles) in length, which, although considerable,
has nothing discouraging, considering the powers which science puts at
the disposal of the engineer. This height will render it necessary to
form 30 locks at each of the declivities.

"M. Garella is convinced, as much by his own observations, as by the
information that he has been able to obtain upon the spot, that all
that has been said of the unhealthiness of the Isthmus has been
exaggerated. Panama is, of all the towns upon the coast of America
which are situated between the Tropics, the most healthy, and perhaps
the only town where the yellow fever has never appeared. The interior
of the Isthmus, through which water courses find a rapid passage, is
equally healthy, and is inhabited by a robust and hospitable
population, which, although thinly spread over a large tract of
country, as in almost all the countries of Central and South America,
together with that of the neighbouring countries, may amply supply the
labourers necessary for the work, in case of its execution. Chagres is
the only point where the climate has any degree of unhealthiness,
owing to pure local circumstances; but this point will be avoided by
the line contemplated by M. Garella. Then in the unhealthiness of the
climate there is nothing to be dreaded for such artizans as masons and
carpenters, whom it would be necessary to send out from Europe.

"On the other hand the soil is of wonderful fertility. The cattle, far
from being scarce in that part are, on the contrary, abundant,
especially in the Canton of Chiriqui, on the Pacific Ocean, a little
to the west of Panama. There will, therefore, be easily found within
the country the means of provisioning a large number of workmen.

"The exact estimate of the expense attending the formation of a Canal
at Panama cannot be known until the report of M. Garella shall be
completed. But the foregoing explanations are of sufficient weight, as
a decided result of his surveys, to enable us to see that, against the
undeniable utility of a Canal that should be of sufficient dimensions
to allow the passage of the largest merchants' ships, we can hardly
place in the balance the consideration of any expenses whatsoever, nor
question the long series and increasing importance of the advantages
which must arise from it."

       *       *       *       *       *

By way of summary: the opinion of this engineer on the possibility of
the formation of the Canal in question, is contained in the following
lines of a letter addressed by him to the Governor of Panama, dated
the 7th July, 1844, and a few days before his departure from that
country, translated from the "_Cartilla Popular_," a public paper
published at Panama, and written in Spanish.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am nevertheless partly able to satisfy your just and natural
impatience, in announcing to you that a Canal across the Isthmus
between the river Chagres, and a point of the coast of the Pacific
Ocean, in the environs of Panama, is a work of very possible
execution, and even easier than that of many Canals which have been
formed in Europe."


_M. Morel._

The author has been furnished with the following summary of the
opinions of M. Morel, who has been a resident for some years at
Panama. M. Morel is stated to have surveyed the whole line of country
destined to be appropriated to a road, as well as the ground through
which a Canal might be opened, and as the result of his surveys and
observations, he is reported to state--

1. That the width of the Isthmus of Panama, in _a direct line_, does
not exceed 33 miles.

2. That the chain of mountains which incloses the country terminates
precisely between Chagres and Panama, and forms a valley, which is
crossed in all directions by numerous streams.

3. That besides those streams, four rivers of more importance, the
Chagres and Trinidad, which flow into the Atlantic, and the Farfan and
Rio Grande, which discharge themselves into the Pacific, in the
immediate vicinity of Panama, can be made available.

4. That the soundings of the River Chagres show its depth to be from
16-1/2 to 22 feet, to its junction with the river Trinidad, the tide
being felt for four miles up the last named river. The breadth of the
Chagres is 220 feet from its mouth to the Trinidad.

5. That it becomes only necessary to unite these rivers by a Canal,
the length of which would not exceed 25 miles, and which would be
abundantly supplied by the numerous streams already mentioned.

6. That the land through which this Canal is to pass, is almost on a
level with the sea, the highest point being 36 feet, thus presenting
none of those serious difficulties which generally attend a work of
this description.[14]

7. That the country abounds with the necessary materials for building,
such as free-stone, clay, lime, and wood.

8. That there can exist no fear of a scarcity of labourers and
workmen, from the number who have already been enrolled by the
government of New Granada, which amounts to 4000 and upwards.

9. That the objection which has often been started against the
possibility of forming a water communication across the Isthmus of
Panama, founded on the difference supposed to exist between the levels
of the two seas, is totally at variance with the natural state of
things, the tides rising to different heights at Chagres and at
Panama, thus placing the Pacific sometimes above, and sometimes below
the Atlantic.

Lastly, M. Morel remarks, that Baron de Humboldt, the celebrated
Geographer, M. Arago, the eminent Astronomer, F.R.S., and Commander
Garnier, of the French Brig of War, "Le Laurier," have proved that if
there be any inequality of height, the average difference of level
cannot exceed one metre (about one yard English).




POSTSCRIPT.


Since the foregoing pamphlet was in print, an Article has appeared in
the Morning Chronicle of the 16th May, 1845, in which it is alleged,
upon the authority of an Article in the _Journal des Debats_, that M.
Garella has given in his Report to the French Government, and that he
reports in favour of the practicability of the scheme, but that he
found the lowest elevation between the two oceans to amount to, from
120 to 160 metres, and that this being, as he says, too great an
elevation for a Ship Canal, he proposes an enormous Tunnel capable of
allowing Frigates to pass through--that he thinks from examination of
the soil, that a Tunnel of 100 feet in height above the surface of the
Canal will be practicable, and might be made with a reasonable outlay
of money; and that the length of the Tunnel would be 5,350 metres, and
the expense of it about 44 millions of francs (L1,760,000).

It is impossible to read this statement without feeling a strong
suspicion that, for some object which does not appear, it is the wish
of the French Government, or those who have put the statement forth,
to deter others from embarking in the formation of a Canal across the
Isthmus of Panama; for the recommendation of a Tunnel of 5,350 metres
(about three miles) in length, and 100 feet in height, is not only
preposterous in itself, as applied to a Ship Canal, but is wholly at
variance with M. Garella's own letter to the Governor of Panama (ante
p. 26), and with the statement of his opinions in the Article in the
_Moniteur Parisien_ (ante p. 23), which Article is believed to have
been written by himself. It is true that M. Garella, being a Mining
Engineer (_Ingenieur des Mines_) may have a partiality for
subterraneous works; and this refection provokes the observation, that
it is singular that the French Government should have selected, for
this very important survey, an Engineer of Mines (however eminent in
his department), rather than one experienced in the formation of
Canals, when it had so many of the latter at command.

It is difficult to conceive that the writer of the letter to the
Governor of Panama, and of the Article in the _Moniteur Parisien_ can
be sincere in recommending a Tunnel; and the conclusion is
irresistible, that if the Article in the _Debats_ has any foundation
in the forthcoming Report, it is a stroke of policy on the part of the
French Government, to discourage an undertaking which its own subjects
have not sufficient enterprize to accomplish, and which it would
object to see executed by other nations.

In the present state of the question, it may not be immaterial to
remark, that on a comparison lately made by an English Engineer of Mr.
Lloyd's levels, with the survey alleged to have been made by M. Morel
(the accuracy of which is necessarily impugned by M. Garella, if he
asserts that an elevation of 120 metres must be overcome), it appears
that the levels ascribed to M. Morel, very nearly agree with those of
Mr. Lloyd, and are substantially corroborated by his survey.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The reader will remember that to discover a more direct passage to
India than the voyage round Africa, which the Portuguese were then
exploring, was the object of Columbus' voyage which led to the
discovery of America, and the present proposal is to realize the
project of that great navigator. The name of "Indies" was given to his
discoveries, under a belief that he had actually reached India, a name
still preserved in our "West Indies."--_Robertson's America_, book
ii., vol. i, pp. 70 and 124-5, (edit. of 1821). It may well excite
astonishment that more than three centuries should have been allowed
to elapse before the full accomplishment of this great man's
undertaking.

[2] The intelligent observer of passing events will not fail to see in
the "signs of the times" indications that the day is not far distant
when the important Empire of Japan will follow the example of China,
and throw open its harbours to European commerce--a consummation
devoutly to be wished--and which the present expedition to those
shores, under the command of Sir Edward Belcher, is likely to
accelerate.

A more immediate development of commercial enterprise cannot fail to
result from the opening of a Ship Canal through the Isthmus of Panama;
viz., _a direct trade_ between the West India Islands, English,
French, and Spanish, and the countries which have been named. From
this consideration, the West India proprietors and merchants, whose
property in those colonies has been of late years so much depreciated,
are deeply interested in the success of this undertaking.

[3] The opinions of writers who have visited the locality, will be
found in the Appendix. To those of Mr. Lloyd, who was sent by Bolivar
to survey the Isthmus in 1827, in particular, great weight is due.

[4] It was formerly called the Isthmus of Darien, but that name has
fallen into disuse among all persons who have any intercourse with
that part of the globe, though still preserved in some of the atlases.

[5] J. A. Lloyd, F. R. S., Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London, 1830, Part I. pp. 62, 63.

[6] J. A. Lloyd, F. R. S., Geographical Society's Transactions, vol.
I.

[7] J. A. Lloyd. See Appendix.

[8] The writer has conferred with several gentlemen who have visited
the Isthmus, and who agree in this opinion.

[9] It may be here stated that the Caledonian Canal, and the Canal
from Amsterdam to Niewdiep, the two most expensive Ship Canals which
have been made in Europe (and which approximate in magnitude the Canal
now projected), were formed at a much less expense per mile than has
been allowed in this estimate.

[10] See Appendix, page 26.

[11] Probably the Farfan.

[12] Malcolm MacGregor, Esq.

[13] The Canal of Languedoc is at its highest point 600 feet above the
level of the sea.--_M'Culloch's Commercial Dict., Art. Canals._

[14] It may be possible to reconcile the apparent contradiction
between the fact here stated by M. Morel, and the report of M.
Garella, by mentioning that the latter suggests the propriety of
carrying the Canal over a hill 120 yards high, and thus shortening its
length, rather than to adopt M. Morel's line of survey along the flat
and low lands, which is the longest of the two.


THE END.


W. LEWIS AND SON, PRINTERS, 21, FINCH-LANE, LONDON.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

The transcriber made these changes to the text to correct obvious
errors:

 1. p. 21, propably --> probably
 2. p. 29, impunged --> impugned





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Succinct View of the Importance and
Practicability of Forming a Ship Canal across the Isthmus of Panama, by H. R. Hill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FORMING A SHIP CANAL ***

***** This file should be named 29269.txt or 29269.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/2/6/29269/

Produced by Adrian Mastronardi, Richard J. Shiffer and The
Philatelic Digital Library Project at http://www.tpdlp.net
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
