The Project Gutenberg EBook of Among the Brigands, by James de Mille

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Among the Brigands

Author: James de Mille

Release Date: July 3, 2009 [EBook #29297]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMONG THE BRIGANDS ***




Produced by Gardner Buchanan








Among the Brigands

By Prof. James de Mille




H. M. Caldwell Company
Publishers
New York and Boston


Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1871, by Lee
and Shepard in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.



Among the Brigands



CONTENTS



CHAPTER I.

Stranger in a strange Land.--A Citadel of Trunks.--Besieged.--Retreat
in good Order.--A most tremendous Uproar.--Kicks! Thumps!--Smash
of Chairs!--Crash of Tables!--A general Row!--The Cry for Help!--The
Voice of David!--The Revelation of the Darkness!--The fiery Eyes!--The
Unseen!--The Revelation of the Mystery.--A general Flight.

CHAPTER II.

How in the World did it get there?--A joyous Ride.--Hark! Hark!
The Dogs-do bark! Beggars come to Town; some in Rags, some in Tags,
and some in a tattered Gown!--A pleasant Meditation on a classic
Past very rudely, unexpectedly, tad even savagely interrupted, and
likely to terminate in a Tragedy!--Perilous Position of David and
Clive.

CHAPTER III.

Out into the Country.--The Drive.--The glorious Land.--Sorrento
and eternal Summer.--The Cave of Polyphemus.--The Cathedral--The
mysterious Image.--What is it?--David Relic-hunting.--A
Catastrophe.--Chased by a Virago.--The Town roused.--Besieged.--A
desperate Onset--Flight--Last of the Virago.

CHAPTER IV.

Salerno and the sulky Driver.--Paestum and its Temples.--A great
Sensation.--An unpleasant Predicament--Is the Driver a Traitor?--Is
he in League--with Bandits?--Arguments about the Situation, and
what each thought about it.

CHAPTER V.

They discuss the Situation.--They prepare to foot it--A toilsome
Walk, and a happy Discovery.--The Language of Signs once more.--The
Mountain Cavalcade.--Bob's Ambition.--Its results.--Bob
vanishes.--Consternation of the Donkey Boy.--Consternation of the
Cavalcade.--"E Perduto!".

CHAPTER VI.

Flight of Both--Difference between a tame Donkey and a wild
Ass.--Carried off to the Mountains.--The headlong Course.--The
Mountain Pass.--The Journey's End.--Ill-omened Place.--Confounded
by a new Terror.--The Brigands.

CHAPTER VII.

The Lurking-place of the Brigands.--The captive Boy.--The hideous
Household.--The horrible old Hag.--The slattern Woman.--The dirty
Children.--The old Crone and the evil Eye.--Despondency of Bob.
--Is Escape possible?--Night.--Imprisoned.--The Bed of Straw.
--Outlook into the Night from the Prison Windows.

CHAPTER VIII.

The worn-out Captive.--Light Slumbers.--Fearful Wakening.--The
stealthy Step.--The overmastering Horror.--The lone Boy confronted
by his Enemy.--The hungry Eyes.--Is it real, or a Nightmare?--The
supreme Moment.

CHAPTER IX.

The Cavalcade in Pursuit--Hopes and Fears.--Theories about the lost
Boy.--A new Turn to Affairs.--Explanations.--On to
Salerno.--Inquiries.--Baffled.--Fresh Consternation and
Despondency.--The last Hope.

CHAPTER X.

The captive Boy and his grisly Visitant--The Hand on his
Head.-Denouement.--The Brigand Family.--The old Crone.--The Robber
Wife.--The Brigand Children.--A Revolution of Feeling.--The main
Road.--The Carriage.--In Search of Bob.

CHAPTER XI.

The Return.--The tender Adieus.--Back to Salerno.--On to
Castellamare.--A pleasant Scene.--An unpleasant Discovery.--David
among the Missing.--Woes of Uncle Moses.--Deliberations over the
Situation.--Various Theories.--The Vengeance of the Enemy.--Back
to Sorrento in Search of the lost One.

CHAPTER XII.

The Waking of David.--A glorious Scene.--A Temptation.--David
embarks upon the wide, wide Sea.--Youth at the Prow and Pleasure
at the Helm.--A daring Navigator.--A baffled and confounded
Navigator.--Lost! Lost! Lost!--Despair of David.--At the Mercy
of Wind and Sea.--The Isle of the Brigands.--The Brigand Chief.

CHAPTER XIII.

David captured.--The big, bluff, burly, brusque, bearded,
broad-shouldered, beetle-browed Bully of a Brigand.--A terrific
Inquisition.--David's Plea for Mercy.--The hard-hearted Captor and
the trembling Captive.--A direful Threat--David carried off helpless
and despairing.--The Robber's Hold.

CHAPTER XIV.

On the Way to Sorrento again.--A mournful Ride.--A despairing
Search.--A fearful Discovery.--The old Virago again.--In a
Trap.--Sorrento aroused.--Besieged.--All lost--A raging Crowd.--The
howling Hag.--Harried Consultation.--The last forlorn Hope.--Disguise,
Flight, and Concealment.

CHAPTER XV.

In the Robber's Hold.--The Brigand's Bride.--Sudden, amazing,
overwhelming, bewildering, tremendous, astounding, overpowering,
and crashing Discovery.--The Situation.--Everybody confounded.--The
Crowd at Sorrento.--The Landlord's Prayers.--The Virago calls for
Vengeance.

CHAPTER XVI.

More Troubles for poor David.--Onset of four Women.--Seized by
an old Crone and three Peasant Girls.--Fresh Horror of David.--A
new Uproar in the Yard of the Inn.--Uncle Moses bent double.

CHAPTER XVII.

Vesuvius.--Ponies and Sticks.--Sand and Lava.--The rocky Steps.--The
rolling, wrathful, Smoke-clouds.--The Volcano warns them off.--The
lost Boy.--A fearful Search.--A desperate Effort.--The sulphurous
Vapors.--Over die sliding Sands.

CHAPTER XVIII.

Pompeii, the City of the Dead.--The Monuments of the Past.--Temples,
Towers, and Palaces.--Tombs and Monuments.--Theatres and
Amphitheatres.--Streets and Squares.

CHAPTER XIX.

Lofty classical Enthusiasm of David, and painful Lack of Feeling
on the Part of Frank.--David, red-hot with the Flow of the Past,
is suddenly confronted with the Present.--The Present dashes cold
Water upon his glowing Enthusiasm.--The Gates.--Minos, Aeacus, and
Rhadamanthus.--The Culprits.

CHAPTER XX.

The Glories of Naples.--The Museum.--The Curiosities.--How they
unroll the charred Manuscripts exhumed from Herculaneum and
Pompeii.--On to Rome.--Capua.--The Tomb of Cicero.--Terracina.
--The Pontine Marshes.--The Appii Forum.

CHAPTER XXI.

The Pontine Marshes.--A Change comes over the Party.--The foul
Exhalations.--The Sleep of Death.--Dreadful Accident.--Despair
of Frank.--A Breakdown.--Ingenuity of the Driver.--Resumption of
the Journey.

CHAPTER XXII.

The March ended.--A lonely Inn.--Evil Faces.--Beetling
Brows.--Sinister Glances.--Suspicions of the Party.--They put their
Heads together.--Conferences of the Party.--A threatening
Prospect--Barricades.--In Time of Peace prepare for War.--The
Garrison arm themselves.

CHAPTER XXIII.

The sleepless Watch.--The mysterious Steps.--The low Whispers.--They
come! They come!--The Garrison roused.--To Arms! To Arms!--The
beleaguered Party.--At Bay.--The decisive Moment--The Scaling
Ladders.--Onset of the Brigands.--End of Troubles.

CHAPTER XXIV.

A beautiful Country.--Magnificent Scenery.--The Approach to
Albano.--Enthusiasm of the Boys.--Archaeology versus Appetite.--The
Separation of the Boys.--The Story of the Alban Lake and the ancient
subterranean.

CHAPTER XXV.

The lonely Path.--The sequestered Vale.--The old House.--A feudal
Castle.--A baronial Windmill.--A mysterious Sound.--A terrible
Discovery.--At Bay.--The wild Beast's Lair!--What is it?--A great
Bore.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Despair of Uncle Moses.--Frank and Bob endeavor to offer
Consolation.--The Search.--The Discovery at the Convent--The
Guide.--The old House.--The Captives.--The Alarm given.--Flight
of Uncle Moses and his Party.--Albans! to the Rescue!--The delivering
Host!

CHAPTER XXVII.

Arma Virumque cano!--The Chase of the wild Boar!--The Prisoners
at the Window.--The Alban Army.--Wild Uproar.--Three hundred and
sixty-five Pocket Handkerchiefs.--Flame.--Smoking out the Monster.--A
Salamander.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

The Salamander inaccessible to Fire.--The last Appeal--Frank takes
Action.--He fires.--Casualty to Frank and Bob.--Onset of the
Monster.--Flight.--Tremendous Sensation.--The Guide's
Story.--Another Legend of Albano.--On to Rome.



THE YOUNG DODGE CLUB.



AMONG THE BRIGANDS.




CHAPTER I.

_Stranger in a strange Land.--A Citadel of Trunks.--Besieged.--Retreat
in good Order.--A most tremendous Uproar.--Kicks! Thumps!--Smash of
Chain!--Crash of Tables!--A general Row!--The Cry for Help!--The
Voice of David!--The Revelation of the Darkness!--The fiery Eyes!--The
Unseen!--The Revelation of the Mystery.--A general Fight._


Mr. Moses V. Sprole had passed the greater part of his life in his
native village, and being anxious to see the world, resolved upon
a tour in Europe. As he did not care to go alone, he offered to
take with him his four nephews, who were great favorites with their
bachelor uncle, and his chief associates. This offer met with an
eager response from the boys, and a willing assent from their
parents, who fully believed that a tour of this description would
be of immense benefit to them. This brief explanation will serve
to account for the appearance of Uncle Moses in Naples, where he
landed on a mellow day in February, _en route_ for Switzerland,
bowed down with the responsibility of several heavy trunks, and
the still heavier responsibility of four fine lumps of boys, of
whose troubles, trials, tribulations, and manifold adventures, he
seemed, on the present occasion, to have a mournful presentiment.

These troubles began at once; for scarcely had they landed when
they found themselves surrounded by the lazzaroni, and the air was
filled with a babel of exclamations.

"_Signori!_" "_Signo!_" "_Moosoo!_" "_Meestaire!_" "_Sare!_" "_Carra
ze baggage!_" "_Tek ze loggage!_" "_Show ze hotel!_" "_Hotel della
Europa!_" "_Hotel dell' Inghelterra!_" "_Hotel dell' America!_"
"_Eccelenza, you wanta good, naisy, rosbif, you comma longsida
me!_" "_Come long!_" "_Hurrah!_" "_Bravo!_" "_O, yais._" "_Ver
nais._" "_O, yais. You know me. American Meestaire!_"

All this, and ever so much more, together with scraps of French,
German, Bohemian, Hungarian, Russian, and several other languages
which the lazzaroni had picked up for the purpose of making themselves
agreeable to foreigners. They surrounded Uncle Moses and his four
boys in a dense crowd--grinning, chattering, gesticulating, dancing,
pushing, jumping, and grimacing, as only Neapolitan lazzaroni can;
and they tried to get hold of the luggage that lay upon the wharf.

Bagged, hatless, shirtless, blessed with but one pair of trousers
per man; bearded, dirty, noisy; yet fat and good-natured withal;
the lazzaroni produced a startling effect upon the newly arrived
travellers.

Uncle Moses soon grew utterly bewildered by the noise and disorder.
One idea, however, was prominent in his mind, and that was his
luggage. He had heard of Italian brigands. At the sight of this
crowd, all that he had beard on that subject came back before him.
"Rinaldo Rinaldini," a charming brigand book, which had been the
delight of his childhood, now stood out clear in his recollection.
The lazzaroni seemed to be a crowd of bandits, filled with but one
purpose, and that was to seize the luggage. The efforts of the
lazzaroni to get the trunks roused him to action. Springing forward,
he struck their hands away with a formidable cotton umbrella, and
drew the trunks together in a pile. Three lay in a row, and one
was on the top of these. The pile was a small pyramid.

"Here, boys," he cried; "you keep by me, Don't let these varmints
get the trunks. Sit down on 'em, and keep 'em off."

Saying this, Uncle Moses put the two Clark boys on a trunk on one
side, and the two Wilmot boys on a trunk on the other; and mounting
himself upon the middle trunk, he sat down and glared defiantly at
the enemy.

This action was greeted by the lazzaroni with a burst of laughter
and a shout of,--

"Br-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-ra-vo!"

To which Uncle Moses and the boys made no reply. In fact, it would
have been a little difficult for them to do so, as not one of them
understood a word of any language spoken among men except their
own. So they said nothing; but constituting themselves into a
beleaguered garrison, they intrenched themselves within their
citadel, and bade defiance to the foe.

The foe, on the other hand, pressed round them, bombarding the
garrison with broken English, broken French, and broken German,
and sometimes made an assault upon the trunks.

Time passed on, and the garrison sat there, holding their own. At
length they all became aware of the fact that they were excessively
hungry. It was very evident that this kind of thing could not last
much longer.

Meanwhile Uncle Moses had recovered his presence of mind. He was
naturally cool and self-possessed, and after mounting the trunks,
and gathering the boys about him, he quickly rallied from his
confusion, and looked eagerly around to find some way by which he
might be extricated from his difficulty.

At last a way appeared.

Around him, in his immediate neighborhood, stood the lazzaroni, as
urgent, as patient, and as aggressive as ever, with their offers
of assistance. Beyond these were people passing up and down the
wharf, all of whom were foreigners, and therefore inaccessible.
Beyond these again was a wide space, and in the distance a busy
street, with carriages driving to and fro.

Uncle Moses looked for a long time, hoping to see something like
a cab. In vain. They all seemed to him to be "one-hoss shays," and
what was worse, all seemed to be filled.

"Boys," said he at last, "I'm goin' to make a move. You jest sit
here, and hold on to the trunks. I'll go an hunt up one of them
one-hoss shays. There ain't nothin' else that I can do. Hold on
now, hard and fast, till I come back."

With these words off went Uncle Moses, and the boys remained behind,
waiting.

A very fine-looking set of boys they were too.

There was Frank Wilmot, about fifteen years of age, tall, stout,
with fine, frank face, and crisp, curly hair.

There was Clive Wilmot, about fourteen, tall and slight, with large
eyes and dark hair.

There was David Clark, about Frank's age, rather pale, with serious
face, and quiet, thoughtful manner.

And there was Robert, or, as he was always called, Bob Clark--an
odd-looking boy, with a bullet head, pug nose, comical face, brown
eyes, and short shingled hair.

Uncle Moses was not gone long. By some wonderful means or other he
had succeeded in procuring a vehicle of that kind which is universal
in this city, and he now reappeared to the delighted boys, coming
at a tearing pace towards them, seated in a Neapolitan caleche.

The Neapolitan caleche is a wonderful machine, quite unequalled
among wheeled vehicles. The wheels are far back, the shafts are
long, and horse draws it. But in the caleche it is a very common
thing for any quantity of people to pile themselves. There is a
seat for two, which is generally occupied by the most, worthy,
perhaps; but all around them cluster others,--behind them, before
them, and on each side of them,--clinging to the shafts, standing
on the axle, hanging on the springs. Indeed, I have heard of babies
being slung underneath, in baskets; but I don't believe that.

At any rate, Uncle Moses and his party all tumbled in triumphantly.
Two trunks were put in front, one behind, and one suspended
underneath. David and Clive sat behind, Frank and Uncle Moses on
the seat, while Bob sat on the trunk in front, with the driver.
The lazzaroni looked on with mournful faces, but still proffered
their services. In patient perseverance few people can equal them.

The driver saw at once the purpose of the Americans, though they
could not tell him what they wanted. So he drove them to a hotel
in the Strada Toledo, where he left them, after having been paid
by Uncle Moses the largest fare he had ever received in his life;
for Uncle Moses gave him about five dollars, and felt grateful to
him besides.

Their apartments were very nice rooms in the sixth story. The hotel
was a quadrangular edifice, with a spacious court-yard. Around this
court-yard ran galleries, opening into each story, and communicating
with one another by stairways, which were used by all the occupants
of the house.

From the gallery in the sixth story a door opened into their parlor.
On the left side of this was a snug bedroom, of which Uncle Moses
took possession; on the right side was another, which was appropriated
by David and Clive; while the third, which was on the other side,
and looked out into the street, was taken by Frank and Bob.

Thus the four boys paired off, and made themselves very comfortable..

That night they all went to bed early. Uncle Moses retired last.
All slept soundly, for they were very much fatigued.

But just before daybreak, and in the dim morning twilight, Frank
and Bob were suddenly roused by a most tremendous uproar in the
parlor--kicks, thumps, tables upsetting, chairs breaking, and a
general row going on; in the midst of which din arose the voice of
David, calling frantically upon themselves and Uncle Moses.

This was certainly enough to rouse anybody.

Up jumped Frank, and rushed to the door.

Up jumped Bob, and sprang after him.

The noise outside was outrageous. What was it? Could it be robbers?
No. Robbers would prefer to do their work in silence. What was it?

Slowly and cautiously Frank opened the door, and looked forth into
the parlor. It was as yet quite dark, and the room into which he
peered was wrapped in the shades of night. What little he could
see he saw but indistinctly. Yet he saw something.

He saw a dark, shadowy figure in rapid motion backward and forward,
and at every movement some article of furniture would go with a
crash to the floor. Sometimes the figure seemed to be on the table,
at other times it was leaping in the air. Suddenly, as he looked,
the door, which opened out into the parlor, was banged back with
a violent blow, and shut again. Frank was nearly knocked down.

"What is it?" asked Bob.

"I don't know," said Frank, "unless it's a madman."

"What shall we do?"

"If we were all together," said Frank, "we might make a rush at
him, and secure him. I've a great mind to make a start, as it is."

"It must be a brigand!" said Bob; for his mind, like the minds of the
rest of the party, was largely filled with images of Italian bandits.

"Perhaps so," said Frank; "but at any rate let's make a rush at
him. Will you do it?"

"Of course," said Bob.

At this Frank carefully opened the door again, and looked forth.
The noise had ceased for the time. Bob poked his head forth also.
They looked eagerly into the room.

Suddenly Frank touched Bob.

"Look!" he whispered, "by the table."

Bob looked.

It was certainly a singular sight that met their view. In the midst
of the gloom they could see two balls of light that seemed like
eyes, though there was no form visible to which these glaring,
fiery eyes might belong. And the eyes seemed to glare out of the
darkness directly at them. All was still now; but the very stillness
gave additional horror to that unseen being, whose dread gaze seemed
to be fastened upon them.

Suddenly David's voice was heard from the next room,--

"Frank! Bob!"

"Hallo!" cried both boys.

"What shall we do? Can't you do something?"

"I'll see," cried Frank. "Bob, light the lamp."

"I haven't any matches," said Bob.

"What a pity!" said David. "Can't you wake Uncle Moses? Your room
is next to his."

At this Bob went to the wall between his room and that of Uncle
Moses, and began to pound with all his might. Uncle Moses did not
respond, but there came a response from another quarter. It was
from the thing in the parlor. Once more the fearful uproar began.
Crash! went the chairs. Bang! went the tables. A rapid racket of
hard footfalls succeeded, mingled with the smash of the furniture.

Frank closed the door.

"If I only had a light," said he, "I should know what to do. But
what can a fellow do in the dark?"

"I wonder what's the matter with Uncle Moses."

"He? O, he would sleep through anything."

"I wonder if it is a brigand, after all," said Bob.

"I don't know. I still think it may be a
madman."

"I don't like those glaring eyes."

"If I only had a fair chance, and could see," said Frank, fiercely,
"I'd soon find out what is behind those glaring eyes."

Louder grew the din while they were speaking--the rattle, the
bang, the smash, the general confusion of deafening sounds.

"I should like to know," said Frank, coolly, "how much longer this
sort of thing is going to last."

For some time longer the boys kept the door shut, and the noise at
length ceased as suddenly as it had begun. It had now grown much
lighter, for in these southern countries twilight, whether in the
morning or the evening, is but of short duration, and light advances
or retires with a rapidity which is startling to the natives of
more northern latitudes.

This increase of light gave fresh courage to Frank, who, even in
the dark, and in the face of the mystery, had behaved very well;
and he began to arrange a plan of action. His arrangements were
soon completed. He simply drew a jackknife from his pocket, and
opened it.

"Now, Bob," said he, "you follow me."

"All right," said Bob, cheerily.

Frank quietly opened the door, and looked forth, while Bob, in
eager curiosity, looked out the same instant. There was now sufficient
light for them to see every object in the room. A scene of wild
disorder revealed itself. All the furniture was turned topsy-turvy.
The door leading to the gallery was open, and there, before their
eyes, standing on the sofa, was the being that had created such
excitement.

One look was enough.

One cry escaped both the boys:--

"A billy goat! A miserable billy goat!" cried they.

And the next moment both of them sprang forward and seized the
animal by the horns.

Then began a struggle. The goat was strong. He was also excited
by the singularity of his surroundings and the suddenness of the
attack. So he showed fight, and resisted desperately. Frank and
Bob, however, clung most tenaciously to the horns which they had
seized. Backward and forward the combatants pushed and dragged one
another, with a new uproar as loud as the previous one.

In the midst of this they were interrupted by the appearance of
Uncle Moses.

The door of his room opened, and that venerable personage made his
appearance in a long night-gown, which reached to his heels, and
wearing a long, starched night-cap, which nearly touched the ceiling.

"Wal, I never!" was his ejaculation. "What's this, boys? Why,
whatever _air_ you doin' with that thar goat?"

The boys returned no answer, for they were struggling with their
enemy. By this time David and Clive made their appearance, and each
seized one of the goat's hind legs. This additional help decided
the contest. The animal was thrown down and held there, still
kicking and struggling violently.

Scarcely had they taken breath when there was another interruption.
This time it was at the outside door. A burly Italian made his
appearance there--very brown, very bearded, very dirty, and very
unsavory. For some time he stood without saying one word, staring
into the room, and fixing his eyes now on the goat as it was held
down by the boys, again on the broken furniture, and finally on
the long, and somewhat ghostly figure of Uncle Moses.

"_Santissima Madre!_"

This Was the exclamation that at last burst from the big, burly,
brown, bearded, dirty, and unsavory Italian. At this the boys looked
up, unconsciously loosening their grasp as they did so. The goat,
feeling the grasp relax, made a mighty effort, and rolled over.
Then he leaped to his feet. Then he made a wild bound to the door,
over the prostrate forms of David and Clive. The big, burly, brown,
bearded, dirty, and unsavory Italian made an effort to evade the
animal's charge. He was not quick enough. Down he went, struck full
in the breast, and away went the goat into the gallery, and down
the stairs, and so into the outer world.




CHAPTER II.

_How in the World did it get there?--A joyous Ride.--Hark! Hark!
The Dogs do bark! Beggars come to Town; some in Rags, some in Tags,
and some in a tattered Gown!--A pleasant Meditation on a classic
Past very rudely, unexpectedly, and even savagely interrupted, and
likely to terminate in a Tragedy!--Perilous Position of David and
Clive._


Fortunately, no bones were broken. The Italian slowly picked
himself up, and casting a stupid look at the boys, moved slowly
away, leaving the occupants of the standing there in their
night-clothes, and earnestly discussing the question,--How in the
world did the goat get there?

This was indeed a knotty question, till at length it was unravelled
by Uncle Moses.

"Wal, I declar," said he, "ef I didn't go an leave the door open."

"You!" cried all.

"Yes," said he. "You see it was dreadful close an suffocatin last
night; so when you went to bed, I jest left that door open to cool
off. Then I went off to bed, and forgot all about it."

That was clear enough as far as it went, but still it did not
account for the presence of a goat in the sixth story of a hotel.
This they found out afterwards. That very day they saw flocks of
goats being driven about from house to house. At other times they
saw goats in their own hotel. They were hoisted up to the various
stories, milked, and left to find their way down themselves. The
fashion of using goat's milk was universal, and this was the simple
way in which families were supplied. As to their visitor, the billy
goat, he was undoubtedly the patriarch of some flock, who had
wandered up stairs himself, perhaps in a fit of idle curiosity.

"If it hadn't been dark," said Frank. "If it hadn't been so abominably
dark!"

"We were like Ajax," said David,--who was a bit of a pedant, and
dealt largely in classical allusions,--"we were like Ajax, you
know:--

   'Give as but light, and let as _see_ our foes,
   We'll bravely fall, though Jove himself oppose.'"

"O, that's all very well," said Uncle Moses; "but who's goin to
pay for all that thar furnitoor? The goat can't."

"Uncle Moses," said Bob, gravely, "there's a great deal in what
you say."

Uncle Moses turned away with a look of concern in his mild face,
and retreated into his room.

(It may as well be stated here, that Uncle Moses had to pay for
that furniture. The landlord called up an interpreter, and they
had a long and somewhat exciting interview. It ended in the landlord's
recovering a sum of money which was sufficient to furnish a whole
suit of apartments in another part of the house.)

Being now fairly introduced to Naples, the boys were all eager to
see the place and its surroundings, and Uncle Moses was quite
willing to gratify them in any way. So they hired a carriage, found
a guide, named Michael Angelo, who could speak English, and, thus
equipped, they set out first for Baiae.

Through the city they went, through the crowded streets; past the
palaces, cathedrals, gardens; past the towers, castles, and quays;
till at last there arose before them the mighty Grotto of Posilipo.
Through this they drove, looking in astonishment at its vast
dimensions, and also at the crowds of people who were passing
through it, on foot, on horseback, and on wheels. Then they came
to Pozzuoli, the place where St. Paul once landed, and which is
mentioned in the New Testament under its ancient name--Puteoli.

Here they were beset by beggars. The sight of this produced strange
effects upon the little party. Uncle Moses, filled with pity,
lavished money upon them, in spite of the remonstrances of the
guide. Clive's sensitive nature shuddered at the spectacle. Frank
tried to speak a few words of Italian to them, which he had caught
from Michael Angelo. David muttered something about the ancient
Romans, while Bob kept humming to himself these elegant verses:--

   "Hark! hark! The dogs do bark!
   Beggars come to town,
   Some in rags, some in tags,
   Some in a tattered gown!"

The beggars followed them as far as they could, and when they left
them, reinforcements always arrived.

Thus they were beset by them at the crater of the extinct volcano
of Solfatura.

They encountered them at the gateway of Cumae,

At the Grotto of the Comaean Sibyl,

At Nero's Baths,

At the Lucrine Lake,

At Baiae,

At Misenum,

In fact everywhere.

Still, they enjoyed themselves very well, and kept up their pursuit
of sights until late in the day. They were then at Baiae; and here
the party stopped at a little inn, where they proposed to dine.
Here the beggars beset them, in fresh crowds, till Uncle Hoses was
compelled to close his purse, and tear himself away from his
clamorous visitants. Frank and Bob went off to see if they could
find some donkeys, ponies, or horses, so as to have a ride after
dinner; while David and Clive strolled off towards the country.

"Come, Clive," said David, "let Frank and Bob enjoy their jackasses.
For my part, I want to get to some place where I can sit down, and
see this glorious land. It's the most classic spot in all the
world."

"It's the most beautiful and poetic," said Clive, who was given to
sentiment.

Walking on, they came to a place which projected into the sea, and
here they sat down.

"O, what a glorious sight!" exclaimed Clive. "Look at this wonderful
Bay of Naples! How intensely blue the water is! How intensely blue
the sky is! And look at Vesuvius opposite. What an immense amount
of smoke is coming from the crater!"

"Yes," said David, clearing his throat, "this is the place that
the elder Pliny sailed from at the time of the destruction of
Herculaneum and Pompeii. And look all around. That little town
was once the luxurious Baiae. Over yonder is Lake Lucrine, which
Virgil sings about. On that side is Misenum, where the Roman navy
lay. There is Caligula's Bridge. What a glorious place! Everything
that we have ever read of in classic story gathers about us here.
Cicero, Caesar, Horace, Virgil, Tiberius, and Juvenal, seem to live
here yet. Nero and Agrippina, Caligula and Claudius,--every old
Roman, good or bad. And look, Clive, that is land out there. As I
live, that is Capraea! And see,--O, see, Clive,--that must be
the--"

"_Datemi un carlino, signori, per l'amor di Dio. Sono povero--molto
povero!_"

It was in the middle of David's rather incoherent rhapsody that
these words burst upon his ears. He and Clive started to their
feet, and found close behind them a half dozen of those miserable
beggars. Two of them were old men, whose bleary eyes and stooping
frames indicated extreme age. One was a woman on, crutches. Number
Four was a thin, consumptive-looking man. Number Five and Number
Six were strong-limbed fellows, with very villanous faces. It was
with one universal whine that these unwelcome visitors addressed
the boys.

"_Datemi un carlino, signori, per l'amor di Dio._"

David shook his head.

"_Sono miserabile_," said Number Five.

"I don't understand," said David.

"_Noi abbiam fame_," said Number Six.

"_Non capisco_," said Clive, who had learned that much Italian from
Michael Angelo.

"_O, signori nobilissime!_"

"I tell you, I don't understand," cried David.

"Non capisco," repeated Clive.

"_Siamo desperati_," said Number Six, with a sinister gleam in his
eyes, which neither of the boys liked.

"Come, Clive," said David, "let's go back. Dinner must be ready by
this time."

And they turned to go.

But as they turned, Number Five and Number Six placed themselves
in the way.

"_Date qualche cosa_," they whined; and each of them seized a boy
by the arm. The boys tried to jerk their arms away, but could not.

"Let us go," cried David, "or it will be the worse for you."

The two beggars now talked in Italian without relaxing their hold.
Then they tried to pull the boys away; but the boys resisted bravely,
and began to shout for help. At this the other beggars came forward
menacingly, and Number Five and Number Six put their arms round
the boys, and their hands over their mouths. Neither David nor
Clive could now utter a cry. They could scarcely breathe. They were
at the mercy of these miscreants!

It was, in truth, a perilous position in which David and Clive
found themselves. Those ragged rascals, the beggars, were as
remorseless as they were ragged. They had the boys at their mercy.
The place was sufficiently far from the town to be out of hearing;
and though the road was near, yet there were no people living in
the vicinity. It was, therefore, sufficiently solitary to permit
of any deed of violence being done with impunity.

David and Clive gave themselves up for lost With a last frantic
effort, David tore his head loose, dashed his fist into the face
of beggar Number Six, who was holding him, and tried to escape.

"_Scelerate!_" cried Number Six; and he threw David to the ground,
and held him down, while he caught him by the throat. But though
thus overpowered, David still struggled, and it was with some
difficulty that the big brute who held him was able to keep him
under.

Suddenly, at this moment, when all hope seemed lost, a loud cry
was heard. There was a rush of two figures upon the scene; and the
next instant Number Six was torn away, and rolled over on his back.
A firm grasp was fixed on his throat, and a tremendous blow descended
on his head from a stout stick, which was wielded by the youthful
but sinewy arm of Frank Wilmot. At the same instant, also, Bob
Clark had bounded at Number Five, leaped on his back, and began
beating him about the head.

The attack had been so sudden, and so utterly unexpected, that it
carried all before it. Away, with a wild cry of terror, fled the
four decrepit beggars, leaving Number Five and Number Six on the
field to themselves and the four boys. Number Six groaned with
pain, and struggled furiously. He wrenched himself from beneath
his assailants, but they again got the upper hand, and held on
firmly. But Number Six was too strong to be easily grappled with,
and it went hard with his assailants.

Meanwhile Clive, relieved by Bob, had become an assailant also.
Snatching up a stone, he dashed it full in the face of Number Five.
The man staggered back and fell, and Bob narrowly escaped falling
under him. But Number Five sprang up instantly, and before Bob or
Clive could close with him again, darted off without attempting to
help Number Six, and ran for his life. Cowardly by nature, the
beggars did not think of the size of their assailants; their fears
magnified the boys to men; and they only thought of safety in a
panic flight But Number Six was there yet, with Frank Wilmot's
sinewy arms about him, and Bob and Clive now rushed to take part
in that struggle. This addition to the attacking force turned the
scale completely.

The struggle that now followed was most violent, the Italian making
the most furious efforts to free himself; but Frank was very large
and strong for his years; he was possessed of bull-dog tenacity
and high-strung courage, and was strenuously assisted by the other
three; so that the union of all their forces formed something to
which one man was scarcely equal. In a very short time, therefore,
after the arrival of Bob and Clive, the would-be robber was lying
on his face, held firmly down by the four boys.

"Boys," said Frank, who was sitting on his shoulders, "fold his
arms over his back."

As they did this, he twisted his handkerchief tightly, and then
bound it around the man's hands as firmly as if it had been a rope.
Bob and Clive held him down by sitting on his legs, while David
sat on his neck. Frank now asked for their hand, kerchiefs, twisted
them, tied them together, and then directed Bob to fasten the man's
feet. This was Bob's task, and he did it as neatly as though he
had been brought up to that particular business exclusively.

The man was now bound hard and fast, and lay on his face without
a word, and only an occasional struggle. The weight of the boys
was so disposed that it was not possible for him to get rid of
them, and Frank watched all his attempted movements so vigilantly,
that every effort was baffled at the outset. Frank also watched
Bob as he tied the knots, and then, seeing that the work was well
done, he started up.

"Come, boys," said he, "let's give the rascal a chance to breathe."

At this the boys all got up, and the Italian, relieved from their
weight, rolled over on his back, and then on his side, staring all
around, and making desperate efforts to free himself. He was like
the immortal Gulliver when bound by the Lilliputians, except that
one of his assailants, at least, was no Lilliputian, for in brawn,
and sinew, and solid muscle, Frank, boy though he might be, was
not very much, if at all, his inferior. As he struggled, and stared,
and rolled about, the boys looked on; and Frank watched him carefully,
ready to spring at him at the first sign of the bonds giving way.
But the knots had been too carefully tied, and this the Italian
soon found out. He therefore ceased his useless efforts, and sat
up; then, drawing up his feet, he leaned his chin on his knees,
and stared sulkily at the ground.

"And now," said David, "what are we to do?"

"I don't know," said Frank.

"Let's go for Uncle Moses," said Bob, "or Michael Angelo."

"We'd better hunt up a policeman," said Clive.

"No," said Frank, "let's get Uncle Moses here first. You go, Bob;
and be quick, or else those other beggars'll be back here and
release him."

Upon this Bob set out, and the others guarded the prisoner. Bob
was not gone long, however, but soon returned in company with Uncle
Moses. Bob had found him at the inn, and in a breathless way had
told him all, but he had scarcely understood it; and as he now came
upon the scene, he looked around in wonder, and seemed utterly
bewildered. Had he found his beloved boys captured by bandits, he
would have been shocked, but not very much surprised--for that was
the one terror of his life; but to find the tables turned, and a
bandit captured by his boys, was a thing which was so completely
opposed to all his ordinary thoughts, that he stood for a moment
fairly stupefied. Nor was it until David had told the whole story,
and thus given him a second and Davidian edition of it, that he
began to master the situation.

"Dear! dear! dear!" he cried, looking slowly at each of the boys
in succession, and then at their silent and sulky captive, "and so
you railly and truly were attacked and made prisoners by bandits.
Dear! dear! dear!"

He looked inexpressibly shocked, and for some time stood in silence
amid the loud clatter of the boys.

"Well, Uncle Moses," said Frank, at last, "what are we to do with
him?"

To this Uncle Moses made no reply. It was certainly a somewhat
puzzling inquiry; and his own life had been so peaceful and
uneventful, that the question of the best way of dealing with a
captured bandit was, very naturally, a somewhat perplexing one to
answer. He stood, therefore, with his head bent forward, his right
hand supporting his left elbow, and his left hand supporting his
forehead, while his mild eyes regarded the captive robber with a
meek and almost paternal glance, and his mind occupied itself in
weighing that captives destiny.

"Well, Uncle Moses," said Frank a second time, somewhat impatiently,
"what, are we to do with him? We must do something,--and be quick
about it too,--or else the other beggars'll be back."

"Wal," said Uncle Moses, slowly and thoughtfully, "that's the very
identical pint that I'm a meditatin on. An the long an the short
of it is, that I'm beginnin to think, that the very best thing you
can do is to take your handkerchees back, and come back with me to
the inn, and get some dinner. For I've every reason to believe that
dinner's ready about this time, bein as I remember hearin a bell
a ringin jest before Bob came for me."

At this the boys stared in amazement at Uncle Moses, not knowing
what in the world to make of this.

"What do you mean," said Frank, "about our handkerchiefs, when
we've tied up the bandit with them?"

"Why," said Uncle Moses, "I think if you come you may as well bring
yer handkerchees with you--as I s'pose you prefer havin em."

"But we'd have to untie them," said Bob.

"Wal, yes," said Uncle Moses, dryly; "that follers as a nat'ral
consequence."

"What!" cried Frank, in an indignant voice, "untie him? Let him
go? And after he has nearly killed David and Clive?"

"Wal, he didn't _quite_ kill em," said Uncle Moses, turning his
eyes benignantly upon the two boys. "They seem to me jest now to
be oncommon spry--arter it all. They don't look very nigh death,
as far as appearances go. No harm's done, I guess; an so, I dare
say, we'd best jest let em go."

At this Frank looked ineffably disgusted.

"You see, boys," said Uncle Moses, "here we air, in a very peculiar
situation. What air we? Strangers and sojourners in a strange land;
don't know a word of the outlandish lingo; surrounded by beggars
and Philistines. Air there any law courts here? Air there any
lawyers? Air there any judges? I pause for a reply. There ain't
one. No. An if we keep this man tied up, what can we do with him?
We can't take him back with us in the coach. We can't keep him and
feed him at the hotel like a pet animule. I don't know whar the
lock-up is, an hain't seen a policeman in the whole place. Besides,
if we do hand this bandit over to the _po_lice, do you think it's
goin to end there? No, sir. Not it. If this man's arrested, we'll
be arrested too. We'll have to be witnesses agin him. An that's
what I don't want to do, if I can help it. My idee an aim allus is
to keep clear of the lawyers; I'd rather be imposed on; I'd rather
pay out money unjustly, be cheated, humbugged, and do any thin,
than put myself in the power of lawyers. Depend upon it, they're
as bad here as they air home. They'd have us all in jail, as
witnesses. Now, I don't want to go to jail."

The words of Uncle Moses produced a strong impression upon
the boys. Even Frank saw that handing the man over to the
authorities would involve some trouble, at least, on their
part. He hated what he called "bother." Besides, he had no
vengeful feelings against the Italian, nor had Bob. As for
David and Clive, they were the only ones who had been really
wronged by the fellow; but they were the last in the world to
harbor resentment or think of revenge. Their victory had also
made them merciful. So the end of it was, that they did
according to Uncle Moses' suggestion, and untied the bonds.

Number Six was evidently amazed. He rose to his feet, looked warily
at the party, as though expecting some new attack, then looked all
around, and then, with a bound, he sprang away, and running towards
the road, soon disappeared. The rest did not delay much longer,
but returned as soon as possible to the inn, where they found their
dinner ready. This they ate, and then drove back to Naples.

The opportune arrival of Frank and Bob was soon explained. They
had been riding on donkeys, and had seen the crowd around David
and Clive, and the struggle. Fearing some danger for their companions,
they had hastened to the spot, and reached it in time to be of
service. The adventure might have been most serious to David and
Clive; but as it happened, the results were of no very grave
character. They felt a little sore; that is all. Bob, also had a
bad bruise on his left arm; but on the whole, very little harm had
been done, nor did the boys regret afterwards that they had let
the scoundrel go free.

As for their guide, Michael Angelo, he had been busy in another
direction, during this adventure, and when he heard of it, he was
very anxious to have them arrested; but Uncle Moses, for reasons
already stated, declined to do anything.




CHAPTER III.

_Out into the Country.--The Drive.--The glorious Land.--Sorrento
and eternal Summer.--The Cave of Polyphemus.--The Cathedral.--The
mysterious Image.--What is it?--David Relic-hunting.--A Catastrophe.
--Chased by a Virago.--The Town roused.--Besieged.--A desperate
Onset.--Plight.--Last of the Virago._


A few days after the affair related in the last chapter, our party
set out from Naples on an excursion round the environs. With the
assistance of their landlord they were able to get a carriage,
which they hired for the excursion, the driver of which went with
them, and was to pay all their expenses for a certain given sum.
They expected to be gone several days, and to visit many places of
surpassing interest; for Naples is a city whose charms, great as
they are, do not surpass the manifold loveliness with which it is
environed, and the whole party would have been sorry indeed if they
had missed any one of those scenes of enchantment that lay so
invitingly near them.

As they drove along the shore they were all in the highest spirits.
The sky was cloudless, and of that deep blue color which is common
to this climate; and the sun shone with dazzling brightness, being
only warm enough to be pleasant, and not in any way oppressive.
For many miles the way seemed nothing else than a street. Houses
arose on each side; crowds of people, and multitudes of wagons,
and droves of cattle constantly met their eyes. Caleches dashed
about in all directions. The street itself was paved with the
large lava blocks which prevail throughout the city; and in fact
it seemed as though Naples was prolonging itself indefinitely.

At length they emerged from the close-built city, and entered the
country. All the way the scenery was exquisite. On the left extended
green fields, and orchards, and vineyards; spreading away for miles,
they rose up the sides of high mountains. Upon these were small
villas and hamlets, while occasionally a castle perched upon some
inaccessible height threw an air of romantic attraction about the
scene. They passed several villages, and at length reached
Castellamare, a town on the shore of the bay. Passing beyond this,
they found a change in the scenery. The road wound along cliffs
which overhung the sea, and was ornamented by trees. The road itself
was a magnificent one, as smooth as a floor, and by its circuitous
course afforded a perpetual variety. The far white houses of
Naples, the towers that dotted the shore on every side, the islands
that rose from oat the waters, the glorious bay, the gloomy form
of Vesuvius, with its smoke clouds overhanging, all united to form
a scene which called forth the most unbounded admiration. Besides
all these general features there were others of a more special
character, as from time to time they came to some recess in the
shore; and the road running in brought them to some little hamlet,
which, nestling here, seemed the abode of peace, and innocence,
and happiness. Through such variations of scenery they passed, and
at length arrived at Sorrento.

This little town is most beautifully situated near the month of
the Bay of Naples, and around it arise high, encircling hills
which protect it from the cold blasts of winter and the hot winds
of summer. Sorrento has a perfect climate, All the seasons are
blended together here, and in the orange groves, that surround
the town, there may be seen at the same time the strange spectacle
of trees in blossom side by side with trees that are loaded with
fruit fully ripe.

It was evening when they arrived, and they had not much time to
spare; so they at once procured a guide from the hotel, and set
forth to see what they could before dark. First, the guide took
them to a deep chasm, which was so wild and abrupt, so deep and
gloomy, that it looked like the work of a recent earthquake. Not
far from this were some ancient reservoirs, the work of the times
of imperial Rome. The arches were yet perfect, and over the reservoir
was a garden of orange trees. Not far distant was a ruined temple,
in the enclosure of which was a myrtle plant, five hundred years
old, and so large that it formed a respectable tree.

After showing them these things and several others, the guide took
them to the sea-shore, to a place which goes by the name of the
Cave of Polyphemus. This is a large cavern in the cliff, in front
of which is a huge fragment of rock. Here the boys recalled the
story of Ulysses; and David volunteered to give it in full to Uncle
Moses. So David told how Ulysses ventured to this place with his
companions; how the one-eyed Cyclops caught them; how he imprisoned
them in the cabin, shutting up its mouth by means of a huge rock,
which David thought might have been that very fragment that now
lay on the shore before their eyes; how the monster began to devour
them; how Ulysses devised a plan of escape, and succeeded in putting
out the eye of the monster; how he then effected his escape from
the cave, and regaining his vessel, put forth to sea.

Then they went to visit the house in which Tasso was born. They
were not able to enter it, and as it was now dark, they retreated
to their hotel.

Oh the following morning they all set oat without the guide, to
see the town for themselves. A festival of some kind was going on,
which attracted many people, and the cathedral was filled. The
boys, haying nothing else to do, wandered away towards the common
centre of attraction. They soon lost one another in the crowd, and
one by one they worked their way into the interior of the place.
The organ was sounding forth, the priests were intoning service,
on the altar candles were burning, and far on high, through the
lofty vaulted nave, there rolled "the smoke of incense and the wail
of song!"

David found himself a little distance away from a side chapel,
which was evidently the chief attraction to the worshippers within
the sacred edifice. A dense crowd assembled about it, and in front
of it. Through these David managed to make his way, full of curiosity
about the cause of their interest. He at length forced himself far
enough forward to see inside the chapel. He saw a structure, in
the centre of the chapel, covered with drapery, upon which was a
cushion. Lying on this cushion was the image of a child, clothed
in rich attire, and spangled with jewels, and adorned with gold
and silver. Whether it was made of wood or wax he could not tell,
but thought it was the former. The sight of it only tempted his
curiosity the more, and he longed to look at it more closely. It
was evidently considered by the surrounding crowd to be an object
of great sanctity, for they regarded it with the utmost reverence,
and those nearest were on their knees. Upon the altar, at the end
of this chapel, lights were burning, and a priest was engaged in
religious ceremonies.

David's desire to go closer was so strong, that he waited patiently
in this one spot for the opportunity of gratifying his curiosity.
He had to wait for a long time; but at length he had the satisfaction
of seeing a movement among the people, which showed that they were
on the point of dispersing. After this the crowd lessened, and
the people began to take their departure. At length but a few
remained, some of whom were still on their knees around the image.

David now, in a slow and unassuming manner, advanced towards the
image. He could go close to it, and was able to see it perfectly.
An iron rail surrounded the structure on which it was laid, preventing
too close an approach; but standing here, outside of the rail,
David saw that the image was very rudely carved out of wood, and
was intended to represent a child. Why such an image should be the
object of such interest and devotion he could not for the life of
him imagine. He could only postpone any investigation into this
until he could find out from some one.

And now there came over him an overwhelming desire to obtain a
fragment from some portion of this image, or, its dress, or its
surroundings, to serve as a relic. His relic-hunting propensities
had never been stronger than they were at this moment, and no sooner
did the idea suggest itself than he looked all around to see what
were the chances.

As he looked around he saw that the cathedral was nearly empty: a
priest was near the high altar, two boys were in the middle of the
nave, by the chief entrance was a little group just preparing to
leave. Nearer him, and close by the image, were two women. They
were on their knees, and appeared to be absorbed in their devotions.
It seemed to David that it would be quite easy to possess himself
of some small and unimportant portion of the drapery. He was quite
unobserved, for the two women who were nearest were not regarding
him, the drapery was within easy reach, and a row of tassels, upon
which he could lay his hand, offered an irresistible temptation.
If he could but get one of those tassels, what an addition it would
be to his little stock of treasures!

David once more looked all around. The priests were still at the
altar; but the boys had gone from the nave, and those who had been
near the door had departed. The women seemed as intent as ever upon
their devotions. David looked at the drapery once more, and upon
one of the tassels which was nearest him.

Once more he looked all around, and then, stretching forward his
hand, he touched the coveted tassel.

Then he drew back his hand, and putting it in his pocket, he drew
forth his knife, which he opened.

Then he looked around once more.

Then, for the last time, he put his hand forward, holding the knife
so as to cut the tassel. But the cord which bound the tassel to
the drapery was strong, and the knife was very dull, and David
found that it was not so easy as he had supposed. But he was
determined to get it, and so he sawed away, with his dull old knife,
at the cord, severing one by one the filaments that composed it,
but doing this so slowly that he began to grow impatient. The
women were not looking. There was no danger. To work with one hand
was useless, and so he reached forth both hands, and began sawing
away more vigorously than ever. But his impatience, and his vehement
pulls and tugs, produced an effect which he had not expected. The
heavy drapery, which had been loosely thrown over, began to slide
off towards him as he pulled. David did not notice this, but
continued his work, looking around to see whether the women were
noticing him or not. At length he had sawed the cord almost through,
and gave a quick pull at it to break it.

The next moment the heavy drapery came sliding down towards him,
and, to his horror, the wooden image came with it, falling with a
crash on the marble pavement.

In an instant the two women started to their feet, staring with
wild eyes at the image and the drapery. Then their wild eyes caught
sight of David, whose frightened face would have revealed him as
the guilty cause of this catastrophe, even if it had not been shown
by the tassel and the knife, which were in his hands.

With a sharp, shrill scream, one of the women sprang towards him.
David instinctively leaped back, and eluded her. The woman chased.
David dodged her around a pillar.

The woman followed.

David dodged behind another pillar.

The woman cried out, "_O Scellerato! Birbone! Furbo! Ladrone!_"
And though David's knowledge of the Italian language was but slight,
yet it sufficed to show him that these names which she yelled after
him had a very direful signification.

Thus David fled, dodging, the woman behind pillar after pillar,
until at length he came near to the door. Had the other woman taken
part in the chase, David would certainly have been captured. But
the other woman did not. She stood as if petrified--motionless and
mute, staring at the fallen sanctuary, and overwhelmed with horror.
So the flight went on, until at length, reaching the door, David
made a rush for it, dashed through, and ran as fast as his legs
could carry him. The woman followed, but at a slower rate of speed,
and saw him go into the hotel. Then she returned to the church,
after which she went abroad with the story of the horrible desecration
through all Sorrento.

On reaching the hotel, David found the rest of the party there, at
dinner. He said nothing of his recent adventure, but took his seat
at the table.

Before long, the party became conscious of a great tumult and uproar
in the street in front of the house. Frank and Bob went to the
windows, and looked out. A sudden exclamation of surprise brought
Clive and Uncle Moses to their side. David followed slowly, with
a strange feeling of apprehension, and with the recollection of
his late flight still strong in his mind.

He looked out.

A great crowd presented itself to his horrified eyes--a crowd
representing all Sorrento; old, the middle-aged, the young; the
rich, poor; male and female; old men, old women, boys, and
children. At the head of this, and immediately in front of the
door, was the very old woman who bad discovered his sacrilege,
and had chased him through the cathedral. Now he had hoped that
the old woman had forgotten him; but her appearance now was
tenfold more terrible than ever. Here she was--a virago--with a
great following, whom she was exciting by violent harangues, and
urging by wild gesticulations, to do something or other which
David could not understand, but which he could well imagine to
be something that had reference to his own humble, unworthy, and
very much terrified self.

Before they had fairly grasped the whole of the scene that was thus
so suddenly presented, they were accosted by the landlord and the
driver, who entered the room hurriedly, and in some excitement, in
search of them.

"One grand meesfortune haf arrive," said the landlord. "De people
declare you haf insult de Bambino. Dey cry for vengeance. How is dis?"

"What?" asked Frank; "insult what?"

"De Bambino."

"Bambino?"

"Yes. It is de consecrate image--de Bambino--does miracles, makes
cures; wonderful image, de pride of Sorrento; an dis is de day
sacred to him. What is dis meesfortune dat I hear of? It is one
grand calamity--for you--eef you do not take care."

"Bambino? insult?" said Frank. "We haven't insulted anything
whatever. They're crazy."

Here David, finding concealment useless, confessed all. The boys
listened in astonishment The landlord shook his head with an
expression of concern and perplexity.

Then he had a long conversation with the driver.

Then they both left the room. The landlord went outside, and tried
to appease the crowd. He might possibly, have succeeded, had it
not been for David's old woman, who shook her fists in his face,
stamped, appealed to Heaven, raved, and howled, all the time he
was speaking. The consequence was, that the landlord's words had
no effect.

He then entered the hotel once more, and after seeing the driver,
and speaking a few words, he hurried up to our party, who by this
time were in a state of general alarm.

"You must run--fly--leaf Sorrento--now--widout delay," he
cried, breathlessly. "I haf order de carriage. I sall tell de
people dat you sall be arrest, an pacify dem for a few moments,
till you get start."

The landlord once more left them, and going out to the crowd, he
made a few remarks, to the effect that the hotel was being searched
now for the offender against the Bambino, and when he was found he
would at once be handed over to the authorities. He urged them to
wait patiently, and they should see that justice would be done.

The crowd now grew calmer, and waited. The landlord then went back,
and led the party down to the court-yard. Here the carriage was
all in readiness, and the driver was waiting. They all got in at
once, unseen by the crowd in the street; and then, cracking his
whip, the driver urged the horses off at full speed through the
gates. The crowd fell back on either side, so as to make away, and
were not in a position to offer any obstacles to so sudden an onset.
They also had the idea that the culprit was inside the hotel, in
the hands of the authorities.

But the old woman was not to be deceived; she saw it all in a
moment, and in a moment she raised the alarm. Having, howling,
gesticulating wildly, dancing, and jumping, she sprang after the
carriage. The crowd followed. But the carriage had already got a
good start; it had burst through the people, and those who stood
in the way were only too glad to get out of it, and thus, with the
horses at full speed, they dashed up the street; and before long
they had left Sorrento, and the hotel, and the insulted Bambino,
and the excited crowd, and the raving old beldam far behind.

David's adventure in Sorrento had been a peculiar one, and one,
too, which was not without danger; but if there was any satisfaction
to be got out of it, it was in the fact that the tassel which he
had acquired, remained still in his possession, to be added to his
little stock of relics.




CHAPTER IV.

_Salerno and the sulky Driver.--Paestum and its Temples.--A great
Sensation.--An unpleasant Predicament.--Is the Driver a Traitor?--Is
he in League with Bandits?--Arguments about the Situation, and
what each thought about it._


After a very pleasant drive through a country as beautiful as it
had been ever since they left Naples, the party reached Salerno,
where they passed the night. Salerno is a lovely place, situated
at the extremity of a bay, like Naples, of which it may be called
a miniature. It is protected from the wind by the high hills that
encircle it, and its delicious climate makes it a great resort for
invalids. But formerly Salerno had a different character, and one
far more prominent in the eyes of the world. Salerno has a history
full of events of the most varied and stirring character. Fought
for by Greek, and Roman, and German, and Saracen, and Norman, its
streets have witnessed the march of hundreds of warlike arrays,
and it has known every extreme of good or evil fortune. Two things
make. Salerno full of interest to the traveller who loves the past.
One is, its position as a seat of learning daring the middle ages.
Here once arose the greatest school of medicine in, the world, the
chairs of which were thrown open, to Jewish and Arabian professors,
who at that time far outstripped the students of the Christian
world in scientific attainments. The other thing is, that here the
great pope, Gregory VII., found refuge, after his long struggle,
and, flying from Rome, obtained rest here among the friendly Normans,
for it was in Salerno that he uttered those memorable dying words
of his: "I have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity, and
therefore I die in exile."

Here at Salerno they had a slight misunderstanding with their
driver. He insisted on getting more pay. As they had already made
a full contract with him, this demand seemed like an imposition,
and was rejected by the whole of them. The driver grew furiously
excited, gesticulated vehemently, stamped, his feet, rolled his
eyes, struck his fists together, and uttered language which sounded
like Italian oaths, though they could not make it out. Uncle Moses
seemed a little appalled at his vehement, and was inclined to
yield to his demands for the sake of peace; but the boys would
not listen to this for a moment. After watching the raging
Italian till they were tired, Frank at length started to his
feet, and in a peremptory tone ordered him out of the room. The
Italian was so unprepared for this decisive conduct on the part
of one who appeared to be but a boy, that he stopped short in
the midst of a most eloquent tirade against them, in which he
was threatening to denounce them to the authorities for sacrilege;
and having stopped, he stared at Frank, and seemed unable to go
on once more. Frank now repeated his orders, accompanying them
with a threat that he would call in the police. At this the
driver's brow lowered into a sullen scowl, and muttering some
expressions of rage and vengeance, he left the room.

The boys chatted a little about the mutiny of the driver, as they
called it, but soon dismissed the thought from their minds.

After passing the night at Salerno, they prepared, on the following
morning, to continue their journey. Early in the day, the driver
made his appearance. He was quiet, and not communicative, and much
changed from his former self. Frank addressed a few remarks to
him, but perceiving that he was sulky, he gave up all attempts to
appease his wrath. In fact, he began to think that it might, perhaps,
have been as well to comply with his request, for the request for
more money had been based upon his recent rescue of them from the
hands of the mob at Sorrento. Had the driver made his request a
little more meekly, and not presented it with such an assertion of
right, there is no doubt that they would have cheerfully given what
he asked. But his tone excited their resentment; and afterwards,
when the driver chose to lose his temper and scold them, they were
more determined than ever to refuse. Had he appeared at this time
with his former good-natured expression, and had he shown any signs
of compunction for his insolent behavior, there is no doubt that
they would have brought up the subject of their own accord, and
promised him as handsome a sum as his exploit deserved. But his
continued sulks prevented them from introducing the subject, and
so they concluded to defer it to some other time, when he might be
restored to himself.

They now drove along the road en route for Paestum. At first they
drove along the sea-shore, but after a few miles the road turned
off into the country. All around them were fields, which were
covered with flocks and herds, while in the distance were hills
that were clothed with vineyards and olive groves, that adorned
their sloping declivities with mantles of dark green and light. In
the country, on either side, they also saw some indications of
Italian life, which excited strong feelings of repugnance within
them; for here and there, in many places, women were toiling in
the fields just as the men, with heavy hoes, or with ploughs, or
with harrows. In some places it was even worse, for they saw women
laboring in the fields, while the men lolled on the fences, or sat
smoking under the shade of some tree. The implements of labor used
excited their surprise. The hoes were as ponderous, as clumsy, and
as heavy as pickaxes; the ploughs were miserably awkward things--a
straight pole with a straight wooden share, which was sometimes,
though by no means always, pointed with iron. These ploughs were
worked in various ways, being sometimes pulled by donkeys, sometimes
by oxen, and on one memorable occasion a donkey and a woman pulled
the plough, while a man, who may have been the woman's husband,
guided it through the furrow.

The road was a good one, and was at first well travelled. They met
soldiers, and priests, and peasants. They met droves of oxen, and
wine carts, and large herds of those peculiar hairless pigs which
are common to this country. As they drove on farther, the travel
diminished, and at length the country seemed more lonely. It was
still fertile, and covered with luxuriant vegetation on every side;
but the signs of human habitation decreased, until at length they
ceased. The reason of this lies in the unhealthy character of the
country, which, like many places in Italy, is subject to malaria,
and is shunned by the people. This is the nature of the country
which lies around ancient Paestum; and though the fields are
cultivated, yet the cultivators live at a distance upon the slopes
of the mountains.

At about midday they arrived at Paestum. Here they descended from
the carriage, and giving instruction to the driver to remain at
this place until they should return, they started off to explore
the ruined city. It had been their intention to make use of the
driver as guide, to show them the objects of interest in the town;
but his long-continued sulks drove this from their minds, and they
concluded to trust to themselves and their guide-books. The carriage
was drawn up on the side of the road, not far from where there
stood an archway, still entire, which once formed one of the gates
of Paestum.

Towards this they directed their steps. The gateway was formed of
large blocks of stone laid upon each other without cement, and by
their great size they had resisted the ravages of time. On either
side of this could be seen the foundation stones of the city walls,
which have fallen or have been removed in the course of ages. But
the circuit of the walls can be traced by the fragments that yet
remain, and from this circuit the size of the city may be judged.
Beyond the gates and in the enclosure of the walls are some majestic
and world-famed ruins, some of which are little else than masses
of rubbish, while others are so well preserved, that they might
now be used for the purpose to which they were originally devoted.
There are the remains of a theatre and of an amphitheatre, which,
however, are confused heaps, and some public edifices in the same
condition. The foundations of some private houses may also be
seen. But the most noted and most interesting of the remains of
Paestum are its two Temples and Basilica--edifices whose origin
reaches back to the depths of an immemorial antiquity, but which
still remain in a state of preservation so perfect as to be almost
incredible. For these edifices are as old, at least, as Homer, and
were probably in existence before his day. Phoenician sailors or
merchants may have set eyes on these temples, who also saw the
Temple of Solomon at its completion. They existed in the age of
the Pharaohs, and rival in antiquity, in massive grandeur, and in
perfect preservation, the Pyramids of Egypt. In the age of imperial
Rome, and even of republican Rome, these temples were ancient, and
the Emperor Augustus visited them, and regarded them as remains of
venerable antiquity.

Of these three edifices, the most majestic, and probably the most
ancient, is the one which is called the Temple of Neptune. The
stone of which it is built, is found in the neighborhood still,
and presents a most singular appearance. At a distance it appears
very rough and full of holes, like cork. A closer examination shows
that it is really composed of innumerable fragments of wood,
compressed together in a vast, solid mass, and petrified. The
stone is exceedingly hard and durable. The blocks of this stone
out of which this temple, and the others also, are built, are of
such enormous size, that they can only be compared to those immense
masses that were heaped up to form the Pyramids of Egypt and the
Temples of Karnak. Piled up here upon one another without cement,
they have defied the ravages of time.

The Temple of Neptune is approached by three immense steps, which
extend around every side of it. It is about two hundred feet in
length, and eighty in breadth, while on every side there is a row
of enormous columns of the Doric order, thirty-six in number. They
are all fluted, and have an aspect of severe and massive grandeur
that is unequalled in any other temple. Above these columns rise
an enormous Doric frieze and cornice, the height of which is equal
to half the height of the columns; and these proportions give such
vastness to the mass above, that it heightens the sublime effect.
The columns, which extend round the Temple, are thirty feet high,
and seven feet in diameter at the base. Inside, the pavement is
well preserved; and, though the altar is gone, yet the place where
it stood can easily be seen. There is no roof above, and probably
never was any; for many of the vast edifices of antiquity were open
to the sky--a circumstance which made the task of the architect
much easier, since it relieved him of the necessity of sustaining
a vast weight in the air, and also of the equal difficulty of
lighting the interiors of his buildings. From within the temple
enclosures, as from within the theatres and amphitheatres, the blue
sky could be seen overhead, while the too fervid rays of a
midsummer sun, or the storms of winter, could be warded off from
those within by means of an awning thrown over the open roof,
and stretched on cables.

Near the Temple of Neptune is another, which is called the Temple
of Ceres. It is neither so large nor so grand as the former, but
it possesses more elegance and beauty. It is about a hundred feet
long and fifty feet wide. Like its companion, it is surrounded
on all sides by a colonnade, six pillars being in the front, six
in the rear, and twelve on either side. The altar here is gone,
but its foundations remain. Various signs show a greater degree
of splendor in the interior adornment of this temple, especially
the fact that the pavement was mosaic work. There is reason to
suppose that this temple was turned into a Christian church some
time in the fourth century. Such a transformation as this was
common enough throughout the Roman empire during that great
triumph of Christianity which took place under Constantine, and
after him, so that in this, case there need be little room for
doubt as to the truth of the statement.

Not far from this is the third of the great edifices of Paestum.
It is about as large as the Temple of Neptune, being nearly two
hundred feet long, and about eighty feet wide. Like the others, it
is surrounded by a colonnade, but the architecture is less massive
than that of the first temple. Of these columns, nine are in front,
nine in the rear, and sixteen are on either side, making fifty in
all. In this edifice there are no signs whatever of an altar; and
this circumstance has led to the belief that it was not a temple
at all, but a court of law. Accordingly, it is called the Basilica,
which term was used by the Romans to indicate a place used for
public trials. Inside, the pavement yet remains, and there are the
remains of a row of columns which once passed along the middle of
the building from front to rear, dividing it into two parts.

Of all the three, the Temple of Neptune is the grandest, the best
preserved, and the most famous. But the others are fit companions,
and the giant forms of these mighty relics of hoary antiquity,
unsurpassed by any other edifice, rise before the traveller, exciting
within him emotions of reverential awe.

The party visited all these various objects of interest, and at
length returned to the gate. They had spent about two hours in
their Purvey of Paestum, and had seen all that there was to be
seen; and now nothing more remained but to return as soon as
possible, and spend that night at Salerno. They had seen nothing
of the driver since they left him, and they accounted for this on
the ground that he was still maintaining himself in his gigantic
sulk, and brooding over his wrongs; and they thought that if he
chose to make a fool of himself, they would allow him to do so as
long as it was agreeable to him.

With these thoughts they approached the gateway. As they drew
near, they were surprised to find that there were no signs of the
carriage. The view was open and unobstructed. Here and there mounds
or fragments of stone arose in the place where once had been the
wall of the city of Paestum, and before them was the simple arch
of the massive gateway, but no carriage or horses were visible.

This excited their surprise, and also their alarm. They remembered
that the sullen mood of the driver made him quite capable of playing
off some malicious trick upon them, and they recalled, also, his
threats of the evening before. Could he have chosen this way to put
his threats into execution? It seemed, indeed, very much like it.

Still, there was one hope left. It was just possible that the carriage
had been drawn up more under the arch, so that it was hidden from
view. As this was the last hope that was left them, they hurried
forth to put an end to their suspense as soon as possible. Nearer
and nearer they came.

At last they reached the arch.

They rushed through it, and beyond it.

There was nothing there!

No carriage! No horses! No driver!

At this they all stopped, and stared at one another in silent
consternation.

"He's gone," cried Clive. "He's left us here--to get back the best
way we can."

"He swore last night," said David, "that he'd pay us up; and this
is the way he's done it."

"Yes," said Bob; "he's been sulky all day. He's been concocting
some plan."

"I don't see what good it'll do him," said Frank.

"He'll lose his fare. We won't pay him."

"O. he'll give up that for the pleasure of revenge," said Clive.

"Wal, wal, wal," cried Uncle Moses, looking all around with a face
of dark and doleful perplexity. "This here doos beat all I ever
seen in all my life. An now, what upon airth we can do--I'm sure
I can't tell."

"Whatever we do," said Frank, "it won't do to wait here. It's too
late now."

"Perhaps he hasn't run off at all," said David, who always was
inclined to believe the best of people. "Perhaps he has driven up
the road, and intends to return."

Frank shook his head.

"No," cried he. "I believe the scoundrel has left us. We paid him
half of his fare at Sorrento; the rest was to be paid at Naples;
but he has thrown that up, in order to have the pleasure of being
revenged on us. And where he's gone to now is a mystery to me."

"O, I dare say he's driven off to Naples."

"Perhaps so. But he may intend something more. I've heard that
there are brigands about here."

"Brigands!"

"Yes. And I shouldn't wonder if he has gone off with the intention
of bringing some of them here to pay their respects to us. He may
have started off immediately after we left him; and, if so, he's
had two hours already--time enough, as I think, to do a good deal
of mischief."

"Brigands!" cried Uncle Moses, in a voice of horror. He stared
wildly around, and then looked, with moistened eyes, upon the boys.

"O, boys," he sighed, "why did we ever ventoor out so far in this
here I-talian land, or why did we ever come to Italy at all?
Brigands! It's what I've allus dreaded, an allus expected, ever
sence I fust sot foot on this benighted strand. I ben a feelin it
in my bones all day. I felt it a comin over me yesterday, when the
mob chased us; but now--our hour hev come!"

"Nonsense, Uncle Moses!" cried Frank, in a hearty, joyous voice.
"What's the use of giving up in that fashion? Cheer up. We'll be
all right yet."




CHAPTER V.

_They discuss the Situation.--They prepare to foot it.--A toilsome
Walk and a happy Discovery.--The Language of Signs once more.--The
Mountain. Cavalcade.--Bob's Ambition.--Its Results--Bob
vanishes.--Consternation of the Donkey Boy.--Consternation of the
Cavalcade.--E Perduto!_


The mention of brigands produced a startling and powerful effect
upon the whole party, and after Uncle Moses' wail of despair, and
Frank's rebuke, there was silence for a time.

"Well," said David, "I don't know. I don't believe in brigands
altogether. Millions of people come to Italy without seeing anything
of the kind, and why should we? For my part, I still think it very
likely that the driver has driven back to some place on the road
where he can get better entertainment for man and beast than is
offered at Paestum."

"Where could he go?" said Frank. "There isn't any inn for miles."

"O you don't know," said David. "There are some by-roads, I dare
say, that lead to houses on the hills. I dare say he'll soon be
back. From what I've seen of the Italians, I think they'd stand a
great deal before losing any money. The driver would wait till he
got his pay, and then try to take his revenge."

"Well, it may be so," said Frank; "burin any case, it will be best
for us to start off at once. There's no use waiting here any
longer. We can foot it, after all. And we may come to houses, or
we may pick up a wagon, and get a lift."

This was evidently the best thing that could be done, and so they
all at once set off on foot, on their way back to Salerno.

Fortunately for them, they were quite fresh. They had been driving
all the morning; and for two hours they had been strolling up and
down within a small circuit, looking at temples, or sprawling on
the grass. They had eaten a good lunch before leaving the carriage,
and had not had time yet to feel hungry. The weather was mild and
pleasant. The sun shone brightly, without being too hot, and
everything was favorable to a walk. More than all, the road was
very good, and not being much travelled, it was grass-grown to a
great extent, and this grass afforded an easy and agreeable path
for their feet.

They set out in high spirits, walking pretty vigorously, yet not
too rapidly, for they wished to husband their strength, chatting
all the while, and debating the point as to the driver's intentions.
Frank maintained that he had deserted them out of malice, and Bob
coincided with this view. David, on the other hand, believed that
he had merely driven away to find refreshment, and would return,
and Clive sided with him. But, as mile after mile was traversed,
and still no signs of the driver appeared, David's theory grew
weak, and Frank's grew strong. As for Uncle Moses, he said nothing,
his feeling being chiefly one of intense anxiety to get the boys
home before meeting with brigands. The awful images of Italian
banditti, which Frank's words had called up in his mind, were not
to be easily got rid of.

They walked on for about two hours, and by that time had succeeded
in putting some seven or eight miles between themselves and Paestum.
The road now became wider, and quite free from grass, giving every
indication of being a well-trodden thoroughfare, and exciting the
hope that they would find some wine cart at least, or other mode
of conveyance, by means of which they could complete their journey
to Salerno.

Suddenly, on making a turn in the road, they saw before them some
moving objects, the sight of which elicited a shout of joy from Bob.

"Donkeys! Donkeys!" he cried. "Hurrah, boys!"

"Why, what good are they?" said David.

"Good?" cried Bob; "every good in the world. We can hire them, or
buy them, and ride back to Salerno."

"That's a capital idea," cried Frank, in great delight. "I hoped
to find wine carts, or ox carts; but donkeys are infinitely better."

Hurrying forward, they soon overtook the donkeys. There were six
or eight of them, guided by an old man and a boy. Frank instantly
accosted them. Of course he could not speak Italian, but by means
of signs he succeeded in conveying to the old man's mind the
requisite idea. On this occasion he felt most strongly the benefit
which he had received from his intercourse with Paolo. Frank
thus pointed to his feet, and then backward, and then forward,
and then pointing to the donkey nearest, he made a motion to
mount, after which he showed the old man some money, and tapping
it, and pointing to the donkey, he looked inquiringly at him, as
if to ask, "How much?"

The old man made some signs which seemed to Frank to be a question,
"How far?" so he roared out, in stentorian tones, "Salerno."

Upon this the old man stood for a little while in silent thought.
Then he looked at Frank, and then, pointing with one hand at Frank's
money, with the other he touched the donkey which seemed to say
that he would let the donkey go for that price. As there was not
quite a dollar in Frank's hand, in loose change, the charge seemed
to him to be very reasonable, and even, as he expressed it, dirt
cheap. So thought all the rest, and they all proceeded to bring
forth their loose change, and pass it over to the old-man. The
hands of the latter closed over the silver, with a nervous and
almost convulsive clutch, and after one long, hungry look at each
lot that was given him, he would insert each very carefully in the
remote corner of an old sheepskin poach that hung in front of him,
suspended around his waist.

But now arose a difficulty. The donkeys had no saddles. That was
a small matter, however, and was not the real difficulty. The
real difficulty lay in the fact that they had no bridles. How
could they guide them?

Frank tried by signs to express this difficulty to the old man,
and the latter understood him, for he smiled, nodded, shrugged
his shoulders, and then pointed to his boy, and waved his band
in the direction they wished to go. The boy also smiled and
nodded, and made signs of his own, by which he plainly showed
them that he intended to accompany them as guide, and lead the
drove, while they might ride.

This being understood, the boys felt satisfied, and each one now
proceeded to select the donkey which was most to his taste. Bob
had already made his selection, and was mounted on the back of the
biggest donkey of the lot--an animal whose size, breadth of chest,
and slender limbs gave him an air of actual elegance. All the boys
envied Bob his mount; but none of them complained. Frank secured
a solid animal, that had a matter-of-fact expression, and looked
as though he had no nonsense in him. Clive chose one that had a
slight shade of melancholy in his face, as though he had known
sorrow. David's donkey was a shaggy, hard-headed, dogged-looking
animal, that seemed bent on having his own way. Uncle Moses'
mount was rather eccentric. He chose the smallest animal of the
lot,--a donkey, in fact,--which was so small that its rider's
feet could only be kept from the ground with difficulty. Uncle
Moses, indeed, if he had chosen, might have taken steps on the
ground, and accelerated the motion of his beast by propelling
him with his own feet.

Great was the laughter that arose among the party as each one
mounted his gallant steed, and turned to look upon his companion.
Jeers, and jokes, and light chaff arose, and the boys found no end
of fun in this new adventure. But Uncle Moses wasn't able to see
any fun in it at all. He sat with an expression on his face that
would have done honor to a martyr at the stake, and the boys
respected him too much to include him in their good-natured raillery.

The Italian boy took David's donkey by the ear, and started.
David's donkey, in spite of his appearance of obstinacy, followed
without resistance, and trotted nimbly off, the Italian boy
running easily by his side. The other donkeys followed. As they
had no bridles and no saddles, some of the party had a little
difficulty in preserving their balance, but managed to do so by
grabbing the coarse hair of the donkey's mane. The pace was a
rapid one, and it was wonderful to see how well the Italian boy
kept up with them without losing breath, or slackening it. This
he did for a long time.

Among those who cared nothing for saddle or bridle was Bob. On the
back of a donkey he felt as comfortable as though he was sitting
in an easy-chair. As they trotted along the road, Bob sat with his
arms folded, and his legs now hanging loosely, now drawn up in
front of him, and at other times pretending that he had a side-saddle.
At length he became discontented with the subordinate position that
he was occupying, in merely following in the rear of a leader like
David. He was a far better rider than David, and his donkey a far
better donkey than the leading one. With the ambitions desire to
obtain the post of honor for himself, he beat, pounded, and kicked
at his donkey. For a long time this had no effect whatever; the
donkey not only was not stimulated by it, but he did not even seem
to be conscious of it. At last Bob determined to resort to other
methods. Drawing a pin from his shirt collar, where it was filling
the place of a lost button, he stuck it two or three times in the
donkey's flanks.

This was too much. The patience of Bob's donkey had reached its
farthest limit. It could endure it no more.

With a wild bound the donkey sprang forward, and in three
paces had cleared the way to the first. Another leap, and he
was beyond them.

The donkey ran like a race-horse. His slender, sinewy limbs
seemed as fitted for running and for speed as the limbs of an
antelope. His head was down, his neck arched, his tail in
the air, and his long, rapid strides bore him with astonishing
velocity far ahead and far away.

The Italian boy tittered a cry of dismay, and stopped short.
The donkey which he was holding stopped also, and the others
did the same. The Italian boy looked with a face of consternation
after the runaway. All the rest looked with vague fears in
the same direction, and with a half hope that Bob might stop
the animal, or turn him.

"_E perduto!_" exclaimed the Italian boy; and though they did
not understand Italian, yet there was something in his tone,
and look, and gesture, which told them the meaning of those
words--"He's lost!"




CHAPTER VI.

_Flight of Bob.--Difference between a tame Donkey and a wild
Ass.--Carried off to the Mountains.--The Headlong Course.--The
Mountain Pass.--The Journey's End.--Ill-omened Place.--Confounded
by a new Terror.--The Brigands._


When the donkey first bounded off, the feelings of Bob were nothing
but pure, unmitigated delight. As his spirited animal, roused from
his indifference, burst through the crowd and reached the head,
Bob's heart swelled with triumph. As he rushed along the road, far
ahead of the rest, his triumph increased. He turned his head, and
waved his hands to his friends. Then he waved his cap in the air,
and shouted, "Hurrah!" Then he rode side-saddle fashion for a little
while, then he drew both legs up in front, and then he indulged in
a series of absurd and fantastic tricks.

All this Bob did because he supposed that he was riding ahead
of his friends, and that they were following him, and admiring
him. He had not made any calculation as to the great rate of
speed at which his donkey was carrying him, and had no idea
how quickly he was leaving all the rest behind. So, while he
had been indulging in his pranks for the amusement of those
whom he supposed to be following him, he was, in reality,
already beyond the reach of their eyes.

For his donkey was an animal very far superior to the common herd.
He was not a donkey--he was an ass--spirited, slender, sinewy, and
fleet as a race-horse. There was something so peculiarly easy in
the ass's gait that it deceived the rider. It seemed to him to be
a gentle ambling trot, or something midway between that and a
canter. In reality this easy pace was exceedingly swift, and before
long Bob was out of sight of his friends. This discovery burst
upon him as he turned, with the intention of shouting back some
nonsense to them, when, to his utter amazement and consternation,
he saw no signs of them whatever.

It must be confessed that the shock which this discovery gave to
Bob was a very powerful one. He looked all around in anxious
curiosity, with the endeavor to comprehend his situation. His first
thought was, that some accident had happened to the party which
was delaying them; but soon he became aware of his own tremendous
progress, and understood the true state of the case'. He was now
in a place where the road ran straight for over a mile. At the end
of this it turned. As Bob reached this turning-place, he looked
back again, and far away, just at the entrance upon the straight
piece of road, he saw the party coming. A few seconds and he was
once more carried out of sight.

And now Bob began to feel that his situation was a serious one. It
was not pleasant to be carried away in this manner, in a strange
country, on the back of an animal like this. Had it been a runaway
horse, he would have felt less troubled. He would, in fact, have
felt quite at home, for he had been frequently run away with on
horseback. He understood horses, but of asses he knew nothing. A
horse was to some extent a sensible animal. He would run away, and
in due time would come to a pause. But an ass! Was an ass possessed
of any sense of decency--any conscience? Would the well-known
obstinacy of the ass be shown on an occasion like this? and would
this ass, merely out of that obstinacy, keep on running for all
the rest of the day? It was a startling thought.

Bob all this time had been making desperate efforts to stop the
ass. He was considerably embarrassed by the fact that there was
no bridle, and no way of getting at the ass, so as to exert his
strength upon him. He tried various ways. First he pulled at his
long ears. For this the ass cared not a whit. He did not seem
to be conscious of it. Then he wound his hands about his neck,
and tried to pull his head back. The effect was useless. Bob's
strength was unavailing. He could no more move that bent and
stubborn neck, than he could straighten the crooked fluke of an
anchor. Then he pounded wildly upon the neck, shoulders, and
flanks of the ass, and kicked against his sides. This, too, was
useless, for his puny blows seemed to affect the animal no more
than so many puffs of wind. Then Bob tried other means. He sat
upright, and suddenly called, in a short, sharp, peremptory voice,
"Whoa!" This he repeated over and over, but without any success;
and at length he reflected that _whoa_ was English, a language
which, of course, an Italian ass could not understand.

While Bob had been putting forth these efforts, the ass bad been
flying along at an undiminished rate of speed, and the country
swept past him on either side. He passed long lines of trees by
the roadside, he saw field after field flit by, and the distant
hills went slowly along out of the line of his vision. Hitherto he
had met with no one at all along the road, nor had he seen any
cattle of any kind. His efforts to arrest the ass had been fruitless,
and he gave them up, and looked forward for some opportunity to
get assistance. He remembered that the road had no towns or inns
between Paestum and Salerno, and he began to fear that he would be
carried all the way to the latter place before he could stop.

His fears, however, were unfounded; for now an event occurred which
made him full of other thoughts. It was a sudden change in the
course of his flight. Thus far they had been going along the main
road. Now, however, they came to a place where a road led away on
the right, apparently to the mountains. Without the slightest pause
or hesitation, but with undiminished speed, and the headlong flight
of one familiar with the way, the ass turned from the main road,
and ran into this side road.

The anxiety and fear which Bob had thus far felt were trifling,
indeed, compared with the emotions that now seized upon him. Thus
far he had not felt altogether cut off from his friends. He knew
all the time that they were behind him, and that at the worst he
could not be carried farther than Salerno, and that they would come
up with him there, and thus they would all be reunited before dark.
But now he was suddenly carried off helplessly from the main road,
and in a moment seemed severed from his friends. Where was he going?
When would the ass stop?

Before him arose the mountainous country, not many miles away, the
declivities in some places slight and gradual, in other places
abrupt. Cultivated spots appeared here and there, and white villages,
and old castles. It was not, however, an inviting country, and the
nearer he drew to it the less he liked it. The road here was not
so broad, and smooth, and easy as the one he had just left, but
was narrow and rough. At length he reached the skirts of the
mountains, and the road now began to ascend. After a while it grew
somewhat steeper, and decidedly rougher. And now Bob found, to his
immense relief, that the pace was at last beginning to tell upon
the tough sinews of the fiery animal which he bestrode. The ass
could not keep up such a pace while ascending the mountain. Gradually
his speed slackened, and Bob at length began to look about for a
soft place, where he could jump.

But by this time the road entered what looked like a pass among
the mountains. On one side the hill rose, wooded in some places,
in others rocky; while on the other side it went down steep for
about thirty, feet, where a mountain torrent brawled, and dashed
over its rocky bed. It was about here that the ass slackened his
pace sufficiently for Bob to jump from his back; but just here
it was impossible to jump without the risk of breaking some of
his bones, and he was not yet quite desperate enough to run such
a risk as that. As the road went on through the pass, it grew
narrower and steeper, quite impassable for carriages, and Only
fit for travellers on horse or foot. The farther on it went,
the rougher and steeper it became, and it went on with many a
winding. No houses appeared, except at a great distance, and
those which did thus appear seemed separated by deep valleys
from the place where he was.

Bob could have easily dismounted from the donkey now; but he
hesitated. He thought with some dismay upon the distance that lay
between him and the main road. He thought that his friends must
have passed beyond the place where he turned off, and that if he
did go back he could not hope to meet them. Besides, to go so long
a distance on foot was too formidable a task just now. He hoped
that the ass had some aim in directing his course here, and that
he was seeking his home. Perhaps that home was close by. Perhaps
it was some village in the mountains. If so, he might be able to
obtain a mount for Salerno, and still reach that place before
night was over.

He hoped thug to find help--to get a horse or an ass, and also
something to eat, and thus set forth for Salerno. As the road wound
on, and as he traversed it, he looked eagerly at every projecting
cliff before him; and as he rounded each projection he still looked
forward eagerly in search of the place, whether house or village,
where he might obtain the help of which he stood in need. But the
road continued lonely. He saw no houses, no villages, in its
vicinity. He met with no living things, whether men or cattle. It
was the loneliest path he had ever traversed.

At last he rounded a projecting spur of the mountain; and here
he beheld a scene which was more promising. A little distance
off there was a bridge, which crossed the torrent. Beyond this
the mountains sloped away in an easy declivity, where appeared
several houses. On the other side of the bridge were two men.
The sight filled Bob with joy, and fearing that the ass might
once more take it into his head to run, he at once leaped off
the animal's back, and walked towards the bridge. The ass, freed
from his weight, trotted briskly away, and Bob followed. The
noise of me ass trotting over the bridge roused the two men, and
they walked across and caught him. One of them then held him,
and the other walked towards Bob.

As the latter approached, Bob noticed that he was dirty and bearded,
and rather shabby. He had a coarse jacket, with brass buttons; a
red flannel shirt, which was open, and disclosed a hairy breast;
and coarse leather breeches with leggings. A conical felt hat was
on the top of his head. Thusfar he was simply the counterpart of
hundreds of other peasants in this part of the country, shepherds,
drovers, wine-sellers, etc., such as he had encountered during his
drive. But in one important respect ne was different.

He had a gun in his hand.

This gun at once made him seem more than a simple peasant. It made
a profound impression upon Bob. And as the Italian approached, with
his eyes fixed on the new comer, a strange and very natural suspicion
was roused in Bob's mind.

"It's a brigand!" he thought. "I'm lost!"




CHAPTER VII.

The Lurking-place of the Brigands.--The captive Boy.--The hideous
Household.--The horrible old Hag.--The slattern Woman.--The dirty
Children.--The old Crone and the evil Eye.--Despondency of Bob.--Is
Escape Possible?--Night.-Imprisoned.--The Bed of Straw.--Outlook
into the Night from the Prison Windows.


A brigand!

Such was the appalling thought that came to the mind of Bob, as
the Italian advanced towards, him. As he came closer, his face
became more distinctly revealed. It was not a face which reassured
him. Heavy, shaggy black eyebrows, from beneath which gleamed black
and fiery eyes, a skin browned by the hot, Italian sun, and white
teeth, that glistened from behind a vast matted mass of tangled
beard and moustache,--such was the face that appeared. It seemed
an evil and sinister face--a face that revealed a cruel and
treacherous soul. No wonder that Bob's heart sank within him as he
saw himself confronted by one like this.

The Italian stood looking at him with sharp and close scrutiny.
Then he said something.

Bob could not understand him, and tried to explain by signs that
he had lost his way, and that the donkey had run away with him. He
also pointed to himself, and said, "Americano," and waved his hand
in the direction of the road up which he had come, and said,
"Salerno." This was very well for Bob, especially when his anxiety
of mind is taken into account, and his signs seemed intelligible
to the Italian. He looked at Bob carefully, and finally seemed to
make out an explanation of his appearance, which satisfied him,
after which he motioned to him to follow, and walked back towards
the bridge. Bob's first impulse was to rush away, and run as fast
as his legs could carry him; but the thought of the Italian's gun
checked the impulse, and he followed.

Meanwhile, the other brigand, who had caught the ass, stood stroking
it and examining it. The animal seemed perfectly quiet and docile;
altogether a changed animal, different far from that wild beast
that had torn Bob away from all his friends, and thrown him here
among these dread associates. This other man had very much the same
general appearance as the first one. His beard was reddish, and
his eyes were smaller, the general expression of his face was more
sinister, as Bob thought, and though he had no gun, yet he seemed
none the less formidable.

The two men stood talking together for some time. One of them seemed
to be narrating to the other Bob's account of himself, as he had
understood it from the signs that had been made. After this they
seemed to be discussing the subject of Bob and the ass, for they
looked at him and at the animal from time to time during their
conversation. At length they seemed to have made up their minds
about the subject, for they stopped talking; and motioning Bob to
follow, they walked away, leading the ass with them.

Again a strong impulse rose in Bob's mind to fly; but again
the dread of being shot at prevented him. He therefore followed
as before.

There was in this place a circular sweep of hills enclosing a
valley, through which the brook ran. Crossing this by a bridge,
the road wound along a gentle declivity, and not very far away were
one or two houses. One of these was two stories high, much
dilapidated, and looked as though it might once have been a wind-mill,
or something of that sort. It stood on the edge of the torrent,
and the door-way was towards the road. The other buildings seemed
to be barns of some sort, or sheep-folds. The grassy declivity
spread away till it reached a steeper ascent, and here there began
a forest which covered the mountain-sides.

Towards this old mill Bob was led by his captors. As he drew near
he saw some dirty children at play, in front of the door-way. Soon
an old woman came out, followed by another, who was younger. The
old woman was a hideous old crone. Her hair was a matted gray mass,
her teeth were gone, and her face was pinched, and so seamed with
wrinkles, that she looked as though she might be over a hundred
years old. The other woman was very dirty and slatternly. She had
a dirty baby in her arms; her hair was in disorder, her face was
greasy and smouched, and a filthy cloth, which might once have been
white, was on her head. The women and children were all barefoot.
As Bob approached, they all stared at him with the most intense
curiosity; the two women stood still and stared; the children
stopped their play and stared; and there was something in the glow
and glitter of all these fiery, black, Italian eyes which seemed
horrible to poor Bob, and made his flesh fairly creep.

The men then began to talk to the women, evidently explaining
about Bob and the ass; and as they talked the eyes of all of them
were most of the time fixed upon these two. As for the children,
they glared for a time with very evil looking faces at Bob; but
at length the ass seemed to offer superior attractions to them,
for they made a rush at it, climbed on its back, pulled at its
ears and tail, and tormented it in various ways. Strange to say,
this animal, that had punished poor Bob's little trick so fearfully,
showed no resentment whatever at his present treatment, but stood
there, no longer the fiery wild ass, but the very living image
of a patient donkey.

Bob stood there looking upon the scene with his heart sinking within
him, yet by no means despairing. He had too high a spirit and too
stout a heart to give up so soon; and as he stood there, in the
power of this evil company, he turned over in his mind a hundred
different modes of escape. If he could once effect his escape from
these people, he might easily go back by the mountain path. But
how could he escape? That was the difficulty. Thus far, to his
amazement, they had not inflicted any cruelty upon him, nor had
they tied his hands; but that was, no doubt, owing to their contempt
for him, and their conviction that he would not venture to fly.
All that Bob had ever heard about the manners and customs of Italian
brigands now came to his mind--how they detain their prisoners
subject to a ransom, treating them well enough until the ransom
comes, but if it fails, then inflicting upon them the most horrible
cruelties. To Bob it now seemed certain that they intended to hold
him for ransom, and that they would treat him well till he should
be freed. As he felt certain about obtaining his ransom, he began
to feel less anxious, and his bold and enterprising spirit began
to conceive various ways by which he might baffle the brigands.

At length one of the men went off, and the younger of the women
went into the house. The brigand with the gun remained, and talked
for a little while with the old woman. It was evident to Bob, by
the glances which they threw at him, that he was the subject of
their conversation. To him the old woman was by far the most
obnoxious of the whole crowd. The slatternly woman, the dirty,
impish children, the brigands,--all these were bad enough; but the
old woman was far worse to his imagination. There was in her watery
eyes, in the innumerable wrinkles of her leathery skin, in her
toothless jaws, something so uncanny that he almost shuddered. She
reminded him of some of those witches of whom he had read, who, in
former and more superstitious ages, were supposed to have dealings
with the evil one, and whose looks certainly sustained such a
supposition. To Bob, at that time, it seemed that if ever any one
did in reality have dealings with the evil one, that one was the
old hag behind him. To him she seemed a witch; he thought of her
as a witch; and if she had at that time put on a peaked hat,
straddled a broomstick, and flown off through the air, it would
scarcely have surprised him.

At length the brigand went off, and the old woman came up to Bob.
At her approach Bob involuntarily shrank back a step or two. The
old hag fixed her small, watery eyes on him, mumbled with her
toothless jaws, and after a few efforts croaked out something in
Italian, followed by some gestures with her hands, which Bob
understood to convey a general assurance of safety. For this he
was prepared, since his mind was now fixed upon the idea that he
would be kept for a ransom. Then the old woman came nearer, and
put one of her thin, bony, shrivelled hands on his shoulder. The
touch was like the touch of a skeleton, and suggested horrible
thoughts to poor Bob. A thrill of disgust and terror shot through
him; but he stood it, for he did not like to show his disgust, for
fear of offending his hideous companion. The old woman, then standing
before him with her hand on his shoulder, looked at him for a long
time in silence. Bob looked back at her, and it seemed to him that
he had never seen in all his life, such a hideous face. The wrinkles
were now more plainly visible, the jaws seemed to be more retreating,
the cheeks were sunken, the cheek-bones projecting, the eyes, small
and weak, showed tears that slowly trickled down.

Suddenly the old hag gave a low groan, which Bob attributed to some
pain or other, and turned away. He noticed that she was trembling,
and thought it was the weakness of her extreme old age. He was
puzzled by these movements of hers, and felt sure that they meant
no good. After a few minutes she, turned again, and beckoned to
him to follow. She led the way into the house. On reaching the
door Bob hesitated, and stood without looking in. He saw a large
apartment occupying all the lower story of the old mill, with some
rude seats and rough beds. A long ladder led up to the upper story.
The old woman beckoned for him to come in, and Bob did not like to
refuse. So he went in. She then brought forth some cold mutton and
black bread, which she offered him. Bob was ravenously hungry; but
at that moment an idea came to him--a suspicion that was created
by the very sinister aspect and very singular behavior of the old
crone. The suspicion was, that it was drugged or poisoned. This
suspicion was not at all in accordance with the idea that they were
keeping him for a ransom, but it was an irrepressible one, and
though hungry, he did not dare to eat. So he shook his head. Upon
this the old hag took the things away, and Bob went out again.

The dirty children had been playing with the donkey all this
time, and still kept up their sport but in the midst of their
sport they still had curiosity enough to keep their eyes from
time to time upon the strange boy who had come thus suddenly into
their midst. The furtive, sinister glances of their wicked black
eyes had something uncanny in them, which made Bob feel more
uncomfortable than ever. He took a seat upon a stone in front of
the house, on one side of the door-way, and looked all around.
The mountains arose there, rising first gently in an easy acclivity,
and then sweeping up with a greater incline. Their sides, and
even their summits, were here all covered with forests. On the
left he could see the bridge over which the road passed--the road
that led to safety. Could he but escape for a few moments from
the eyes of his jailers, he might be saved. And why not? Two
women, and some dirty children--why should he care for such guards
as these? One rush, one leap, and he would be free. Willingly
would he walk all the way to Salerno. Anything would be welcome
after such a captivity as this.

But Bob was doomed to disappointment; for just as he had made up
his mind to fly, just as he was looking all around to see if the
coast was clear, he saw, to his deep distress, the two brigands
approaching from the outhouse. They were carrying something which,
on nearer approach, turned out to be a sheep, which they had just
killed. Of course all thoughts of flight now departed, and Bob
could only deplore his own stupidity in allowing that one chance
of escape to pass away.

After this they began to boil portions of the sheep in a pot; and
soon the savory odor of a stew filled the room, and came to Bob's
nostrils. As he was half starving, the delicious odor excited the
utmost longing to taste it, and he at once began to feel rather
satisfied that he had not fled. He felt that a flight after dinner
would be far better. In due time the dinner was ready. It was a
stew,--mutton, with vegetables, cooked deliciously,--and Bob's
hunger was so great that if it had been worse cooked it would have
been a banquet. He had no fears of poison, no suspicions of drugging,
for the whole family prepared to partake' of the repast--the two
brigands, the old hag, the slatternly woman, and the dirty children.
The stew was poured out into a huge wooden platter; they used no
plates, but dipped with their fingers. The sight awakened a little
disgust in Bob, but he was too hungry to be squeamish, and he
succeeded in picking out various morsels which had not been touched
by the dirty hands of his companions.

During the repast Bob noticed that they all kept looking, from time
to time, at him, and their furtive glances met his eyes whenever
he turned them. The old woman sometimes seemed to devour him with
a greedy, hungry sort of gaze, that was very horrible. It was an
ogrish look, and Bob's appetite was somewhat checked by the horror
that he found in her eyes, and he was unable to have that free play
with the repast which he might otherwise have had.

After the repast Bob once more went outside, hoping now to have
the opportunity which he had missed before. The dirty children went
outside too. The two brigands followed, and occupied themselves
with various employments. Escape from such surroundings as these
was impossible. At length one of the brigands mounted the ass,
and rode away down the road by which he had come. This circumstance
seemed suspicious to Bob at first, but afterwards he thought that
perhaps he had gone to Salerno to get the ransom.

After this, darkness came on so suddenly that he was amazed. He
had already noticed that the twilight in Italy was very much less
than that to which he had been accustomed at home, but had never
been so impressed by it as now. There seemed but a minute Between
day and night It was quite bright, and then in a wonderfully short
time it became dark.

Upon this they all entered the house. Bob had to go with the rest.
The room was feebly illuminated by a small oil lamp. Bob noticed
that they fastened the door with a huge chain. The fastening of
that door was ominous to him, and the clanking of that chain smote
him to the heart, and echoed drearily within his soul. It seemed
to him now like real imprisonment, shut in here with chains and
bars, within this stone prison.

Soon they all prepared to retire; and the brigand who had first
met Bob beckoned to him, and taking the lamp, climbed the ladder
to the upper story. Bob followed him. The upper story was about
eighteen feet above the lower one. On reaching it, Bob saw that it
was all one apartment. There was no bed here, or bedding, or
furniture of any description whatever. Sheep-skins hung from the
rafters, and dried mutton, and some vegetables. In one corner was
a pile of straw. To this the brigand pointed, and Bob went over
there. He understood that he was to pass the night on this pile of
straw. Once more Bob looked all around as he stood there by the
straw. He saw the farther end of the room in dark shadows; he saw
the articles hanging from the rafters. He noticed, also, that
there were two windows, one in front and the other in the rear. In
these windows there were no sashes. They were open to the night
air. One glance sufficed to show him this.

The brigand now said something which Bob supposed to mean good
night, so he very civilly said the same in English. The brigand
grinned, and then descended the ladder, taking the lamp with him.

On his departure, Bob's first act was to take off his boots. He
then felt his way along the wall to the front window, for it was
so intensely dark inside and outside, that not a thing was visible.
Reaching the window, he put his head out and looked down. He could
see nothing. All was the very blackness of darkness. He looked up
to the sky. All there was blackness also and darkness. Then he
looked down again. If he had only some means of getting down, he
could venture the descent; but he had nothing. There were no sheets
here for him to tie together; he could not make a rope out of that
straw strong enough to bear his weight. To jump down was not to be
thought of, for he knew very well that at least twenty feet separated
him from the ground.

He turned away from the window in despair, and groping his way back
to his rude bed, he sat upon the straw, and gave himself up to his
gloomy and despondent thoughts.




CHAPTER VIII.

_The worn-out Captive.--Light Slumbers.--Fearful Wakening.--The
stealthy Step.--The overmastering. Horror.--The lone Boy confronted
by his Enemy.--The hungry Eyes.--Is it real, or a Nightmare?--The
supreme Moment._


The darkness of the night and the impossibility of escape filled
Bob with the most gloomy and distressing thoughts, which at first
quite Overcame him. But at length other thoughts came, which were
of a less distressing character. His mind once more reverted to
the idea that he was held for ransom, and that for the present, at
least, he was in safety; and not only so, but well cared for. These
people certainly had given him of their best. They had made him
share at the common meal, and though this bed of straw was not very
elegant, it was at least comfortable, and was no worse than they
themselves used to sleep upon.

He flung himself down upon the straw, and found that it was a
soft and a refreshing couch. Far better was this fresh straw
than any formal bed could have been, for in such a house as that,
a mattress or a bed would certainly have been hideous thing, as
dirty, as greasy, and as squalid as the people of the house. On
the whole, Bob was pleased with his bed of straw, and with its
clean, fresh smell.

Escape being thus cut off for the present, Bob's frame of mind grew
more placid. As long as he entertained the idea of immediate flight,
his mind was constantly on the strain; but now, when that idea had
been dismissed, he grew calmer, and thought over his circumstances
with more deliberation. He remembered that one of the brigands
had already gone away, and, as he supposed, to Salerno. If so, he
would, no doubt, either see his friends, or at least hear from
them, some time on the following day.

The more he considered his situation, the more free from all
immediate danger did it seem, and the more did his hopes increase.
He looked forward with eager hope, to the following day. That would,
without doubt, bring him news of his friends, or, perhaps, restore
him to liberty. Under the pleasant influence of thoughts like these,
his mind grew more calm and cheerful every moment, and passed into
a state of tranquil contentment Besides, he was tired, and his
weariness brought on drowsiness. As long as his excitement lasted,
he could not feel the drowsiness; but now, as calmness returned,
the weariness and sleepiness became stronger, and by degrees
overpowered him.

Gradually the thoughts of his mind became intermingled with the
fancies of dreams, and blended the realities around him with things
at a distance. All was still, outside and inside. No sound whatever
arose from below. The family seemed all asleep. At last Bob dozed
off also, and passed into the land of dreams.

His sleep was not heavy. Many things conspired to keep his senses
somewhat on the alert even in that slumber of his, and he was in
that condition which is called sleeping with one eye open. The fact
is, the extraordinary excitement of his donkey ride, and especially
of his last adventure in thus falling into captivity, had so roused
his faculties, so affected his nerves, and so sharpened his senses,
that even in his sleep there still predominated the thoughts and
the purposes of his waking hours.

In this state he remained for some time, sleeping, yet vigilant,
the body gaining rest and refreshment, but the wary soul on the
alert, as though to guard against danger.

How long this sleep continued, whether minutes or hours, Bob could
never afterwards remember; but with a sudden shock through all his
nerves, he opened his eyes. He was lying, as he had flung himself
on the straw, on his back, with his head elevated against a bundle
of straw, in such a way that he could see the length of the room.

It was a noise that he heard. He listened breathlessly, and looked
with all his eyes.

Around him all was dark. It might be near morning, or it might be
early night; he could not tell. All was still, outside and inside--the
blackness of darkness and the stillness of death.

Yet now, in the midst of that black darkness and that deathly
stillness, he became aware, of a sight and a sound.

It was a low, creaking sound, which was repeated at short intervals,
accompanied by a sliding, shuffling noise. It sounded in the
direction of the opening by which the ladder led up from below.
Looking there, he saw a ray of light, faint and flickering, yet
visible enough in that deep darkness; and as the grating, shuffling
sounds succeeded one another at regular intervals, even so did the
faint, flickering ray of light grow brighter and brighter.

As Bob looked at this and took it all in, one thought came to him
in an instant,--

_Somebody was coming up the ladder!_

The thought went through him with a pang.

Somebody is coming up the ladder!

Who?

What for?

That mysterious somebody was coming slowly and stealthily. It was
the tread of one who wished to come unobserved.

On waking out of sleep suddenly, the mind is often confused; but
when, after such a sudden awakening, it is confronted by some
horrible presence, the shock is sometimes too great to be endured.
So was it with Bob at this time. His awaking had been sudden; and
the horror that he found in the object that now presented itself
was, that the shuffling sound that arose from the ladder was the
step of Doom,--and the mysterious visitant was stealing towards
him to make him its prey. There arose within him an awful
anticipation. His eyes fixed themselves upon the place where the
light was shining; all his soul awaited, in dreadful expectation,
the appearance of the mysterious visitor, and as the stealthy step
drew nearer and nearer, the excitement grew stronger, and more
painful, and more racking.

At length the figure began to emerge above the opening.

Bob's eyes were fixed upon the place.

He saw first the light. It emerged above the opening--an old oil-lamp
held in a bony, grisly, skinny hand. Then followed an arm.

Bob's excitement was now terrible. His heart beat with wild throbs.
His whole frame seemed to vibrate under that pulsation which was
almost like a convulsion.

The arm rose higher! Higher still!

_It_ was coming!

There arose a matted shock of greasy, gray hair. The light shone
down upon it as it was upheld in the bony hand. The hair came tip,
and then, gradually, a face.

That face was pale as ashes; it was lean and shrivelled; the cheeks
were sunken; the cheek bones projected; and a million wrinkles were
carved upon the deep-seamed brow and corrugated cheeks. Over that
hideous face the gray hair wandered. Bob's blood seemed to freeze
within his veins. The old fable tells of the Gorgon, whose face
inspired such horror that the beholder stiffened into stone. So
here. Bob beheld a Gorgon face. He felt petrified with utter horror!

As the face came up it was turned towards him. It emerged higher
and higher, and at length stopped about a foot above the opening.
Here it fixed its gaze upon Bob, bending itself forward, and holding
forth the light as far as possible, so that it might light up the
room, and peering through the gloom so as to see where Bob was.

There seemed something indescribably evil, malignant, and cruel,
in those bleary eyes which thus sought Bob out, fastened themselves
upon him, and seemed to devour him with their gaze. There was a
hideous eagerness in her look. There was a horrible fascination
about it,--such as the serpent exerts over the bird. And as the
bird, while under the spell of the serpent's eye, seems to lose
all power of flight, and falls a victim to the destroyer, so
here, at this time, Bob felt paralyzed at that basilisk glance,
and lost all power of motion. He could not speak. He tried to
scream. No cry came. He was dumb with horror. He was like one in
a nightmare; but this was a waking night-mare, and not the fanciful
terrors of dreamland.

But the horror was too great to be endured. He closed his eyes
tight, and thus shut out the sight.

But though he shut out the sight, he could not shut oat sound; and
soon he became aware of something which brought a fresh terror over
his soul.

It was a stealthy step.

It was advancing towards, him.

Slow, cautious, cunning, yet steady, and nearer and still nearer,
came the awful step! Bob opened his eyes, to assure himself once
more of the worst. He opened them by a resistless impulse.

The figure was now half way between the opening and the bed. The
old hag stood now fully revealed. Her bleary eyes were fixed on
Bob. One hand upheld the flickering lamp, and in the other was a
sharp weapon.

Bob closed his eyes in an anguish of horror. He was dumb. He could
utter no cry. He could not move. The blow was coming. The destroyer
was here, yet he could not make one motion to ward off that blow.
His brain whirled, his heart seemed to stop beating.

There was a terrible moment of dumb, motionless, breathless
expectancy.

The old woman knelt by his side.

She put the lamp on the floor.

Then she reached out one of her long, lean, bony, skinny, shrivelled
hands, and took Bob by the hair of his head, while with the other
she raised her sharp weapon.




CHAPTER IX.

_The Cavalcade in Pursuit.--Hopes and Fears.--Theories about the
lost Boy.--A new Turn to Affairs.--Explanations.--On to
Salerno.--Inquiries.--Baffled.--Fresh Consternation and
Despondency.--The last Hope._


Meanwhile the party on donkeys trotted along the road after Bob.
At the exclamation from the donkey boy they had all experienced a
shock; but soon they recovered from it, and the shock only served
as a stimulus to make them push the donkeys onward more rapidly.
They rode on for some time without making any remarks, each one
looking eagerly forward to see if Bob might reappear; but he had
vanished behind a turn in the road, and as they advanced, there
were other turns to be encountered, and so they were unable to see
him. This began to create uneasiness. At first they all had hoped
that Bob would be able to stop the ass, or that the animal, after
indulging his paces for a short time, would stop of his own accord;
but the farther they went, the more they became convinced that this
affair had something serious in it.

At length they reached that long, straight piece of road already
mentioned. At one end of this was a rising ground; as they ascended
this and reached its summit, they looked ahead, and there, far away
before them, was a single rider. They recognized Bob at once. He
was more than a mile away; but the sight of him filled them all
with joy, and they at once stimulated their donkeys to greater
exertions. In spite of the distance that intervened, they all
shouted as loud as they could; but of course the distance was too
great, and their cries were lost before they reached nearly as far
away as Bob. In a short time he turned in the road, and passed out
of sight.

They now rode on for a long time, and at length came to the road
that led to the mountains, up which Bob had gone. This road was
not even noticed by them. They had passed other roads of the same
kind, which, like this one, led to the mountains, and attached no
more importance to this than to those. In the minds of some of
them, however, these side-roads suggested a fear, that Bob's ass
might have turned off into some one of them; but of course, as they
were all alike, they could not conjecture which one would have been
taken by the runaway. As they rode on, they still looked ahead. At
every turn in the road they still expected to see the fugitive;
and it was not until the donkeys themselves gave signs of fatigue,
that they were willing to slacken their pace. But the nature of
these donkeys was, after all, but mortal; like other mortal things,
they were subject to weakness and fatigue; and as they were now
exhausted, their riders were compelled to indulge them with a
breathing space, and so they slackened their pace to a walk.

And now they all began to consider the probabilities of Bob's
fortunes.

"I'm afraid something's happened," said Clive. "Perhaps he's been
thrown."

"Thrown?" cried Frank, cheerily. "Why, if so, we would have found
him long ago. But the idea of Bob being thrown from any animal that
ever lived is simply absurd. Hell stick to that donkey as long as
the donkey runs."

"It seems to me," said David,--who was a very thoughtful and
observant boy,--"it seems to me that the donkey may have taken some
of those roads that go off to the mountains."

"Pooh!" said Frank. "Why should the donkey take the trouble to do
anything of that sort? A runaway animal don't generally indulge in
freaks of that kind. He generally goes it blind, and runs straight
ahead along the road that happens to be before him."

"But perhaps he lives among the mountains," said David, "and, in
that case, he would merely be running home."

"I don't believe that," said Frank. "I hold that it requires some
thought for an ordinary donkey to quit the high road, and take one
of those by-roads."

"Not if a by-road leads to his home."

"But how could his home be there," objected Frank, "when we found
him away down there near Paestum?"

"Easily enough," said David. "I dare say they were going home at
the very time we came up with them."

"I wish we could ask the boy about it," said Clive. "He could tell
as just what we want to know."

"Yes," said Frank; "but, unfortunately, we couldn't understand all
of it."

David heaved a sigh.

"How I wish," he exclaimed, "that I had studied Italian before I
came! But from this time forth, I'm determined not to rest till
I've learned the language."

Uncle Moses was deeply distressed at Bob's disappearance. He had
only one idea in his mind. He told the other boys what it was. It
was the idea of brigands. They had met poor Bob; they had seized
him, and had carried him off to their lurking-places in the mountains.
Even now he was in captivity. And the heart of Uncle Moses yearned
over the poor prisoner. He expressed these fears in a few words,
for he was too agitated to say much.

Clive and David both shook their heads over this, and thought there
was something in it. Both of them now thought that Bob might have
been carried by his donkey to the mountains; and, if so, his capture
by brigands would be almost certain. To them, these mountains
seemed to be full of them; the whole population, in their opinion,
was a community of brigands.

Clive had also another idea. It was this. The driver had deserted
them and had gone off vowing vengeance. He had gone to the mountains,
and returned with a band of brigands to capture all of them. They
had met Bob, seized him, and taken him off.

At all this Frank laughed.

"Pooh!" said he. "I don't see why you should go out of your way to
torment yourselves about nothing at all. It all seems plain enough
to me. The donkey has run off, and intends to keep running till he
drops. There's a long, straight, smooth road before him, and he'll
stick to that without bothering his head about by-roads or mountains.
And if he's obstinate enough, I don't see why he shouldn't keep on
running till he gets to Salerno. And it's my opinion, if we don't
pick him up on the road, well find him at Salerno when we get there."

"O, that's all very well," said Clive, "but think how certain you
were about the driver--"

He was interrupted by the sound of galloping horses and rolling
wheels. The sound came from behind. At once they all turned their
heads. Emerging from behind a torn in the road, they saw two horses
galloping at full speed, and drawing a carriage. The driver was
whipping the horses furiously, and calling and shouting. The carriage
was empty. In a moment they recognized the truth. It was their
carriage and their driver.

They all stood still, and looked in surprise, and the carriage
rolled swiftly up. The driver at once stopped the horses, and jumped
to the ground. Then, coming to the boys, he burst forth into a
strain of the most profuse and vehement apologies. He implored
them to forgive him, and began to explain the cause of his absence
from the place where they had left him.

It seems that he found this place an inconvenient one, and had
driven across the fields for about half, a mile, to some trees.
Here he had taken his horses out, and allowed them to feed. He
himself lay down in the carriage, and took a _siesta_. He
overslept himself. On awaking, he was horrified to find how much
time had passed, and at once proceeded to search for the horses.
But during his sleep they had both wandered off, and could not
be found until after a long search. When at length he was ready,
and had driven back, he found to his horror that they were not
there. Thinking that they were still among the ruins, he had gone
over the whole place, which took up still more time. At last he
saw that they must have left. He at once drove off. Knowing that
they were on foot, he expected every minute to catch sight of
them. He drove on for miles without seeing any trace of them,
and at length came to the conclusion that they had, perhaps,
found the carriage of some other visitors, and had obtained seats
in that. He knew that they must have gone, and could only account
in that way for their rapid progress.

This explanation of the driver was perfectly satisfactory to them
all, and their joy at getting the carriage again was so great that
they excused his unfortunate slumbers. The driver also, on his
part, had now forgotten all about his sulks, and was the same genial
and companionable soul as before. On learning about Bob's mishap,
he at once assured them that the donkey must have run along the
road, and that they would undoubtedly soon catch up with him. So
the whole party got into the carriage, the driver whipped up the
horses, and away they went towards Salerno.

Mile after mile was traversed.

Still there were no signs of Bob,

"Something's happened," said Clive.

"He's been carried to the mountains," said David.

"It's the brigands!" groaned Uncle Moses.

"O, it's all right," said Frank, confidently. "That donkey's a
regular race-horse. We'll find him at Salerno."

At length they reached Salerno. They drove up to the hotel.

No signs of Bob!

Hurrying in, they made inquiries, and found that he had not come.
This filled them all with the greatest concern; and the driver,
and the landlord, and all others who heard of it, asserted that
he must have been carried to the mountains. It was now dark.
Nothing more could be done; and so they could only resolve to
drive back on the following day, and make a more careful search
after the lost boy.




CHAPTER X.

_The captive Boy and his grisly Visitant.--The Hand on his
Head.--Denouement.--The Brigand Family.--The old Crone.--The Robber
Wife.--The Brigand Children.--A Revolution of Feeling.--The main
Road.--The Carriage.--In Search of Bob._


Paralyzed with terror, dumb with horror, Bob lay motionless and
almost breathless; and the grisly old hag reached out her long,
lean, thin, bony, withered, shrivelled hand, and took his hair,
while with the other hand she raised her sharp weapon.

She took his hair very lightly and tenderly; so lightly, indeed,
that Bob was just conscious of her touch; and though he expected
that he would be torn from his bed and struck dead the next instant,
yet this fate was delayed.

She took his hair then in her hand very gently and tenderly, and
in her other hand she raised the sharp weapon.

Now, the sharp weapon was a pair of sheep-shears.

These shears she held forward, and with them she snipped off, as
noiselessly as possible, a lock of Bob's hair.

She pressed the lock of hair to her thin lips, looked at it
steadfastly for some time, pressed it once more to her lips, and
then put it in the folds of her dress.

Then kneeling by Bob's side, she looked at him long and earnestly.
She bent over him, and looked down upon him. She laid the shears
upon the floor, clasped her withered hands together, and gazed upon
the boy. He lay still. His eyes were closed; but the delay of his
fate and the snip of the shears in his hair bad roused him somewhat
from his abyss of terror. He opened his eyes wide enough to see
what was going on. He could not see the old woman's face, but he
saw her kneeling, and he saw her thin hands clasped before her,
like one in prayer, and tremulous.

The old woman bent over him; and if Bob could have seen her face
he would have known that this old creature was an object of any
other feeling rather than fear. Pale it was, that face that was
over him, and wrinkled, and emaciated; but there was upon it a
softened expression--an expression of yearning and of longing.
That which at a distance had seemed to his frightened fancy a
hungry, ghoulish look, was now nothing more than the earnest,
fixed gaze of a love that longed to be satisfied--a gaze like
that of a bereaved mother who sees some one who reminds her of
her lost boy, and looks at him with a look of unutterable yearning.
So, now, it was with this poor old decrepit creature. Perhaps in
her past life some son had been torn from her, of whom Bob reminded
her, and she had come now to feast herself with his face, which
reminded her of her lost boy, to take a lock of his hair, to bow
down over him in speechless emotion. Here, then, she knelt, her
poor hands clasping each other tremulously, her aged breast
heaving with repressed sighs, while from her weak eyes there fell
tears which dropped upon the face of the boy.

Those tears had a wonderful effect.

As Bob's half-opened eyes saw the old woman's attitude, his grisly
terror left him; his heart regained its ordinary pulsation; the
tremendous pressure that had been upon his soul was removed; warm,
and fresh, and free, his young blood sped through his veins, and
all his frame was quickened to a bounding life and vigor. By the
force of this reaction he was roused from his stony lethargy, his
paralysis of horror, and his presence of mind was restored. Then
there came those tears which fell upon his face. This completed
the recovery of his self-command. It did more. It assured him that
he was an object, not of murderous fury, but of tender love, and
that the one whom he had feared had come, not with purposes of
cruelty, but with yearnings of affection. Why this should be he
knew not; he was content to know that it was so; and in this
knowledge all fear died out. Bat even now he felt somewhat
embarrassed, for the old woman was evidently only giving way to
her emotion because she believed him to be asleep; and thus he was
an unwilling witness of feelings which she supposed to be seen by
none. In this there seemed to be something dishonorable, and he wished
the scene to end. He chose to do so therefore by making a few movements
without opening his eyes; that is, he changed his position several
times, turned himself over and back again, and thus gave signs of
waking. Upon this the old woman silently took her lamp and shears,
and left the apartment by the way she had come.

So ended the adventure.

The effect produced upon Bob was a varied one. He still felt the
consequences of that horror into which he had fallen, that spasm
and convulsion of terror which had seemed to turn him to stone,
yet the relief that had been found was inexpressibly sweet. In
spite of the pain which still lingered about his heart, there came
a calmer and happier frame of mind; the pain itself also gradually
died out, and its only result was a general languor. So commonplace
a termination to what seemed a terrible event made his whole
situation and his other prospects seem commonplace, and he even
began to think that his captors might turn out to be as commonplace
as the old woman.

He fell again into a deep sleep, and did not wake till it was broad
day. On descending, the people all respectfully bade him good
morning. Breakfast was ready, consisting of black bread, stew,
and some coffee. Outside, the view was superb; the rising sun had
not yet ascended high enough to shine down into the valley, but
the glowing heavens, and the shadows of the mountains, and the
light green of the little space nearest, with the darker green of
the forests that clothed the mountain-sides, all made the spectacle
a memorable one.

Bob's whole state of mind was more healthy, and cheerful, and
hopeful than it had been. Everything appeared bright and favorable.
The old woman, as he looked at her this morning, did not seem to
be at all repulsive. Her face was shrivelled, it is true, and her
eyes were weak; but she looked gentle and mild, and treated him
with very great favor and attention. The slatternly woman did not
seem worse than any other Italian peasant woman. The children were
dirty, no doubt; in fact, very dirty; but then they were brown,
and healthy, and merry, not inclined to mischief, and quite respectful
to him. In short, Bob found himself surveying his situation and
its surroundings with much complacency, and he began to feel that
he had misjudged these people altogether the night before.

But other things were yet in store which were to redeem still more
the character of these people. He was standing outside the house
after breakfast, when, to his surprise, he saw the second "brigand"
approach. He knew that he had not had time to go to Salerno and
return; so he saw that he could not have been to Salerno at all.
He seemed to Bob to be going there now, for he was mounted on a
donkey, and led another by the bridle. The one which he led was no
other than the ass which had carried Bob to this place.

Bob's only thought at seeing this was, that the "brigand" was now
setting forth for Salerno, and was about to take the donkey with
him, either to sell it, or to return it to the owner, and get a
reward. But this idea was not left long in his mind.

The first "brigand" came out, and the two men talked to one another,
after which they turned to Bob, and the first brigand explained to
him that he was to mount the donkey. He pointed to the animal,
smiled, waved his hand towards the road by which Bob had come, and
uttered the word "Salerno."

Bob's heart gave a wild leap; he could scarcely believe what he
heard; but the faces of the two men were smiling, and they continued
to nod, and gesticulate, and repeat the word "Salerno." They looked
like two benevolent farmers, and Bob wondered how he could ever
have seen anything malignant in their very good natured faces.

Of course there was nothing to do now but to hurry away to his
friends. Yet Bob was not willing to take too abrupt a leave. He
remembered the old woman, and thought with a softened heart about
her emotion. He went back into the house, and shook hands with her
for good by. He even knew enough Italian to say "_Addio_." The old
creature was much softened and burst into tears. Bob gave her one
of his cuff-buttons as a souvenir, for he had nothing else to give,
and the cuff-button was an uncommonly elaborate affair; and he had
the satisfaction of seeing that the old woman took it as though it
was of inestimable value. He then went around among them all, shook
hands with all of them, from the slatternly woman down to the
smallest of the dirty children, and gave each one of them
something--to the woman, a pencil case; to one child, his pocket
knife; to another, a watch key; to a third, a shirt stud; to a
fourth, a memorandum book; and to the fifth, a handkerchief.

"Brigand" number two was going to accompany him, and it was now
evident to Bob that the delay which had taken place in his
restoration to his friends was probably owing to the fact that
they had to wait to procure bridles, or another donkey. It only
remained for him now to bid good by to "brigand" number one,
which he did with great earnestness, and cordiality, and fervor;
presenting him at the same time with his neck-tie, a very brilliant
piece of satin, which the Italian received with a great flourish,
and profuse expressions of thankfulness. Bob had several times
regretted his ignorance of the Italian language since his arrival
in the country, but never had his regrets been more sincere than
on this occasion. Had he been able to speak Italian he would have
made a speech then and there, and have invited them all, from
the old woman down to the smallest child, to come and visit him
and his friends either at Salerno, or at Naples, or in far-off
America. But alas! Bob's tongue was tied, and so the invitation
remained unuttered. He did what he could, however, and utterly
exhausted the whole language of signs in the attempt to express
to them his thanks, and his good wishes for their happiness.
The simple people seemed to comprehend him, for they were by no
means dull, and gesticulated in return many things which seemed
to convey the same meaning; and when at last Bob rode away, the
humble inhabitants watched him until he passed out of sight.




CHAPTER XI.

_The Return.--The tender Adieus.--Back to Salerno.--On to
Castellamare.--A pleasant Scene.--An unpleasant Discovery.--David
among the Missing.--Woes of Uncle Moses.--Deliberations over the
Situation.--Various Theories.--The Vengeance of the Enemy.--Back
to Sorrento in Search of the lost One._


Returning to the main road with his guide, Bob traversed the same
way by which his donkey had carried him on the preceding day.
His progress now was very different. It would not do to dash
furiously down the narrow and steep mountain pathway; so they
had to go at a slow pace, until they reached the plain. Bob's
animal also had changed. He was no longer the fiery, wild ass of
the day before, which had borne him helplessly away from his
friends, but a tractable animal, with sufficient spirit, it is
true, yet with all the signs of subordination and obedience. He
obeyed the slightest touch of the bridle, and moved along after
the rider in front of him, as quietly as though he was the most
patient and gentle of the donkey tribe.

In two or three hours' time they reached the main road, and turning
to the right, rode towards Salerno. Thus far Bob had not noticed
much of his surroundings, but now his eyes gazed most eagerly upon
the road ahead of him, for he expected to meet his friends. He
rightly supposed that they would have driven to Salerno on the
preceding day, hoping to find him there, and that they would drive
back in search of him at the earliest dawn of another day.

Bob's conjecture turned out to be rights He had not ridden more
than a mile when he saw a carriage approaching, which he soon
recognized as belonging to his party. In it were his friends, who
had recognized him as soon as they had caught sight of him, and
whose joy at meeting with him again, and amazement at the sight of
his companion, knew no bounds. The carriage stopped, and the boys
flung themselves out, and tore Bob from the back of the donkey,
and hugged him, and hustled him, and danced about him in their joy.
Uncle Moses was not so quick as the others, and held back. Bat if
his greeting was last, it was not least fervent, as Bob well knew
by the moistened eye, the quivering lip, the tremulous voice, and
the convulsive grasp of that venerable relative.

Then and there, on the road, Bob had to satisfy the hungry
curiosity of his friends, and give them some sort of an outline
of his adventures. The particulars he reserved until a future
occasion. Bob's account of his friends in the mountains at once
roused the enthusiastic interest of the whole party in their
favor, and they all proceeded to shake hands with the Italian.
Nor did they content themselves with this, for on the spot Uncle
Moses and the boys made up a handsome purse, which they presented
to him, not because he deserved it, exactly, but partly because
they were so rejoiced at finding the lost boy, and partly on
account of Bob's urgent appeal to them. For now Bob's sentiments
about the humble people in the sequestered valley had undergone
the last phase which was necessary to complete a perfect revolution
of feeling; and he had come to regard them not by any means as
brigands,--far from it,--but rather as a family of peaceful,
innocent, harmless, affectionate, quiet, benevolent, warm-hearted,
good-natured, hospitable, and virtuous peasants.

The Italian received the gifts with a series of gesticulations,
by which he seemed to be invoking the blessing of Heaven upon
them, and vowing endless gratitude; and after the boys and Uncle
Moses had one by one shaken hands and bidden him good by, he
still stood there, smiling, bowing, and gesticulating; and as
they drove away, they saw him standing motionless in the road
till they passed out of sight.

Bob's adventures had not been without some serious consequences,
for the strain on his mind during the previous day, and especially
the horror of the night, combined with the fatigues to which he
had been subjected, had been somewhat too much for him. As soon,
therefore, as the first excitement of the joyous meeting was over,
a reaction took place, and he complained of utter weariness and
exhaustion. As Bob was a boy who never complained except under sore
pressure, the boys perceived that he was now in need of quiet and
repose, and therefore tried to put a check upon their eager curiosity.
On reaching Salerno, they put up at the hotel again, and gave Bob
the opportunity of a long rest. Had it not been for Bob's adventure,
they would by this time have been back in Naples; for their intention
had been to go on from Paestum without stopping; but now they were
forced to delay somewhat. Still they were anxious to resume the
journey back, and as Bob seemed refreshed after a rest and a good
repast, Uncle Moses thought they had better set out and go as far
as they could before dark. The driver mentioned Castellamare as a
convenient stopping-place, and it was thereupon decided to drive
on as far as that place, and pass the night there.

They had passed through Castellamare before, when on their way to
Sorrento, and again, when returning from that place, on their way
to Salerno, so that it seemed quite familiar. But on quitting the
carriage and looking out from the windows of the hotel, they were
surprised to find how much the beauty of the place was enhanced by
this new outlook. Before, they looked at it as hasty travellers,
snatching a passing glance; but now they could take a leisurely
survey. Before them was the Bay of Naples; on the right, the city
with its suburbs, extending far along the shore; on the left, the
isle of Capri; in front, the shores of Baiae; while in the rear
was the verdant landscape, with a background of mountains, over
which reigned supreme the gigantic form of Vesuvius, from whose
summit was still floating the wrathful smoke cloud.

It was decided to pass the night here, and go on to Naples early
on the following day. All the party were tired and went to rest at
an early hour. The night was calm, and beautiful, and bright; and
as they went to sleep, they were lulled by the plash of the waters
as they gently rippled upon the pebbled beach.

Frank arose pretty early on the following morning, and found that
David was already up, and had gone forth. The others were still
asleep. Frank thereupon went forth for a walk, and one by one
the others awaked also. They had ordered breakfast at an early
hour, and they were to start immediately after. When Uncle Moses
went down stairs he found breakfast ready, and departed to hunt
up the boys. He found Frank, and Clive, and Bob, watching the
driver groom the horses.

"Boys," said Uncle Moses, "breakfast's ready."

"All right, sir," said Frank; "we'll be along."

Upon this Uncle Moses went back, and after a few moments Frank,
and Clive, and Bob entered.

"Where's David?" asked Uncle Moses.

"I don't know, sir."

"Well," said Uncle Moses, "I suppose he'll be along; so let's sit
down and begin."

They all sat down.

When they were about half through breakfast, Uncle Moses began to
wonder what was keeping David.

"Which way did he go, boys?" he asked.

"I didn't see him," said Frank.

"I didn't," said Clive.

"Nor I," said Bob.

"He was up before I was." said Frank, "and had gone out. I didn't
see him at all. I only saw his empty bed, and found his clothes
gone. I dare say he's gone off on a walk."

"O, he's all right," said Bob.

"Yes," said Uncle Moses, "I don't doubt it He's a very careful,
quiet boy, I know; but he is always so punctual, that it seems kind
o' odd for him to be so late."

"O, I dare say he's misunderstood about the hour," said Clive.

"Perhaps so," said Uncle Moses.

The boys now went on finishing their breakfast; but Uncle Moses
began to fidget in his chair, and look around, and sigh, and gave
other signs of growing uneasiness of mind. Feeling in himself, as
he did, the care of all the boys, he never was altogether free from
anxiety; and the various adventures which the boys had encountered,
had not, in any way, tended to lessen his uneasy vigilance over
them. Bob's last adventure, in particular, had wrought upon him
most painfully, so that he was ten times more careful over his
young and somewhat flighty charges than he had been before. The
absence of David at such an important time seemed unaccountable.
If it had been any one of the others, it would have been intelligible;
but for David, who was the soul of order, regularity, and method,
to fail an appointment, was something so extraordinary, that he
could not but feel alarmed. Still he restrained himself, for he
felt a little ashamed of his fears; and though he was evidently
very restless, uneasy, and worried, he said not a word until the
boys had finished their breakfast.

"I don't know what to make of it," said Uncle Moses at last, starting
from his chair and going to the window. Standing there, he looked
uneasily up and down the street, and then returned and looked
earnestly at the boys.

"I don't know what to make of it, at all," he repeated. "Did you
say you didn't see him, none of you? Didn't you see him, Clive?"

"No, sir," said Clive. "When I waked, all the boys were up."

"Didn't he say anythin last night about intendin to do anythin this
mornin?"

"I didn't hear him say anything."

"O, I'm sure he's misunderstood about the hour," said Frank. "That's
it He's off on a walk. I dare say he's found some old ruin; and if
that's the case, he won't know anything about time at all. Put him
in an old ruin, and he'd let all the breakfasts that ever were
cooked wait before he'd hurry."

"Wal," said Uncle Moses, "there's somethin in that too. David's
dreadful fond of old stones, and old bones, and tumble-down edifices,
and old sticks an weeds. Why, he's all the time collectin; an if
he keeps on, his baggage'll become nothin else but that."

Pleased with this thought, which brought up before his mind what
to him was an inexplicable peculiarity of David, Uncle Moses drew
a breath of relief.

"Wal," said he, "we'll have to wait patiently, till David's done
with that there old ruin; an meantime I think I'll take a turn an
see if I can see anythin of him."

Upon this Uncle Moses went out of the room, and down to the street.
Reaching the street, he walked up and down the entire length of
the town, looking eagerly in every direction, peering into the
doors of houses, staring into space, scanning groves and vineyards,
and every half minute taking out his watch and looking at it. At
the end of about half an hour, he returned more troubled than ever,
and met Frank, Clive, and Bob in front of the hotel.

"I can't find him anywhere," said he.

Thus far the boys had thought nothing of David's disappearance;
but the deep anxiety of Uncle Moses now excited their alarm; and
though, if left to themselves, they would have seen nothing to fear
in the fact of David's being an hour or so behind time, yet, after
all, they began to see that, in one like David, such conduct was
most extraordinary; and in this foreign country, of whose ways they
were so ignorant, there might possibly be danger in such absence.
They at once began to comfort Uncle Moses; and then all of them
volunteered to go in different directions and see if they could
find him. Uncle Moses again set out, walking up the road in the
direction of Sorrento; Frank went down the road; Clive took a
by-road that led towards the hills; while Bob, who was rather weak
yet, and not capable of much exertion, said that he would watch
from the window of the hotel, and be at home, in case of David's
return, to explain matters.

In this way they began their search, and Bob waited patiently in
the hotel. After about an hour Uncle Moses came back. On finding
that David had not returned, he looked unspeakably distressed;
and when, after a short time farther, both Frank and Clive returned
without any tidings of the fugitive, he began to look quite
heartbroken.

Then they talked to the driver about it; but the' driver could give
them no information whatever. They sent him over the hotel to
question all the people, but this search was as vain as the others
had been. There was no one in the hotel, from the big landlord down
to the scullion, who could tell anything at all about David.

By the time all these examinations and searches had been made it
was after ten o'clock. Breakfast had been served at seven, and
seven was the hoar at which David should have been among them. He
had been gone, therefore, more than three hours.

Even the boys now began to feel uneasy. Uncle Moses and all the
boys began to rack their brains to find some way of accounting for
David's absence.

"Did any of you ever hear of his walking in his sleep?" asked,
Uncle Moses, in an agitated voice.

"No," said Bob, "never. I know he never did such a thing."

"He couldn't have taken a walk anywheres," said Uncle Moses, "or
he'd been back long ago."

"O, yes; he wouldn't have started on a three hours' walk," said
Clive.

"Perhaps he's tried a donkey ride, and been ran away with, like
me," said Bob.

"O, no," said Frank, "he isn't fond of riding; he'd never get on
the back of any animal, unless he had to."

"Did he say anything about--about--?"

Uncle Moses hesitated at the question which he was about to ask.

"About what, Uncle Moses?" asked Clive.

"About--bathing?" asked Uncle Moses, in a faltering voice.

"No," said Clive.

Uncle Moses drew a long breath.

"It would be dreadful dangerous," said he.

"But, Uncle Moses," said Clive, "David would never think of such
a thing. He might go in if all of us fellows went in too, just for
company; but he doesn't care enough about it to go in alone. The
fact is, he doesn't care much for any kind of sports. He's too fond
of books."

Uncle Moses sighed heavily.

"I wonder," said Bob, "if any of those Sorrento fellows have been
about here, and seen him."

At this suggestion every one of them started, and stared at one
another.

"Sorrento fellers?" repeated Uncle Moses.

"Do you think there's any chance?"

"O, I don't know," said Bob. "I only thought it might be
possible. You see Dave made no end of a row there about that
tassel that he took, and you know how we had to run for it.
Well, you know Sorrento isn't very far from here, and I just
thought that some of the Sorrento people might have seen us
come here yesterday. If they did, they might have tried to
pay up poor old Dave for what he did out there."

"It may be so," said Uncle Moses, with a groan. "The whole population
were ravin mad, an we had hard enough work to get away."

"Well," said Frank, "it's the only thing that can account for Dave's
absence. He may have taken a little stroll this morning, and fallen
into the hands of some of those fellows. Perhaps they've been
watching all night for the chance. They would watch, not only all
night, but a fortnight, for the sake of revenge. There's no people
so revengeful as the Italians. Poor Dave! What can we do? I'll go
and ask the driver."

Saying this, Frank hurried out of the room and down stairs to
talk to the driver about it. All the others followed. On
suggesting this Sorrento theory to the driver, that worthy
shook his head, and thought that there might be something in
it. He evidently began to look upon David's absence as something
very serious, and his seriousness over it only added to the
anxiety of Uncle Moses and the boys.

"If this is so, we ought to drive off to Sorrento at once," said
Frank, "before it is too late. If Dave is in their hands, he needs
us now, and I only wish we had thought of this before."

"But he mayn't be there at all," said Bob, who
generally had a mind of his own.

"Where else is he?"

"I don't know."

"There's no need for all of us to go," said Uncle Moses. "I'll go
alone, and you boys stay here till I come back. But I don't know,
either. I'm afraid to leave you. If David's got into trouble, how
can any of you hope to escape? No, you must all come, for I declare
I'm afraid to trust one of you out of my sight."

"But some of us ought to stay," said Bob, "for Dave may turn up
all right, and how'll he know what's become of us?"

"Wal," said Uncle Moses, "I'll leave word for him here at the
hotel."

"Yes." said Frank, "that's the best way. None of us want to dawdle
our lives out in this place all day, and you don't want to leave
any of us behind, Uncle Moses; so if we all go together, we'll all
be satisfied."

A few minutes afterwards the carriage rolled out of Castellamare,
carrying the party back to Sorrento.




CHAPTER XII.

_The Waking of David.--A glorious Scene.--A Temptation.--David
embarks upon the wide wide Sea.--Youth at the Prow and Pleasure at
the Helm.--A daring Navigator.--A baffled and confounded
Navigator.--Lost! Lost! Lost!--Despair of David.--At the Mercy of
Wind and Sea.--The Isle of the Brigands.--The Brigand Chief._


On the morning of that day David had waked very early, feeling
refreshed with his slumbers, and not at all inclined to prolong
them. The others were all asleep, and the house was silent. As he
lay he could hear the gentle ripple of the water upon the beach,
and feel the sweet, balmy air of morning as it tanned his cheeks.
For some little time he lay enjoying his situation, and then jumped
out of bed and went to the window.

Immediately in front of him lay the Bay of Naples, a dark blue
expanse, with its border of green shores and white cities, overhung
by a sky whose hue rivalled that of the sea beneath. The beauty of
the scene was so exquisite that it called him forth, and unable
any longer to remain within doors, he dressed himself and walked
out. On his way out he met no one, for all were still asleep. He
had to unlock the door to let himself out, and when outside he saw
that the street was as deserted as the interior of the hotel.

Standing at the door, he saw the eastern sky all ruddy and glowing.
The sun was not yet up, but these hues indicated its approach, and
announced that it was at hand. The fertile plains, all covered with
vineyards, spread afar, extending from the outskirts of the town
to the slopes of the mountains, which in the distance rose up
grandly, their sides covered with groves, and resting in dark
shadows. There, too, was Vesuvius, as ever, monarch of the scene;
and the smoke that hung over its summit stood revealed in a black
mass against the blue sky.

David left the hotel, and, after walking a few paces, turned his
steps towards the sea-shore. Here the attractions were greater
than on the land, for the blue expanse of water spread itself out
before him, encircled by shores and islands, and all the congregated
glories of the Bay of Naples were there in one view before his
eyes. There was a beach here of fine pebbles, which sloped gently
into the water, and upon this beach a number of boats were drawn
up. After wandering along the beach for a little distance, David
entered one of these boats, and sat down. It was a small boat,
with: a mast and sail, the latter of which was loosely furled. Here
David sat and looked out upon the water.

The glorious scene filled his whole soul with enthusiastic delight.
Upon that deep blue surface his eye was attracted by several white
sails far away, that moved to and fro. At that moment it seemed to
him that to move thus over such a sea would be equal to a bird's
flight in the blue of heaven; and as he watched the boats he longed
to be in them.

Suddenly he thought of the boat in which he was. Could he not have
a little sail up and down along the shore? True, he did not know
how to sail a boat, but he could learn; and this seemed as good a
time to learn as any other. He did not know the owner, but on his
return he could pay him what the excursion might be worth. He could
float over this glorious water, and move up and down within easy
reach of the shore, so as to land whenever it might be desirable.

David was not at all an enterprising boy, or an adventurous one.
He was essentially quiet, methodical, and conservative. It was not
because this sail was a risky thing that he tried it, but rather
because it seemed so perfectly safe. There was a breeze,--he felt
it,--and the progress of the boats, afar off on the water, tantalized
him and tempted him on. The result was, that without taking much
time to think about it, David yielded to the inclination of the
moment, and pushing the boat from the land into the water, he let
loose the sail; and then seating himself in the stern, he prepared
to glide over the water.

About sailing David knew absolutely nothing. He was not even
acquainted with the theory of sailing; nor did he know, how, or on
what principle, a sail-boat moves. About steering he was equally
ignorant, nor did he know how a boat obeys its rudder. But he knew
that the one who sails a boat sits in the stern, and holds the
tiller; so David did the same, holding the tiller in his right
hand, and the sheets in his left.

The wind was not very strong, and it happened to be blowing in
such a way that, as he unfurled the sail, it filled at once, and
the boat moved lightly and pleasantly along. The motion filled
David with delight. He saw himself borne on past the shore, at
a gentle rate, and felt that the moment was one of supreme
happiness. Thus, holding sheet and tiller, he resigned himself
to the joy of the occasion.

The wind was moderate, and there was nothing whatever in the movement
of the boat to excite the slightest uneasiness. The wavelets dashed
pleasantly against the bows, and the course of the boat remained
sufficiently straight to keep her sail filled. David saw that
whatever the secret of navigation might be, he had unconsciously
stumbled Upon it; and finding that the boat was doing so admirably,
he was very careful to hold the tiller straight, and not to move
it to either side. So he leaned back, and luxuriated in the pleasant
motion, and looked up at the deep blue sky that bent above him,
and around at the wide expanse of water, the green verdurous hills,
the vine-clad meadows, and the purple mountains.

From time to time he noticed, with satisfaction, that his
course ran along the shore, parallel to it, as it appeared.
He noticed, however, that he was now farther away from it than
when he started; but as yet the distance did not seem excessive;
in fact, it seemed on the whole preferable, since it gave him
a finer view. Before him the shore ran on until it terminated
on a headland, and David thought that this would be a good
place to fix as the limit of his voyage.

Never was any human being more utterly out of place than David in
this sail-boat, and never was any human being more serenely
unconscious of his unfitness. David's frame of mind was one of
calm, beatific enjoyment. He was quite unconscious of the increase
of the distance between his boat and the shore, which grew greater
every moment, and equally unobservant of the lapse of time. In
times of great enjoyment the hours fly quickly by, and in David's
high exaltation of feeling the time thus fled.

At length, even in the midst of his happiness, the sober practical
thought obtruded itself of time and space. How long had he been
out? How much time would he have? How far had he gone? He looked
at his watch. To his utter amazement and consternation, he found
that it was seven o'clock--the time fixed for breakfast. He had
been sailing for two hours at least. As to distance, he could not
grapple with that thought, but turned hastily, and looked back.
That look gave him but little satisfaction. He could see a line of
white at the skirts of the sea; but whether it was Castellamare,
or Naples itself, he was unable to guess.

It was a wide, sharp; and painful awakening from his bliss
and serene delight, and it was an effectual one. No more placid
gliding now; no careless voyaging. Two hours! Seven o'clock!
Already they were at breakfast, and waiting for him. They were
wondering about his absence. And when could he join them
again? Two hours! If it had taken two hours to come thus far,
it would also take fully as much time to go back. Go back?
And where should he go, or how could he get back?

Thus far, David's idea about his course, if he can be said to have
had an idea, was, that it lay along the shore, and that somehow he
could go back as easily as he had come. But now that the necessity
for going back was upon him, he instantly became aware of his utter
ignorance, for he had not the faintest idea how to turn the boat.
There was no time for delay, however. Something had to be done,
and that immediately. David knew this much at least, that a boat
could be turned by means of the rudder; so he began to experiment
upon this part of the vessel. He palled the rudder towards him.
The boat turned, and as it turned the sail began to flap, and toss,
and snap, in such a way that he grew exceedingly nervous. Suddenly
a puff of wind came, and the sheets where whipped out of his
nerveless hand, while the sail thus loosened blew forward.

David's heart quaked at this, and he knew not what to do. With some
vague idea of bringing the boat back to her former position, and
beginning all over again, he pulled the tiller first to one side
and then to the other; but to his dismay he found that the boat no
longer obeyed it. Then he tried to get possession of the sheets
again, and, clumsily crawling forward, he managed to secure them;
after which he crawled back to the stern, and clinging to the
sheets, began, as well as his nervousness would allow him, to try
a series of experiments. First, he pulled the tiller towards him.
At this the boat came up to the wind, and resumed her former
course. But this was the very course on which he did not wish
to go; so he pushed the tiller from him. Upon this the boat fell
away; and the flapping, jerking, whipping, and snapping, which
had so alarmed him before, recommenced, and alarmed him more than
ever. For some time he continued this, until at length, as he
brought the boat up to the wind once more, there came a fresher
puff than any which had thus far blown, and the boat lay far over
on her side. Terrified out of his wits, David had just sense
enough to put her off, and then dropping sheets and tiller, he
sank back and looked all around in a panic.

This puff was the beginning of a somewhat stronger breeze--a breeze
which would have rejoiced the heart of a sailor, but which carried
nothing but terror to the heart of David. What to do now he did
not know, nor for some moments did he even think. The wind to his
inexperienced senses seemed a hurricane, and the wavelets seemed
formidable waves. For a time he lay paralyzed in the stern, expecting
every instant to be ingulfed; but as the time passed, and his doom
was delayed, he began to recover himself, and think about what he
should do next.

To him, in his terror and anxiety, the first necessity seemed to
be to get rid of that dangerous sail. As it flapped in the wind
it seemed to endanger the boat. At all hazards that must be furled
or taken down. So once more, by a mighty effort, he crawled forward,
and grasping the flying sheets, he drew them in, and tied the sail
to the mast, performing, the work in a manner which was very clumsy,
yet quite efficient. The upper part of the sail still remained
free, bagging out a little, like a balloon; but the lower part was
tied up in a way that would defy the tempest itself. After this
David felt safer, and crawling back, he drew a long breath, and
threw a fearful glance around.

Some time had been taken up with these experiments in navigation,
and as David looked, he saw that the result had been not to bring
him nearer to Castellamare, but to take him farther out from the
shore. The nearest land to him now was an island, but what island
he could not say. As his eyes wandered around, they saw nothing
that was familiar. A mountain appeared over the land astern, and
the smoke on its summit showed that it must be Vesuvius; but it
had a different appearance altogether from that with which he was
familiar. He could form no idea of the course which he had taken,
and could only guess, in a general way, where Castellamare might be.

Some time before, he had been troubled at the thought that he would
keep his party waiting; but now he had no trouble whatever on that
score. His only trouble or anxiety was about himself. He felt as
though he was in a position of tremendous danger, and was being
tossed about by pitiless waves, which were hemming him in on every
side, like ravening beasts of prey. In reality the pitiless waves
were scarcely waves at all, the breeze was only moderate, and there
was no possible danger; but David did not know this, and so he
suffered as much as though his imaginary danger was real.

Meanwhile a portion of the sail had been left loose, as has been
said, and afforded something for the breeze to act upon. The
consequence was, that the boat moved along slowly before the wind,
and gradually approached the island which David had already noticed.
For some time he remained with his eyes fixed upon the land astern,
and Vesuvius. When he withdrew them and looked around, the island
was much nearer. He began to see that he was approaching that
island, and that before long he would reach it. This prospect
excited in his mind the utmost hope, and all his attention was now
directed towards that place. The time passed slowly, but it did
pass; and at length, about three hours after he had first tried to
turn the boat, he found himself so close to the island that he
could step ashore.

It was now about ten o'clock. The place where David landed was a
pebbled beach, bordered by rocks, above which grew trees. As he
approached the island he saw houses and people. The houses were
plain and small, and the people seemed laboring in the fields.
David's habit of considering all Italian peasants as brigands now
excited in his mind a fear which brought fresh anxieties. On this
lonely island the whole population might be brigands, who would
treat him as lawful prey, and from whom he could hope to fare no
better than those early shipwrecked mariners in these seas about
whom he had read and studied so much. He congratulated himself that
his boat had borne him to a sequestered spot like this, where he
might be secure from observation, and have time to look forth and
see what manner of men these island brigands might be.

And so, full of anxiety, David drew his boat cautiously upon the
beach as far as he could, and secured it; after which he stole up
to the shelter of the trees and rocks, so as to reconnoitre. The
trees grew along the edge of the rocks, which rose above the beach,
to a height of about twenty feet, and formed a grove, which was
sufficiently dense for David to feel secure from observation. The
grove ran along the edge of the bank for some distance, bat was of
no great depth; and David, as he peered through the trees, could
see an opening beyond, and the glimpse of white buildings. Here,
then, David found himself close to the dreaded neighborhood of the
brigands of the island, and it was with a feeling of great trepidation
that he recognized the frailty of his present shelter, the
insufficiency of his place of concealment, and the necessity that
there was of leaving it before long.

To quit it and communicate with the inhabitants of the place, he
plainly saw, could not long be avoided. He had as yet eaten nothing,
and already he began to feel the cravings of hunger. He would also
have to take measures to effect his return to his friends. His
hunger and his desire to get back to his friends alike made him
desperate; and so, after a few minutes of concealment and fearful
inspection of the scene, he began to move forward cautiously, so
as to make a more thorough survey of the open ground on the other
side of the grove.

Stealing forward as noiselessly and as warily as possible, and
keeping himself carefully under the shelter of the heavier foliage
and denser underbrush, David worked his way on, and at length found
himself on the other side of the grove, where he could peer forth
through the leaves of a laurel bush upon the scene.

He saw here a green meadow, which ran up a moderate declivity till
it reached a house. The house was a small cottage, of simple and
neat appearance, and it stood not more than a hundred yards from
the edge of the grove. Cattle were feeding in the meadow. To the
right was a vineyard, and on the left an olive grove. On one side
of the olive grove there ran a row of cactuses, up from the bank
towards the house.

All this David took, in at a glance; but he also saw something
which made his heart, beat quick with excitement and anxiety.

He saw a man!

The man was standing in front of the house. He was a big, burly,
broad-shouldered, bearded ruffian, with a red shirt, and a slouching
felt hat. A short pipe was in his mouth, stuck into the mass of
hair which covered the lower part of his face. His hair was long,
and dark, and glossy, and curling; falling in rich clusters below
his broad felt hat. He had gaiters and stout shoes, and was engaged
upon a rifle, which he seemed to be cleaning.

At the sight of this great, big, bearded, Burly, broad-shouldered
ruffian, David's' heart gave a great leap, and suddenly seemed to
stop beating. He sat as though petrified, crouching low, as though
to avoid observation.

This, then, he thought, was what he had feared, and while trying
to avoid the brigands, he had stumbled upon the chief of them all.
In that formidable figure he recognized the true brigand style,
and in that bearded face, with its bushy eyebrows and slouching
hat, he saw what seemed to him, from that distance, like the ferocity
of the implacable Fra Diavolo himself.

So overwhelmed was he, that for some time he could not move. At
last he felt a wild impulse to fly. He started back, determining
to seek his boat once more. So hurried was he that he was less
cautious than before, and catching his foot in a long tendril of
some creeper, he fell. In falling, he struck his hand against some
cactus or other thorny plant, and the spine pierced his flesh,
causing severe pain. In spite of himself a cry burst from him. The
cry was instantly repressed, and David, raising himself, prepared
to continue his retreat. But first he looked fearfully around to
see whether his cry had discovered him.

As he did so his heart sunk within him.

The brigand chief had heard him!

He was walking straight towards him!




CHAPTER XIII.

_David Captured.--The big, bluff, burly, brusque, bearded,
broad-shouldered, beetle-browed Bully of a Brigand.--A terrific
Inquisition.--David's Plea for Mercy.--The hard-hearted Captor and
the trembling Captive.--A direful Threat.--David carried off helpless
and despairing.--The Robber's Hold._


So this great, big, bluff, burly, brusque, bearded, broad-shouldered,
beetle-browed brigand came straight towards the place where poor
David was; walking with great strides; and David, seeing all hope
lost, stood still, and awaited the arrival of his formidable enemy.
The consciousness of his utter helplessness filled him with despair,
and his ignorance of Italian put it out of his power to disarm the
fury or deprecate the wrath of his fierce pursuer. In the few
moments that intervened between the first discovery that he was
seen and the arrival of his enemy, his brain was filled with
confusion, and his bewildered thoughts turned helplessly to his
friends whom he had left behind. He thought of their grief. He
thought, too, of his home. He thought, of his mother. That home,
those friends, that loving, mother, he now might never see again.
Farewell, all dear ones! Farewell, bright past! Farewell, sweet
life, and glad light of day! Such were the thoughts, gloomy and
despairing, that filled his mind, and tormented his heart; and at
the moment that his pursuer entered the grove and stood before him,
David looked up with pale face and frightened eyes, and something
like a sob escaped him.

The big, burly brigand stood before him, and eyed him from head to
foot. He was very tall, and, indeed, to David he seemed gigantic,
while his right hand held the rifle like a walking-stick. He looked
at David in silence, and scanned him curiously all over; and David's
eyes, which had at first sought those of his captor in timid
entreaty, now sank before his stern gaze.

"_Cosa volete?_" said the brigand. "_Donde venite?_" in a deep
voice.

"_Non capisco_," faltered David, bringing forth the only Italian
that he knew.

At this the brigand was silent, and again surveyed him.

"_Parlate Italiano?_" he asked, at length.

"No," said David, in a tremulous voice; for he understood the
meaning of those words well enough.

"Hm--" said the brigand, and then, "_Parlez vous Francais?_"

"No," said David.

"_Habla usted Espanol?_" asked the brigand once more, apparently
quite curious to find out the nationality of his prisoner, so as
to form some basis of communication with him.

David shook his head.

The brigand paused, and frowned, and stared fixedly at David, as
though trying to gather from his looks and dress what his country
might be. David's dress showed him to be a respectable youth,
while his face might belong to any nationality; for his complexion
was dark, and somewhat sallow, his eyes dark, his hair black and
straight, and his frame slender.

"_Sprechen sie Deutsch?_" asked the brigand, once, more returning
to the examination.

David shook his head.

At this the brigand frowned, and once more relapsed into silence
for some time. At length he made a further effort.

"_Russo?_" he asked, in an interrogative tone, elevating his
eyebrows.

David shook his head.

"_Turco?_" asked the brigand again, in the same tone and manner.

Again David shook his head, wondering why the brigand should for
one moment imagine it possible that he could be a Russian or a
Turk.

"_Greco?_" asked the brigand, in a tone of voice which seemed as
though he was about to give it up as a hopeless conundrum.

When David shook his head at this, the brigand turned away in
disgust, and stood for a few moments meditating. David felt his
fate to be hanging in the balance, and stood in deep suspense,
watching with anxious eyes the face of his captor. But the heavy
beard and mustache, and the slouched felt hat, concealed all
expression; nor could David see anything there which could at all
lessen his anxiety. He thought, however, that if he could only
communicate in some way his mournful story, and let his captor see
that he had come here unintentionally, and only wanted to get back
to his friends, he might excite his compassion, if indeed there
was any compassion in the stern soul of this awful being. It was
David's only chance, however; and so, putting his hand timidly on
the brigand's arm, he pointed towards the shore, and waved his arm
towards Naples.

At this the brigand stared; but seeing that David persistently
pointed in that direction, he walked off through the grove for a
few paces, till he reached the top of the bank, where the beach
appeared before him, and the boat drawn up on it. David followed
him, and as they came in sight of the boat he pointed towards it,
and then touched his breast, meaning by that to show that the boat
was his. This the brigand at once understood, and after once more
staring hard at David, as though anxious to ascertain whether he
was speaking the truth or not, he bounded down the bank, and strode
towards the boat, which he examined narrowly, inside and out. Daring
this time he paid no attention to David; but to the poor lost lad
this indifference gave no hope. He knew that there was no escape
for him. He felt that on this island the brigand was supreme, and
any effort to fly would only be worse than useless. So, instead of
trying to fly, he followed the brigand, and came up to where he
was standing beside the boat.

The brigand examined it very narrowly outside and inside. He
inspected the bow, the stern, and the rudder. He knelt down and
looked underneath. He stepped inside and examined David's clumsy
fastenings of the sail. These excited much interest, apparently,
and caused prolonged study on his part. To David all this appeared
perfectly intelligible, and very natural. The brigand was evidently
examining his plunder, to see what it was worth. David felt an
additional pang of grief at the thought that he had sequestrated
the property of some innocent Castellamare fisherman, and diverted
it into the possession of brigands; but he consoled himself by the
thought that if he ever escaped he could hunt up the owner and make
good the loss. Escape for himself was the first thing, and he tried
to hope that the boat might prove a prize sufficiently valuable to
mollify the mind of the brigand, and dispose him to mercy and
compassion. So, as the brigand inspected the boat, David stood
watching the brigand, and looking earnestly to see whether there
were any signs of a relenting disposition. But the face of the
brigand preserved an unchanged expression; and after he had examined
the boat to his satisfaction, he once more confronted David, and
the poor, forlorn, despairing lad saw that his aspect was as malign,
as ferocious, and as truculent as ever.

David determined to make a further effort. There was nothing else
to be done. He felt that he must pacify this ferocious being, disarm
his hostility, appease his cruelty, and, if possible, excite his
compassion. To do all this, it would be necessary to express himself
by signs--for he could not speak the language; and though signs
seemed very inadequate, yet he had to resort to them. He had heard,
however, of the skill of the Italians in expressing ideas by means
of gestures, and he hoped that this man might gain some meaning
from his unskilled efforts.

So, first of all, he tried to tell the brigand that he was from.
America. He laid one hand on his heart, and waved the other towards
what he supposed to be the west.

The brigand nodded solemnly, and seemed to comprehend what he wished
to state. It gratified David to see this, and to notice also that
the brigand was very attentive, and fixed his dark, stern eyes upon
him with closest scrutiny.

The next thing that David tried to tell him was, that he had friends
with him.

This he did by patting his breast, waving his arms around him,
smiling, and touching four of his fingers.

The brigand nodded. He had apparently got idea.

David was very much encouraged.

The next thing to be told was, that he and his friends had gone on
an excursion into the country.

This he did by prancing along the sand, and snapping an imaginary
whip; after which he pointed to the opposite shore, waving his hand
along the country.

The brigand nodded again, and appeared deeply interested.

The next thing to be told was, that he had put off in this boat.

He waved his hand towards Vesuvius. Then he lay down on the
sand, and pretended to be asleep. He then rose, yawned, and
rubbed his eyes. Then he went to the boat, pretended to push
off and hoist sail.

The brigand now nodded very vigorously, and it began to be evident
to David that his story was making some impression.

He now wished to explain that the boat had got beyond his control,
on account of his ignorance of navigation, and that he had drifted
or been blown upon this shore.

To do this, he pointed to the boat, then to himself; after which
he sighed and looked down in a melancholy way. Then he got into
the boat and shook the sail. Then he jumped out and rocked it as
violently as he could. Then he sank back on one knee with folded
arms and upturned face, intending by that to indicate despair. Then
he waved his hands all about, and pointed to the boat and to the
sea; and then, pointing alternately to the boat and to the sea, he
waved his hands, trying to indicate the track over which he had
passed while approaching the island. After this he paused, and
turned a supplicatory look at his captor.

Thereupon the brigand nodded vehemently, as before.

And now one thing yet remained for David to explain, and that was,
his own position. He wished to tell the brigand that he knew he
was in his power, and that he would pay any ransom, if he would
only restore him to his friends.

To explain this, David took the big hand of the brigand, and put
it upon his head, stooping down low as he did so. Then he waved
his arms all around, and mournfully shook his head. Which meant,
that he was in the brigand's power, and would not and could not
escape. Then he drew forth his purse, tapped it several times, held
it out to the brigand, waved his hands towards Naples, slapped his
breast, and pointed to the brigand and to himself. Which meant,
that he would pay any money, that he had friends in Naples who
would treat with the brigand for his release on his own terms.
Having explained this much, David stopped, for he felt that there
was nothing more for him to do, and watched the effect of his story,
and his concluding offer.

The brigand seemed gratified. He nodded several times gravely and
thoughtfully. Then he looked at the boat, and then at David, and
then at the sea. To David it seemed as if the brigand was trying
to trace the boat's devious track over the water, so as to see
whether his story was true or not. He did not offer any further
explanations, but allowed the brigand to think it out for himself.
That worthy accordingly devoted his mind to the consideration of
the situation for some time, until at length he seemed to have
mastered it, and also to have come to a decision about his own
course of conduct.

He reached out his brawny hand, and laid it on David's head. After
which he pointed to himself, and nodded.

By this David saw, unmistakably, that the brigand was claiming
him as his own captive. Although the fact was already painfully
evident, yet this formal statement of it produced a very depressing
effect upon David's mind, and made him feel that he had been
indulging in hopes too soon. Then the brigand waved his hand
towards the fields, and the cottage beyond the grove. After this,
he waved his hand in a general direction, and then swept it over
the surrounding scene. He pointed to the island and nodded,
pointed to Naples and shook his head.

By which David understood him to say, "You are my prisoner. I live
in that house. You shall be kept there. You can't escape."

Then the brigand raised his gun, and nodded at David. Then he
slapped the stock of it several times, fixing his keen, glowing
eyes gloomily upon the lad as he did so. Then he waved his hand
towards the sky.

By which David understood the following:--

"You're my prisoner! You cannot escape! If you dare try it, I will
shoot you! You can no more escape than you can fly in the air!"

Then the brigand pointed to the boat, and touched his breast.

By which David understood,--

"This boat is mine, and I will keep it as my lawful prize."

Then he waved his hand to the house, and then pointed to Naples.
After which he brought forth a purse from his pocket, tapped it
significantly, pointed to David, and then to Naples.

By which David understood,--

"I will keep you as a prisoner up there in my house till I communicate
with your friends about your ransom, and find out how much I can
get for you."

After this the brigand pulled the boat farther up on the beach,
and then, beckoning to David to follow, he strode off towards
the house.

Slowly and sadly poor David followed; and hope, which had for a
moment revived, began to die out within him. He had been deceived
by the demeanor of the brigand, during his own description of his
woes and wandering, and had mistaken for compassion what was only
ordinary attention. The manner of the brigand, when he had began
to gesticulate, changed hope to fear, and fear to despair. The
merciless allusion to David's captive state; the rude appropriation
of him as a prisoner by the grasp of his head; the ferocious threat
with the gun; and, finally, the display of the purse, and the coarse
reference to money and ransom, all convinced David that he had to
do with one who was a stranger to compassion--a ferocious and
ruthless nature, without pity, and without remorse. And now, as
his captor led the way to the house, he felt that he was being
conveyed to a prison, from which his escape was, indeed, uncertain;
for, though he knew that Uncle Moses would pay any ransom, yet he
could not know whether the brigand would ever be able to communicate
with him or not. On the whole, it was the darkest hour of his life;
and the stride of the ruffian in front of him seemed like the march
of inevitable Fate!

They climbed up the bank, and then went through the grove. Emerging
into the field, they walked on towards the house. As they drew
nearer, David saw signs that were not altogether in keeping with
the tough exterior of his enemy, for in front of the cottage
there were flowers in bloom, which appeared to be cultivated by
some careful hand; but a moment's thought showed David that this
might be the work of the robber's wife. The prospect of meeting
with a woman afforded hope; for whatever the husband might be,
the wife might be gentle, and pitiful, and womanly; and David
drew hope from the flowers; for the one that would have tastes
like these might not be altogether hard and implacable; and as
the giants and ogres of the fairy books had wives who generally
were willing to help the victims of their husbands, so here, in
the wife of this Italian ogre, David hoped to find one who might
be as merciful as those of fairy lore.

At length they reached the house, and the brigand, after waiting
for a moment for his prisoner to come up, entered the door. David
followed, and found himself inside.

The door opened immediately into a room. It was large and low. The
floor was paved with red tiles, and the walls were of wood, varnished.
Around the walls hung numerous pictures without frames. In different
places there were confused heaps of clothing and drapery. The
clothing was rich, though fantastic. In one corner was a frame with
armor suspended; while over this, on the wall, he saw arms of
different kinds--pistols, carbines, daggers, and blunderbusses.
The fashion of all these was somewhat antique, and there was a
richness in their ornaments which even David noticed, in spite of
his trouble and anxiety. The furniture about the room was
old-fashioned, formed of massive mahogany, carved most elaborately,
and was of so many different styles that the pieces seemed thrown
together at random. A Glastonbury chair stood beside an Elizabethan
sofa; a modern Davenport, a Louis Quatorze side-board, and a classic
tripod, stood in a row. Some Chinese tables were in one corner. In
the centre of the room was a table of massive construction, with
richly carved legs, that seemed as old as the middle ages; while
beside it was an American rocking-chair, in which lay a guitar.
The whole scene struck David as being perfectly in keeping with
his captor; for this interior looked like some pictures which he
had seen of robber holds, where the accumulated plunder of years
is heaped indiscriminately together, and reminded him vividly of
the descriptions which he had read of the abodes of pirates or
brigands, in the novels of Cooper, in Francisco, the Pirate of the
Pacific, Lafitte, the Pirate of the Gulf, and Rinaldo Rinaldini.




CHAPTER XIV.

_On the Way to Sorrento again.--A mournful Ride.--A despairing
Search.--A fearful Discovery.--The old Virago again.--In a
Trap.--Sorrento aroused.--Besieged.--All lost.--A raging
Crowd.--The howling Hag.--Hurried Consultation.--The last forlorn
Hope.--Disguise, Flight, and Concealment._


So, as I have said, the carriage rolled out from Castellamare,
along the road to Sorrento, freighted with its anxious load. All
were silent. Uncle Moses was weighed down by an anxiety that was
too deep for words, and sat bent forward with his head buried in
his hands. The boys respected his feelings too much to say anything,
and consequently they, too, sat in silence. They were far from
feeling anything like despair, however, on David's account. Before
they started, Bob had assured them that "Dave" was "all right,"
and would turn up before long somewhere--an assurance which Frank
and Clive accepted as a perfectly sound and reliable statement;
and so, if they were silent, it was not so much the silence of care
or sadness, as of sympathy with Uncle Moses.

As they went along they met people from time to time, some
wayfarers, some in carriages, some in wagons, and some on
horseback. In accordance with the earnest request of Uncle
Moses, the driver questioned all these without exception, and
asked the same question of all.

"Have you seen anything of a boy about fifteen years old--pale,
with dark hair, sallow face, and gray dress?"

And to this question there was one uniform answer from every one,

"No."

And at each fresh answer Uncle Moses would feel more and more
disheartened, and sink into a new abyss of despondency and anxiety.

Far different was this journey to Sorrento from that former one
which they had made a few days before. Then they were all together,
and every one was filled with joy and enthusiasm. Then no one in
that little party was penetrated with a more profound and heartfelt
joy than David, who, in addition to a boy's delight at novelty,
brought forth all that classical glow and fervor which were peculiarly
his own. And now, where was he? The nearer they drew to Sorrento,
the more urgent and pressing did this question become; and as each
one asked it of himself, there was no answer. Gradually the
spectacle of the woe of Uncle Moses began to affect the boys, and
in spite of Bob's confidence they began to feel an unpleasant fear
stealing over them.

A little way out of Sorrento the driver halted and spoke to Uncle
Moses.

He felt a little troubled, he said, about taking the carriage into
the town. He reminded them of the recent uproar of the people, and
their narrow escape, and warned them that if they were recognized
they might again be assailed.

But this warning fell on heedless ears. Uncle Moses was decided to
go on. If David was anywhere, he might be in that very town, a
prisoner in the hands of those foolish people who took offence at
nothing. If they wished to save him, they must go into the very
midst of the people, and gave him from their vengeance.

At this the driver drove on.

About a half a mile outside the town they overtook an old woman,
and the driver stopped, and put to her the usual question. As the
woman looked up they all recognized her at once.

She was their old friend, or rather enemy--the virago herself, and
no other!

At the driver's question she stared at them, and at once recognized
them all. A dark and gloomy expression came over her, and if glances
could have injured them they would have been blasted on the spot.

She stood there, and after the driver had asked the question she
glared at them for some time in silence, looking from one to the
other. Then she stretched forth a long, bony, skinny hand, and
shook it at them. Then she burst forth in a long, shrill, venomous
strain of denunciation, of which the boys could not understand one
word; but the meaning of which they could easily conjecture.

"What does she say?" asked Uncle Moses of the driver.

"O, nothing," said the driver. "She only does curse; and she
say she will haf vengeance." And once more the driver urged
Uncle Moses go back.

But this appearance of the virago and her threats only roused Uncle
Moses to fresh determination. He was now confident that David had
been seized by the Sorrentonians, and that this woman was, perhaps,
the instigator and leader in the act. He urged the driver to talk
to her; but the driver assured him that it was useless, that she
was crazy, and that if they wanted to gain information they must
make inquiries elsewhere.

They now resumed their progress, and before long entered the town,
and reached the hotel. Uncle Moses at once sought the landlord.
At the appearance of the carriage and passengers the landlord looked
a little uneasy, and at the inquiry of Uncle Moses he looked still
more troubled. But as to David he knew nothing whatever.

"Had he heard of a boy being arrested anywhere?"

"No--nothing at all."

"Had he heard of any one being arrested?"

"No."

"Had he heard any people making any threats against them?"

"O, certainly!"--for the whole of the next day there was nothing but
threats against the sacrilegious foreigners; but the feeling had
subsided since. Still their appearance in Sorrento would undoubtedly
rouse the people again, and the landlord urged them for their own
sakes to hurry away as fast as possible back to Castellamare.

But Uncle Moses refused to think of this. He was here, and here he
would remain until he had found David. He wanted the landlord to
help him in this task. Let him go out and mollify the people in
any way, and see if he could find anything about the lost boy. He
promised to pay any sum to the landlord, or anybody else, if they
would only effect his rescue.

This promise acted powerfully upon the landlord's cupidity, and he
thought that at any rate it would be well to try. So he told Uncle
Moses to wait, and he would see what could be done. He thereupon
left them, and Uncle Moses and the boys walked up stairs to that
same room in which they had dined before, when the uproar of the
people reached their ears. Here they sat down and waited in silence.

They did not have to wait very long. It was not more than a quarter
of an hour, or twenty minutes, when hurried footsteps were heard,
and the landlord rushed in, followed by the driver. Both were
agitated and disturbed. At the same instant an outcry arose from
without, and a tumult of eager and excited voices burst upon their
ears. The landlord clasped his hands, and stood listening. The
driver rushed to Uncle Moses, and cried,--

"Dey haf come!--de people! You are lost!"

At this Uncle Moses and the boys started to their feet aghast,
and Frank rushed to the window, and standing so as to be as little
observed as possible, he looked out.

In the street in front he saw an excited crowd, which was not so
large as it had been on that former memorable occasion, but which
promised to be so before another quarter of an hour, for people
were running up every minute, and adding to the uproar. The cries
grew louder and louder, and though Frank could not understand
the words, he perceived plainly enough that they were fierce
cries of anger and vengeance. And there, conspicuous among this
crowd, was that identical old woman--that villanous old virago,
who had caused all the former trouble, and seemed now bent upon
the full accomplishment of her furious purpose. Dancing, howling,
shrieking, she stood close by the door of the hotel, which was
now shut and barred, and shook her fists at the building, and
yelled out curses at those within, and called upon her fellow
citizens to break into the hotel, and seize the sacrilegious and
barbarous foreigners. Frank was a bold boy, but this sight was
too much for him. His heart sank within him, and he involuntarily
shrank back farther out of sight.

Soon the people outside began to throw at the party within something
harder than words. Stones came flying through the open windows,
and one of these missiles came very close to the head of Uncle
Moses. The landlord rushed forward, and closed all the shutters,
and barred them, while the boys gathered around Uncle Moses as
though to protect him from those savage assailants without.

"What shall we do?" asked Frank of the driver.

The driver shrugged his shoulders.

"Can't we drive through them as we did before?"

"Dey have put a guard at de gate. Dey prepare dis time--an not let
us go."

"Isn't there any back way?" asked Frank, once more, of the landlord,
who now rejoined them, after having barred all the windows.

"Dere is; but de people are on de guard."

"Are there no soldiers about--no police? Can't some one go and get
help?"

The landlord shook his head despondingly.

"But there must be some way of getting rid of the mob," said Frank,
impatiently. "Can't you explain that it was all a mistake?"

The landlord sighed.

"I haf try," he said, in a doleful voice. "And dey say I mus put
you out of de house. Dat I can not do--so I sall haf to soffaire.
Listen!" And at that moment the crash of glass below interrupted
him, and formed a striking commentary on his remarks. "Dey vill
break de vindow," said he, "an dey vill try to break de door; but
I haf barricade as well as I can."

"Are we at all safe?" asked Frank.

The landlord shook his head.

"Not mooch. If dey get enrage enough, dey break in, and den"--a
significant shrug ended the sentence.

"Have you any arms--fire-arms?" asked Frank, after a thoughtful
pause.

"I haf a small shot gun."

"Give me that," interrupted Frank.

"But I haf no powdaire," said the landlord.

At this Frank turned away in despair.

"Can't we get to some other room than this?" he asked of the driver.
"Isn't there a place where we can have some chance of defending
ourselves?"

The driver had been silent for some time, and buried in thought.
He did not hear Frank's words, but as he spoke, he looked earnestly
at him, and said,--

"I haf a plan. It may be no good--but it is de only one."

"Ah," asked Frank, eagerly, "what is that?"

"You must all disguise."

"Disguise?"

"Yes--female dress. I sall try to get some."

"But they would recognize us all the same."

"No--de plan is dis. You all disguise--stay below--I sall sit in
de carriage; de horses are all ready now. Ef de people do break
in, dey will all rush up stair to here. You sall be down stair
in de stable. De moment de crowd come, I will haf de gates opened.
You sall spring in--an den I whip up, an make a fly for life.
You ond'stan?"

The driver spoke hurriedly. Frank understood him, and at once
approved. At this the driver went off to get the landlord to procure
female dresses. That worthy hurried away, and soon returned with
about twenty gowns, bonnets, and petticoats. These he threw upon
the floor, and implored them to make haste, for the people outside
were talking of getting a beam to batter in the door. He had implored
them not to, but they scorned his prayers.

Upon this the boys began to put on the dresses, disguising themselves
as well as they could. It was very clumsy work, and they were very
uncertain about the proper way of fastening them; but the driver
and the landlord assisted them. The dresses were those of Italian
peasant women, and required no very elaborate adjustment. Some
coarse bonnets, of an antique type, were stuck on their heads, and
served to conceal their short hair and faces.

With Uncle Moses they had very much trouble. At first he refused
positively, and only consented when he was assured that the safety
of the boys depended upon his disguise. So he yielded reluctantly,
and allowed the driver to officiate as lady's maid.

No sooner was this task concluded, than the landlord and driver
hurried them down stairs, and through a passage-way into the barn.
Outside, in the court-yard, was the carriage, with the horses ready.
The hostler was sent to the gate to fling it open at the driver's
signal, and the landlord, stimulated by a promise from Uncle Moses
of a large reward hi case of his rescue, returned to the hotel, to
operate upon the crowd from that quarter.




CHAPTER XV.

_In the Robber's Hold.--The Brigand's Bride.--Sudden, amazing,
overwhelming, bewildering, tremendous, astounding, overpowering,
and crushing Discovery.--The Situation.--Everybody confounded.--The
Crowd at Sorrento.--The Landlord's Prayers.--The Virago calls for
Vengeance._


The brigand put his gun down upon the sofa, and motioned to David
to take a seat. He then left the room, and David heard his voice
calling,--

"Laura! Laura!"

A light footstep sounded in the next room, and the brigand returned,
followed by a woman.

This woman's appearance astonished David. She was a lady. She was
young, beautiful, bright as a vision, dressed simply, but in the
modern fashion altogether. She had a very sweet face, and a bewitching
smile, and as she entered she looked at David in some surprise.

Then this great, big, bluff, bearded, broad-shouldered, beetle-browed,
brusque bully of a brigand; this fierce, ferocious, bloodthirsty,
relentless, ruthless ruffian; this hard-hearted, implacable,
inexorable villain; this cruel, vengeful, vindictive, griping,
grasping, scowling fiend; this demoniac miscreant, without pity,
and without remorse, opened his month.

And this is what he said, in first-rate ENGLISH!--"See here, Laura;
I've picked up a poor wretch of a Bohemian--can't speak a word of
any language, and had to explain by signs. Well, you know I'm great
on gestures; so I worked his story out of him. It seems he came to
Naples with his father, mother, and two sisters, and they all went
on horseback up Vesuvius. Well, somehow they were captured by
brigands, and were carried off; but the father, who, I believe, is
a medical man, managed to drug the food of the scoundrels, and
carried off his family. Well, they got to the shore, found a boat,
and set out for Naples. After sailing a little distance, a squall
struck the boat, and it upset. All were drowned except this poor
lad, who managed to cling to the boat, and drifted, or was blown,
ashore here on the cove, just down there, last night. He was
senseless all night, and only came to himself a little while ago,
and I picked him up just as he was reviving. He says he is alone
in the world, and has appealed to me to help him. Poor lad! my
heart fairly aches for him. He says he hasn't got a penny of money,
and implores me to help him. Of course I've tried to comfort him;
for I've told him that he may make my house his home, and I've
promised to give him whatever money he wants, and move heaven and
earth to get him back to his friends, if he has any."

During this astounding speech the lady had stolen over to David,
and sitting by his side, she placed a soft hand tenderly on his
head. As the story was being told, her eyes filled with tears, and
leaning forward, she kissed the poor boy's pale brow. When it ended
she murmured in English, that was even better than that of the
"brigand,"--"Poor boy! poor boy! O, Walter, dearest, how I do wish
I could speak Bohemian, so as to tell him how sorry I feel!"

And what of David?

What did David think--feel--say?

Nothing. Not a word!

David was paralyzed. He was stunned. He gasped for breath.

And so this was his brigand--the brutal, the beetle-browed, the
cruel, the bloody-minded, the inexorable, the demoniac, and all
the rest of it! He gasped for breath, as I think I have already
remarked; and as the ex-brigand went on with his narrative, David
listened in a dazed way, and began to understand that the language
of gestures has its little uncertainties. But when the lady kissed
him, and when her sweet voice spoke those tender words of pity, he
could stand it no longer. His voice came to him. He burst forth,--

"O, how I thank you! O, how good you are! O, what a fool I am!"

And he could say no more.

Not a word more, on my honor.

It was now the turn of the others to be surprised.

The lady started back in wonder, and looked at David, and then at
her husband. The ex-brigand started back also, and stared at David
in utter bewilderment.

"What!" he roared, in a deep, thunderous bass voice. "Say that
again."

"O, I'm an American--and I'm such a fool!" said David. "Why didn't
I tell you so?"

"An American!" roared the ex-brigand. "An American!"

Upon this he burst into a perfect thunder-peal of laughter. The
laughter came forth, peal after peal, in long and deafening
explosions, till the house vibrated with the sound, and till at
last the ex-brigand sank exhausted into the Glastonbury chair.

"An American!" he cried; "and think of me--ha, ha, ha!--asking
you if you spoke every language in the world--ha, ha, ha!--but the
right one--ha, ha, ha!--and speaking every language--ha, ha,
ha!--but my own--ha, ha, ha! And to think of us two Americans--ha,
ha, ha!--after trying Italian--ha, ha, ha I--and French, and Spanish,
and German--ha, ha, ha!--rushing into gestures!--ha, ha,
ha!--gestures!--only think, Laura--ha, ha, ha! He and I--ha, ha,
ha!--spending an hour in making signs to each other--ha, ha, ha!--but
'pon my life it's too bad in me to be howling out in this fashion,
my poor lad, when you're in the midst of such deep affliction. I
swear I'm sorry. I forget myself."

"But I'm not in any affliction at all," said David.

"What! What's that?" cried the ex-brigand. "Didn't you lose your
father?"

"No."

"But your father, and mother, and the rest of them--"

"No," said David. "You didn't quite understand what I wanted to
say." And he then proceeded to tell his story in plain English. He
was listened to with deep attention; but as his story turned out
to be so different from the first report of the ex-brigand, the
lady stole an arch look at her husband, and her eyes fairly danced
with fun and merriment. But the ex-brigand bore it admirably; and
as David ended, and showed himself to be in no such deep affliction
as had been supposed, he once more burst forth in a fresh peal of
riotous laughter.

Upon this David ventured to hint at his own late fears, and on
being questioned by the lady he confessed frankly what had been
the interpretation that he put upon the signs of the ex-brigand.

"Well," said that worthy, "I'm not a brigand at all. I'm an artist."

"I'm sure I don't wonder, Walter," said the lady. "You dress yourself
up in such an absurd fashion--and I've always told you that this
room looks like a bandit's den."

"No, no, Laura; say an artist's studio. How could I get along
without my furniture. As for my dress, it's quite in keeping with
the place and the people. It's picturesque, and that's all an artist
is bound to consider."

Further explanations followed, in the course of which it appeared
that this ex-brigand was Mr. Walter Ludlow, an American artist,
who, for the time being, was living here with his bride. They had
been married three months. The island was Capri. They were enjoying
love in a cottage, which cottage was furnished in an artistic,
rather than a fashionable way. They lived here quite free from
restraint, and the artist occupied the time partly with his art,
and partly with general enjoyment. Neither of them felt at all
inclined to leave Capri for some time to come, but thought it the
pleasantest place in the world.

Ludlow happened that day to be cleaning his gun, with the intention
of going on a shooting excursion. The noise which had been made in
the wood by David had startled him, and he had gone to see what it
was, with the idea that some cattle had strayed along the shore,
and were coming into the fields and gardens.

When Ludlow explained his gestures to David, and the latter confessed
what interpretation he had put on them, further laughter was elicited
from the fun-loving artist, in which his wife joined, and David
also. Ludlow, as soon as he was in a condition to speak, proceeded
to explain what he really meant. His gestures were all intended by
him to express the following ideas:--

   1. I'm an American.
   2. I don't live here--I only lodge.
   3. I'm an artist.
   4. I'm very sorry for you, and I'll take care of you.
   5. I'm going out shooting soon.
   6. Don't fret. I'll take care of you, and the boat too,
      as long as you like.
   7. I live in that house up there, and you can stay there
      till you hear from your friends.

But Mrs. Ludlow now retreated, and before long she had a table set
for their young guest, at which David took his seat, and ate with
an appetite that had been sharpened by his long fast. While at
the table Ludlow questioned him more particularly about his friends,
and where he had left them.

"Well, David, my lad," said the artist, at length, "I should like
very much to have you stay with us for a time; and if you could,
I feel confident that I could show you what would well repay you.
Are you aware that on this island is one of the wonders of the
world--the famous grotto? I should like to take you there--but I
see how it is. As you say, your uncle will be wild with anxiety
about you, and will have no peace till he hears from you. So I
suppose the best thing I can do for you, is to restore you to him
first of all, and then arrange for a visit from you all on some
future occasion."

David thanked him very earnestly, and dwelt strongly upon the
anxiety of Uncle Moses under the circumstances.

"Well, my lad," said Ludlow, "I think you'd best go off at once,
and I mean to go with you. Unfortunately there is a head wind,
just now, so that we cannot go to Castellamare without taking too
long a time. The best way will be to go over to Sorrento from this
place, and take a carriage, or horses, to Castellamare."

This proposal pleased David, greatly, and as Ludlow was ready to
start, he rose to go. Mrs. Ludlow bade him good by, and pressed
him affectionately to come back with his friends.

In a short time they were in the boat and afloat. Ludlow was a
good sailor, and the wind was favorable for a passage to Sorrento.
The distance was traversed quickly and pleasantly; and then, leaving
the boat, they walked up into the town towards the hotel, to see
about getting a conveyance to Castellamare.

As they approached the hotel they became aware of a great and
unusual crowd in front of it. The crowd reminded David very
forcibly of that one which had been raging there a few days
before, and excited some trepidation in his breast. Involuntarily
he hung back.

"What's the matter?" asked Ludlow.

"The mob," said David; "do--do you think it's safe to venture among
them?"

"Safe? Pooh! why not?"

"They appear to be excited. Hark! how they shout."

"O, nonsense! These Italians are always shouting."

But David still hesitated, and finally told Ludlow about the trouble
with the tassel, and the old woman, and the mob, and their escape.

At this story Ludlow laughed heartily, and then proceeded to reassure
David.

"Don't be alarmed," said he; "they won't remember you. If they did,
I've got something that'll make them keep at a respectful distance;"
and he touched his breast significantly. "A six-shooter, David, my
boy, is a very convenient thing to carry about one in this country,
and it is surprising how the native mind respects it. So come
along, and we--that is, I and my six-shooter'll--take care of you.
Don't be uneasy. They've got something else on their minds now."

With these words Ludlow walked on, and David followed, full of
fear.

The crowd in front of the hotel was in a great state of rage and
excitement. Some were banging at the door, others pounding against
the window shutters, which had been closed by the terrified
landlord; others were standing at a distance, and trying to find
stones to throw. Fortunately there were no loose stones of any
size, few being larger than a pebble, and therefore, as yet, no
very great damage had been done. But the crowd was evidently
capable of any amount of mischief. Every one was howling, and
yelling; and in the midst of them was an old woman, whose shouts
and shrill cries made her conspicuous in the scene. She was
encouraging and stimulating a number of men who were carrying a
beam to the house, which they evidently purposed to use as a
battering-ram, so as to burst open the door.

The moment that David caught sight of this woman he shuddered, and
falling behind Ludlow, caught at his hand, and tried to pull him
back. Ludlow turned in surprise.

"It's the same woman," said David, in an agitated voice, "who
chased me."

"Is it?" said Ludlow, with a smile. "O, well, you've got me with
you now. So be a man.--cheer up, my boy. It's all right."

Saying this, Ludlow again walked forward, this time keeping his
left hand on David's arm. David felt that it was not "all right,"
but he had to follow Ludlow, and so he followed him into the midst
of the crowd. Working their way on through the people, they at last
came near to the door, and found themselves close by the men who
were carrying the beam. They had laid it on the ground, and were
hesitating for a moment. Overhead Ludlow heard the voice of the
landlord pleading with them in piteous tones.

"O, good citizens! O, dear citizens! Don't destroy my furniture!
Don't ruin me! There is a mistake. On my honor, the strangers are
innocent."

At this the old virago howled out some insane maledictions, and
urged the crowd on. Some on the outskirts yelled, and the old hag,
whirling around in the midst of her tirade, found herself face to
face with David. The terrified lad shrank back, and tried to hide
himself; but the old woman recognized him at once, and with a howl
sprang at him.

Ludlow saw the movement.

He put himself in front of David, and, seizing the old woman's arm
in a grasp like a vice, held her back, and asked her sternly, in
Italian,--

"Accursed one! what do you mean?"

"O, citizens of Sorrento!" shrieked the hag. "O, pious citizens!
Help! This is the accursed boy! This is the sacrilegious one! the
blasphemer! the insulter of the Bambino! the--"

"Silence!" roared Ludlow, in a voice of thunder. "Men of Sorrento,
is this the way you treat strangers? Does this mad thing govern
the city?"

"The boy, the boy! the blasphemer! the sacrilegious! the accursed!"
shrieked the hag. And at her yells some of the mob seemed inclined
to respond. They were already ripe for mischief, and when the hag
diverted their attention to David, they felt quite ready to take
him in hand. So now a ring of dark faces was formed around Ludlow,
and the yells of the hag directed them to seize David.

Ludlow pushed the hag from him, drew his revolver from his breast,
and took two strides towards the house, which was close by, dragging
David after him. Then he put his back against the wall, and holding
the revolver in an apparently careless manner, with its muzzle
turned towards the crowd, he once more opened his mouth.

"Men of Sorrento!" said he, "what foolery is this? The woman is
mad. I have just come from Capri, with this boy. Many of you know
me, for I am often here; and now, when I come, am I to be insulted
by a madwoman? Are you--"

"Seize him! seize the boy! the boy! the blasphemer!" yelled the hag.

Ludlow placed his hand on David's head, and looked with a smile on
the crowd nearest.

"Does her madness usually take this form, gentlemen?" he added;
"does she usually show this animosity to little boys and children?"

At this question, which was asked in an easy and natural manner,
the crowd looked abashed.

They began to think that the woman was crazy. Those to whom Ludlow
had spoken were the very men who had brought the beam but a few
minutes before. They now edged slowly away, and began to think that
they had done a very silly thing.

"What's the trouble, signori?" asked Ludlow, in the same easy tone,
of those who were nearest.

"Well, they say there are some people inside that desecrated the
church--some boys--"

"What--boys?" said Ludlow, with a smile. "Who says so?"

The men shrugged their shoulders.

"She says so."

Ludlow thereupon shrugged his shoulders.

"Seize him! seize him! seize him!" yelled the hag, who all this
time had kept up her insane outcry.

"Somebody had better seize _her_," said Ludlow, with a laugh. "Why,
gentlemen, she will give your town a very bad name."

The crowd nearest had already undergone a revulsion of feeling.
The assault of the old woman on two harmless strangers seemed too
wanton to be tolerated. Ludlow's easy manner and calm language
restored them fully to their senses, and the sight of his revolver
effectually overawed the more excitable or reckless. They were also
jealous of the good name of the town, and now began to be enraged
with the old woman. A murmur passed through them. Curses were freely
lavished upon her, and the threats which but a short time ago had
been directed against the landlord and his guests, were now hurled
at her. The hag, however, in her fury, was quite unconscious of
all this, and continued to yell as before, endeavoring to hound
them on against David. But the crowd was now disgusted with her
and her yells.

"Stop your diabolical yells!" cried an angry voice. "Go home, and
stay home, or you'll have a strait jacket put on you."

The hag stopped short, as though thunderstruck, and looked around
with staring eyes. It was a young man who thus addressed her: he
was grasping her arm and looking savagely at her. Evidently he
was some relative, of whom she stood in awe, for with something
like a gasp she seemed to shrink into herself, and then, gathering
her clothes about her, slunk away through the crowd.

Ludlow had often been at Sorrento before, and saw some familiar
faces among the people. These he accosted, and soon found out what
the trouble was. Although some of these very men had been howling
like maniacs a short time before, yet they now were as quiet, and
gentle, and amiable as lambs. They sneered at the old hag, deplored.
the excitement, and assured him that no harm had been done.

Soon the crowd dispersed, and the landlord, who had been watching
the scene in deep anxiety, came down, opened the doors, and gave
Ludlow and David a most eager, exuberant, and enthusiastic welcome.




CHAPTER XVI.

_More Troubles for poor David.--Onset of four Women.--Seized by an
old Crone and three Peasant Girls.--Fresh Horror of David.--A new
Uproar in the Yard of the Inn.--Uncle Moses bent double._


Ludlow began to talk to the landlord about a conveyance to
Castellamare, and David walked through the house into the yard.
David's only desire now was to hurry on and join his friends as
soon as possible. He had not the remotest idea that they were in
Sorrento, and that the trouble had arisen about them, but fancied
that they were in Castellamare, full of anxiety about him.
Sympathizing with their anxiety, he longed to go to them, so as to
put an end to it; and seeing a carriage in the yard, he naturally
walked in that direction. Reaching, the yard he noticed that the
horses were in it, and that it was a barouche, like the one in
which his party had been travelling. Not for one moment did he
suppose that it was the same one, nor did he notice it very closely;
but giving it a careless glance, he looked around to see those to
whom it belonged.

As David went out into the yard, the driver had just gone into the
barn to tell Uncle Moses and the boys that the trouble was over
and the crowd was dispersing. Their joy may be imagined. They were
just hastening from the barn to return to the hotel, and had just
reached the barn door when David approached.

David was walking along towards the barn, looking around to see
where the people were, when suddenly he heard a wild cry, and saw
a figure rush straight towards him. It was a woman's figure, and
she appeared quite old. Like lightning, the thought flashed through
him that this was his old tormentor, the hag; and with a gasp he
started back, and was about to run. But the other was too quick
for him, and David felt himself seized by his dreaded enemy. This
dreaded enemy then behaved in a frantic way, hugging him and uttering
inarticulate words. David struggled to get free from her, and
throwing a frightened glance at her face, which was but partly
visible, beneath a very shabby bonnet, he saw that she was quite
old, and that tears were streaming down from her eyes. This frightened
David all the more, for now he was sure that she was insane.

But now, to David's horror, he found himself surrounded by three
more women, in coarse dresses and horribly shabby bonnets. They
all made a simultaneous rush at him, seizing his hands and arms,
and seemed about to tear him to pieces. In vain he struggled. He
was helpless. A cold shudder passed through him, and a thrill of
horror tingled every nerve.

All this had been the work of an instant. So sudden had been the
onset, and so overwhelmed was David with utter horror, that he
could not even scream for help. But at last he got his month open,
and was just about to give one piercing yell for help, when the
words were taken out of his mouth, and his voice stopped, and a
new and greater surprise created within him.

"David! David! My boy! my boy!" moaned the first old woman.

"Dave! You rascal! What do you mean by this?" cried woman
Number Two.

"Dave! Old boy! What in the world is the meaning of this?" cried
woman Number Three.

"Dave! How did you find us?" cried woman Number Four.

"Where have you been?" "Where did you come from?" "When did you
get here?" "What made you go off?" "Did they seize you?" "Was it
the old woman that did it?" These questions, and scores of others,
came pouring forth into his astonished ears. As for David, he could
not utter one single word. At length the yearning affection of
Uncle Moses seemed to be satiated, and the boisterous greetings of
the boys exhausted, and one by one they released their grasp, and
allowed David to extricate himself.

Thereupon David stood off at a little distance, and gazed at them
in mute amazement. The sight which they presented to his astonished
eyes was one which might have excited strong emotions in the breast
of any beholder.

There stood Uncle Moses, his figure concealed under a tattered
gown, and his venerable head enfolded in a battered bonnet of
primeval style.

There stood Frank, looking like a strapping peasant woman, with a
bonnet that was stuck on the top of his head like a man's hat.

There stood Clive, looking like a pretty peasant girl, quite Italian
in his style, with a dress that was a trifle neater than the others.

And there was Bob, an utter and unmitigated absurdity,--with s
dress that was tangled about his legs, and a bonnet that had no
crown. The four of them looked more like escaped lunatics than
anything else, and no sooner had David taken in the whole scene,
than he burst forth into a perfect convulsion of laughter.

Thus far the disguise had possessed nothing but a serious character
in the minds of the wearers. By means of this disguise they had
hoped to escape, and the costumes, being thus a help to safety,
had been dignified in their eyes. But now, when the danger was
over, and safety assured, there was nothing to hide from their eyes
the unutterable absurdity, the inconceivable ludicrousness of their
appearance. As David's laugh burst forth, each turned his eyes upon
the other, and saw how it was.

Then they all burst forth! It was a cataclysm of laughter. The boys
swayed backward and forward, and danced up and down, and shouted,
and yelled with laughter. Uncle Moses stood with his eyes shut and
his figure bent double. Frank stared at each one in succession,
and then at himself, giving a scream at each figure. Clive laughed
till he sank down; and Bob, flinging himself upon the ground in a
perfect paroxysm, rolled over and over, and kicked, and yelled,
and fairly howled in one prolonged and uproarious cachinnation.

The uproar aroused the house.

The driver hurried out of the barn and joined in the roar.

The hostler followed him.

The servants came from the hotel, and lent their voices.

The landlord came out, and was at once seized with a convulsion.

After the landlord came Ludlow. He didn't altogether understand
it; but he saw David, and he saw the four figures; and from what
the landlord had been telling him, he knew who they were. The
sight overwhelmed him. He opened his mouth. He burst forth. It was
tremendous. It was Olympian. It was the laughter of Homer's immortals.
It was a thunder-peal. It was too much. He could not keep his feet,
but sank down on the stone steps, and burying his face in his hands,
gave way utterly.

Thus it Was, then, that David, the most solemn of boys, returned
to his distracted and anxious friends.

At length the laughter ceased, and the costumes were set aside,
and they all sat in the dining-room, asking and giving explanations.
David had to tell the story of his adventures. The boys had to tell
about their search after him, and Ludlow had to tell the story of
his meeting with David at Capri. These mutual explanations had
nothing in them but what was pleasant, so that there was nothing
to detract from the joy of the occasion.

And now Ludlow, finding the friends so happily reunited, pressed
them all to come over to Capri at once, and stay as long as they
felt inclined to. David's eyes sparkled at this, and the other
boys, who had fallen in love with Ludlow at first sight, were more
eager to go than they could tell. But Uncle Moses demurred. He felt
afraid of giving trouble, and thought they had better get back to
Naples. Ludlow, however, pooh-poohed his scruples, answered every
objection, and would not take any refusal whatever; so that the
result was, the final departure of the party for Capri.

But before they went, several things had to be attended to. First
of all, they had to dismiss the driver. With the exception of his
sulk at Paestum, he had behaved admirably, and had been of immense
service to them in more than one hour of need. The consequence was,
that Uncle Moses gave him a reward so liberal that it elicited an
outburst of benedictions, thanks, and prayers for the future welfare
of the whole party.

The other business was to see about the return of the boat which
David had taken. This, however, was arranged without difficulty.
Ludlow knew an honest fisherman who could be intrusted with the
task of returning the boat, and making explanations to the owner.
By this man they sent a sufficient sum to repay the owner for the
use of it.

They engaged another boat to take them to Capri. A gentle breeze
wafted them over the intervening water, and they soon stood before
the artist's picturesque abode. Mrs. Ludlow received them all with
her brightest smile and warmest cordiality, and the boys soon began
to feel towards the artist and his wife as though they were near
and dear relations. They found the artist's cottage a perfect
storehouse of curiosities, and a museum of antiquities; they found
also that it was of large dimensions, and contained sufficient
accommodations for the party; and thus they were able to feel that
they were not a burden in any way on their warm-hearted friends.

Ludlow took them all over the island, and showed them all that was
to be seen. He was not only an enthusiastic artist, but also an
antiquarian of no mean attainments; and while he could point out
to them the most beautiful spots on that lovely isle, he could also
talk learnedly about the ancient Capraea, and raise out of ancient
ruins theories about the pleasure-grounds of Tiberius.

But the most wonderful thing which they found there was the famous
grotto, so familiar to all from the accounts of tourists, and from
the well-known description in Hans Andersen's Improvisatore. After
that glowing, poetic, and enthusiastic narrative, no other need be
attempted. Here they passed three or four days, and when at length
they bade adieu to the artist and his wife, it was with many sincere
regrets on both sides, and many earnest wishes that they might meet
again.

After which they all went back to Naples.




CHAPTER XVII.

_Vesuvius.--Ponies and Sticks.--Sand and Lava.--The rocky Steps.--The
rolling, wrathful Smoke-clouds.--The Volcano warns them off.--The
lost Boy.--A fearful Search.--A desperate Effort.--The sulphurous
Vapors.--Over the sliding Sands._


The sight of Vesuvius from a distance had filled David with an
ardent desire to visit it, and all the rest shared this feeling.
Vesuvius was before them always. The great cloud of dense, black
smoke, which hung over it like a pall, was greater, and denser,
and blacker than usual. The crater was disturbed. There were rumbling
noises in its wondrous interior; and all around and all beneath
the volcano gave signs of an approaching eruption. Sometimes the
smoke, as it ascended from the crater, would tower up in the air
for thousands of feet, far into the sky, a black pillar, which at
the summit spread out on all sides, giving to the spectator the
vision of a colossal palm tree--the shape and the sign which is
the inevitable forerunner of an approaching eruption. At other
times the sulphur-laden clouds would hang low over the crest of
the mountain, and roll far down its sides, and envelop it in its
dense, black, voluminous folds.

As yet, in spite of these appearances, the ascent might be made in
safety, though every day lessened the chances of an ascent by
increasing the danger. This they learned from Michael Angelo, their
guide, whom they had engaged to make the ascent; so they determined
to go without any farther delay. Accordingly, two days after their
excursion to Baiae, they set out, going first to Portici, where
they hired ponies to take them to the foot of the cone; each one
supplied himself with a good stout stick to assist his ascent, and
Michael Angelo went with them as general manager of the expedition.

On riding, up they found the road good at first, but soon it
became somewhat rough. It left the fertile meadows and vineyards
at the base of the mountain, and ran over a wild, rocky country,
which looked, as Uncle Moses said, like the "abomination of
desolation." No verdure appeared, no houses, no flocks, and
herds--all was wild, and savage, and dismal. After passing over
these lava fields, the party reached what is called the "Hermitage"
--a kind of refreshment station near the foot of the cone. Resting
here, for a little way they proceeded on foot. The path was now
rugged and difficult, and ascended at so steep an angle that it
became rather climbing than walking. After a toilsome walk this
path ended at the foot of the cone.

Here the mountain arose grandly before them, with its smoke-cloud
overhanging its steep sides, ascending from where they stood to
where the view was lost in smoke. At one part there was a surface
of loose sand, and at another wild, disordered heaps of crumbled
lava blocks. Over these last Michael Angelo led them, for these
blocks formed stepping-stones by which to make the ascent. A number
of men were here with chairs and straps, who offered them assistance;
but they all declined, even Uncle Moses choosing to rely on his
unassisted muscle.

Then they began the ascent of the cone. The lava blocks were of
all sizes, and lay strewn loosely down the steep side. It was like
ascending a long, rough stairway, where all the steps are irregular.
It was laborious and tedious. Often they had to stop and rest.
Uncle Moses felt it most, and the boys had frequently to stop rather
on his account. But when they had traversed about two thirds of
the way, they began to grow more excited, and in Bob this excitement
was most evident. Thinking that the others would take sufficient
care of Uncle Moses, he started off alone, and soon was far up,
clambering over the rocks like a young chamois.

Usually there is one side of the crater which is accessible. There
is almost always some wind which blows the smoke away, and on the
windward side the visitor can stand and breathe freely. On the
present occasion, however, there was little or no wind; and the
smoke, which was far denser than usual, gathered in thick, black
folds, and sometimes rolled down the sides of the cone, and hid
the crest from view. Michael Angelo expressed a fear that they
would not be able to reach the crest; and as they drew nearer,
every step showed that this fear was well founded. At last, when
they were within easy distance of it, there came rolling down a
cloud of smoke, so dense and so full of sulphurous vapor that they
all had to stop and cover their faces with their clothes.

It was now evident that they could go no farther. They waited for
a time in great distress from the smoke. It rolled away at last,
yet still hovered near them, every little while moving threateningly
down, as though to drive them back, and prevent the crater from
desecration by human footsteps. They had evidently reached their
farthest limit, and could go no farther.

But where was Bob?

Scarcely had they discovered the impossibility of going farther
than this thought came to them. Where was Bob? He had left them
some time previously, and had gone far ahead of them. They had
expected every moment to come up with him. But there were no signs
of him anywhere.

Frank called out with all his strength. David and Clive joined in
the cry.

There was no response.

Fear came to them--a sickening, awful fear. All shouted--the boys,
Uncle Moses, and Michael Angelo.

Still there was no response.

Again, and again, and yet again, they called, by this time in an
agony of apprehension; but to all these cries the surrounding
stillness gave forth not one answering sound.

And the deep, dark, wrathful smoke-clouds rolled around, and above,
and downward, moving close to them, and over them, as though eager
to involve them in that dread fate which they feared had overwhelmed
the lost boy.

"I can't stand this any longer!" cried Frank, at last. "I'll go
and hunt him up."

"We'll all go," said David.

"Wait," said Uncle Moses, as the boys were starting. "We must hunt
him up as we do in the woods. We can't tell where he is. Let's form
a line, an walk as nigh abreast of one another as we can get, an
yet far enough away to cover the ground. In that way well be more
likely to find him."

At this the party formed themselves in a line, so that about twenty
or thirty feet intervened between each. The five thus extended for
a long distance. Michael Angelo was at the extreme right, next to
him was Uncle Moses, then Clive, then David, while Frank was on
the extreme left. In this way they determined to go as far forward
as the smoke would permit. The prospect was gloomy enough; but the
situation of Bob nerved them all to the effort. Besides, they were
encouraged by the fact that the smoke would sometimes retreat far
up, exposing the surface to the very crest of the crater. So they
advanced, clambering over the rough blocks, and drew nearer and
nearer to the summit. At length a heavy mass of black smoke came
rolling down. It touched them. It enveloped them. It folded itself
over them and under them. Each one fell flat on his face at Michael
Angelo's warning, and covered his mouth and nostrils with his
handkerchief, so as to keep out the sulphurous vapors. It was almost
suffocating; breathing was difficult and painful, and it seemed a
long time before the blackness of the darkness was mitigated. But
at last the smoke withdrew itself, and the whole party stood up,
and looked around painfully for one another, panting heavily, and
drawing laborious breaths.

"You can't go any further," said Uncle Moses. "I ain't goin to
let you resk your lives, boys. You must all go back, an I'll go
for'ard."

"No, uncle; I'll go," cried Frank.

"And I," cried David.

"And I," cried Clive.

"None of you shall go," said Uncle Moses, firmly. "I tell you I'm
goin. I order you to stay here, or go back." Uncle Moses was deeply
agitated, and spoke with unaccustomed sternness. "Go back," he
said; "I'll find Bob, or leave myself there. Go back. D'ye hear?"

He darted forward, and turned to wave his hand at the boys. But
Frank had already sprung upward, swiftly and eagerly. Onward he
went, going first to the left and then to the right. David and
Clive also rushed forward. Uncle Moses toiled after them, calling
on them to come back. Michael Angelo followed slowly, looking on
with a face of fearful apprehension.

Frank was far ahead. He had come to a place where the lava blocks
ended, and the soil was sandy. Here he paused for an instant, and
took a swift glance around. He started. He had seen something. He
made a quick gesture and then sprang away to the right.

All this had not taken many minutes. It was an act of desperation
on the part of Frank, but he was determined to save Bob or perish.
Fortunately the smoke did not descend just at that moment, but was
floating up from the summit, so that the edge of the crater could
be seen, with a dull yellow gleam, caused by the sulphur that lay
mingled with the sand.

Frank had seen a prostrate figure. It lay on the sand beyond the
edge of the lava blocks. His first feeling was one of surprise that
Bob had succeeded in penetrating so far; his next was one of horror
for fear that he might be beyond the reach of help. With frantic
haste he rushed towards him, and reaching the spot, he raised Bob
in his arms.

He was senseless!

And now, as Frank stood there, close to the perilous edge, the
treacherous smoke, which had thus far held back, rolled down once
more. To face it was impossible. Frank flung himself down, and
buried his face as before, looking up from time to time to see if
the smoke was lessening. The time seemed protracted to a fearful
length. The dense fumes which penetrated through the thick folds
of the clothes which he held over his mouth nearly suffocated him.
He began to think that he, too, was doomed.

And where were the others?

Scattered, apart from one another--and thus they had been caught
by the rolling smoke. They could do only one thing, and that was
what they had done before. Uncle Moses alone refused to yield. He
tried to toil on so as to get nearer to his boys. He had a vague
idea of getting near to Frank, so as to die by his side. But physical
pain was stronger than the determination of his soul, and at length
he involuntarily flung himself down, and covered his face.

But at last even that ordeal was passed. The smoke lifted. It rolled
away. There was air again for them to breathe. Frank roused himself
before the smoke had all passed, and lifting Bob in his arms,
carried him swiftly downward. He reached the place where Uncle
Moses was standing, gasping for breath; and the other boys who had
seen him hurried towards him, and tried to help him carry his
senseless burden. Uncle Moses also tried to take Bob in his own
arms, and prayed Frank, with tears in his eyes, to let him carry
him; but Frank refused them all, and insisted on doing it himself.
A few paces more, however, over the lava blocks, showed that Frank's
strength would not be sufficient for such a journey. He sank down
exhausted by his excessive exertions, and waited a few moments to
take breath.

While he was thus recovering his breath, Michael Angelo reached
the spot, and explained that there was another place of descent
not far off, and led the way towards it. Here they found the side
of the cone all covered with loose sand. Down this they went. At
every step they sank in up to their ankles, and the sliding soil
bore them down, so that for every step they took they were carried
the length of two or three steps.

Frank clung to Bob till he had got beyond the reach of the smoke,
and then he fell backward, gasping for breath. The others scrambled
towards him, eager to help him; and Michael Angelo, who had exerted
himself the least of all, and was fresher than any of them, raised
Bob in his arms, and said that he would take care of him now. At
this Frank gave up his precious burden, and resuming their descent,
they were soon at the foot of the cone.

Here they sat down, and Bob was laid upon the sand. With trembling
hands they felt for his heart, and found, to their unspeakable,
joy, that it was still beating. There was no water near; but they
chafed his feet and hands, and did what they could. For a long time
their efforts were unavailing; but at last Bob opened his eyes,
and drawing a long, breath, looked around him with a face full of
astonishment.

"What's--the--matter?" he murmured, in a feeble voice.

At this tears of joy flowed into the eyes of Uncle Moses, and his
lips murmured inaudible words of prayerful gratitude.

"O, nothing," said Frank, who by this time had completely recovered
from his fatigue. "Nothing of any consequence. Don't bother. You'll
be all right soon."

Bob seemed too weak to say much, and even to think. He lay there
in silence, and with an expression of bewilderment on his face,
evidently trying to collect his scattered faculties, so as to
account for his present situation.

And now, the question was how to get Bob home. The men with chairs
and straps had gone away, so that this mode of conveyance seemed
denied them. After waiting a short time, however, they saw a
party approaching who were evidently about to try the ascent.
They consisted of ladies and gentlemen, and were accompanied by
some chair and strap men. Seeing Bob and his friends, they made
inquiries; and on learning what had happened, the ladies refused
to make the ascent on so unfavorable a day, but preferred postponing
it to a more auspicious time. Michael Angelo therefore was able
to obtain one of the chairs for Bob; and setting him upon it,
they carried him towards the Hermitage, where they arrived without
any further mishap.

Here Bob grew rapidly better, and was able to tell his story.

He had felt very anxious to see the crater, and equally anxious to
see it first. Taking advantage of a time when the smoke had retreated,
he had made a rush, and had just attained the very edge of the
crater, when suddenly he found himself overwhelmed by a tremendous
cloud of smoke. To resist it, or to endure it in any way, was
impossible. He thought only of flight He turned mechanically, and
ran, with this idea of flight alone in his mind. That was all he
remembered. He must have run for at least a hundred feet, for that
was about the distance which lay between the summit and the place
where he was found.

Michael Angelo started off and got a carriage, by means of which
Bob was taken to Naples. He did not seem to have suffered any very
serious injury; but for some days he was quite languid and miserable,
and complained of a taste of sulphur in his mouth; his coat, too,
which on going up was of a dark-blue color, had become quite faded,
from the action of the powerful sulphurous fumes.

On the whole, Bob, as well as the rest of the party, had ample
reason to feel thankful.




CHAPTER XVIII.

_Pompeii, the City of the Dead.--The Monuments of the Past.--Temples,
Towers, and Palaces.--Tombs and Monuments.--Theatres and
Amphitheatres.--Streets and Squares._


A few days after their ascent of Vesuvius, the whole party started
off to visit Pompeii. The prospect of this journey gave them
unusual delight. Bob had now completely recovered his health and
spirits. Clive's poetic interest in so renowned a place was roused
to the highest pitch of enthusiasm. David's classical taste was
stimulated. Frank's healthy love of sight-seeing was excited by
the thought of a place that so far surpassed all others in interest;
and Uncle Moses evidently considered that this was the one thing
in Europe which could repay the traveller for the fatigues of a
pilgrimage. Thus each, in his own way, felt his inmost heart stirred
within him as they approached the disentombed city; and at length,
when they reached the entrance to the place, it is difficult to
say which one felt the strongest excitement.

They found a number of other visitors there, consisting of
representatives of all nations--Russians, Germans, Americans,
French, and English; ladies, gentlemen, and boys. Michael Angelo
was with them, and was more useful to them than any mere guide-book
could have been.

The first emotions of awe which filled their minds as they entered
the streets of the mysterious city gradually faded away, and they
began to examine everything with great interest. The first thing
that struck their attention was the extreme narrowness of the
streets. There was only room for one carriage to pass at a time.
The sidewalks were a foot higher than the carriage-way. There were
crossing-stones that stood high above the pavement. The sidewalks
were paved with brick, and the carriage-way with lava blocks, which
were very neatly joined together. Clive took a piece of brick as
a relic, and David broke off a fragment from one of the
crossing-stones for the same purpose.

They soon came to a ruined edifice, which Michael Angelo called
the Basilica. It was two hundred feet in length, and seventy in
width. At one end still remained the Tribunal or Seat of Justice,
seven feet above the pavement; and all around the walls were
columns formed of brick, covered with plaster. The boys picked off
some of the plaster as relics.

Leaving this, they went on and came to another ruined edifice,
which Michael Angelo called the Temple of Venus. It was built
round a courtyard, with porticos. Here David and Clive obtained
some more relics.

Beyond this was an open square surrounded by pillars, of which only
the lower parts remained. This was the Forum Civile; and beyond
this stood the Temple of Jupiter, which they visited without finding
anything that was particularly interesting. After this Michael
Angelo took them to a place which he said was the Public Bakery.
Here they saw millstones, ovens, water-vessels, and some other
articles of which they could not guess the use. Not far away were
some bakers' shops. In these shops loaves of bread were found by
the diggers. Of course they were burned to charcoal; but they
retained their original shape, and showed marks upon them which
were probably intended to indicate the bakery from which they came.
Heaps of corn were also found.

Going down the street where these were situated, they came to one
of the gates of the city. Beside this was a niche in the wall,
used as a sentry-box, upon which, all the party gazed with a profound
interest; for in that sentry-box those who disentombed the city
found a skeleton, in the armor and with the equipment of a Roman
soldier. Evidently the sentry had died at his post.

They took a good look at the walls here, which they found to be
about twenty-five feet high, and formed of huge stones, that were
joined together without cement. The gates had evidently been double.

Passing through this gate, they found themselves outside the city,
in what Michael Angelo called the "Street of Tombs." Looking down
it, they noticed a number of edifices of a monumental character,
lining it on either side. These were the tombs of wealthy citizens.
They visited several of them, and found them all alike. The interiors
were all simple, the walls being pierced with niches, in which were
deposited the urns that held the ashes of the dead. This was the
first time that they had seen anything of this kind, and they
examined it with deep and solemn interest. Here, too, Clive and
David succeeded in finding some relics in the shape of some burnt
fragments of human bones.

After this Michael Angelo led them to what was once the finest
mansion of the city, now known as the Villa of Diomede. They entered
here, and wandered through the halls, and rooms, and courtyards.
They saw rich mosaic pavements; the basins of what once were
fountains; the lower parts of marble pillars that once belonged to
stately colonnades. They saw some rooms that once had been used
for cold baths, and others that had been used for vapor baths.
Dining-rooms, reception-rooms, bed-rooms, kitchens, libraries,
opened up all around, and told them of that vanished past which
had once peopled all these apartments with busy human life. Far
more than basilicas, or temples, or streets, or walls, were they
affected by this glimpse into the home of a household; and they
traversed that deserted home in eloquent silence. After going
through all the house, they descended into the cellars. These were
very spacious, and extended beneath the entire villa. Here, at
one end, they saw what is called the Wine Cellar. Many wine jars
were standing there--huge earthen vessels, as large as a hogshead,
with wide mouths and round bottoms, which made it impossible for
them to stand erect, unless they were placed against some support.
In these wine jars there was now no wine, however, but only dust
and ashes.

Here Michael Angelo had much to tell them.

He told them that several skeletons had been found in these vaults,
belonging to hapless wretches who had, no doubt, fled here to escape
the storm of ashes which was raging above. One of these skeletons
had a bunch of keys in its bony fingers; and this circumstance led
some to suppose that it was the skeleton of Diomede himself; but
others thought that it belonged to his steward. Whoever he was, he
had fled here only to meet his doom, and to leave his bones as a
memorial to ages in the far distant future.

Leaving this place, they visited another house, which is called
the Villa of Caius Sallust. At one corner of the house they saw
something which at once struck them all as being rather singular.
It was nothing else than a shop, small in size, fitted up with
shelves and counters; a row of jars was fixed on one side, and in
the rear were furnaces. Michael Angelo informed them that it had
once been an eating-house. The boys thought it excessively odd that
the occupants of such a house--people, too, who bore such a name
as Sallust--should tolerate such an establishment; but there was
the undeniable fact before their eyes. Afterwards their surprises
diminished; For in many other houses in Pompeii--they found shops
of the same kind, and saw that the ancient Pompeians were not above
trade; and that, if they did not keep the shops themselves, they
were at least very willing to hire the fronts of their houses to
other parties who did wish to do so. In Sallust's house they saw
the traces of very elegant ornaments, and learned from Michael
Angelo that many of the articles discovered here showed that it
must once have been the abode of a luxurious and refined family.

The elegant house of the Dioscuri was visited next. It is in the
Via dei Mercurii, and is a very interesting and extensive ruin,
and contains some handsome fresco paintings. After this they visited
many other houses, a description of which is not necessary; they
were all like the Villa of Diomede, though less interesting; and
among them all there was the same general character. In all these
only the lower stories remained, though in a few a small part of
the second story was visible.

As the chief part of the Pompeian house was on the ground floor,
the loss of the upper story did not make any particular difference.
Among these they found another temple, called the Pantheon--a large
edifice, which showed signs of great former beauty. It was two
Hundred and thirty feet long, and nearly two hundred feet wide. An
altar is still standing, around which are twelve pedestals, upon
which once stood twelve statues. A few houses and temples followed,
after which Michael Angelo informed them that he was about to take
them to one of the greatest curiosities in the city.

The building to which he led them was in much better preservation
than the majority of the edifices in Pompeii, though not nearly so
large as many that they had seen. It was about sixty feet wide,
and a little longer, being nearly square in shape, and was evidently
a temple of some kind.

"What is this?" asked David.

"This is the Temple of Isis," said Michael Angelo.

"The Temple of Isis!" exclaimed David, in eager excitement. "Is
it, indeed!" and he looked around with a face full of intense
interest. Hitherto, though all the boys had shown much interest,
yet, David had surpassed them all in his enthusiasm. This was
partly on account of his taste for classical studies, and his love
for all connected with classical antiquity, but more especially
from the fact that he had very recently read Bulwer's _Last
Days of Pompeii_; and on this occasion that whole story, with all
its descriptions and all its incidents, was brought vividly before
him by the surrounding scene. Most of all was the Temple of Isis
associated with that story, and it seemed more familiar to him than
anything else that he had found in the city. Glaucus and Ione, the
Christian Olynthus, and the dark Arbaces seemed to haunt the place.
In one of the chambers of this very temple, as Michael Angelo was
now telling,--even while leading the way to that chamber,--had
been found a huge skeleton, with an axe beside it; two walls had
been beaten through by that axe, but the desperate fugitive could
go no farther. In another part of the city had been found, another
skeleton, carrying a bag of Coins and some ornaments of this Temple
of Isis. David listened to Michael Angelo's account with strange
interest, for it seemed to him as though the fabled characters of
Bulwer's story were endowed with actual reality by Michael Angelo's
prosaic statements.

After inspecting the chamber just mentioned, they were taken to a
place where they saw what had once been the pedestal of a statue.
Here Michael Angelo showed them a hollow niche, which was so
contrived that one might conceal himself there, and speak words
which the ignorant and superstitious populace might believe to come
from the idol's own stony lips. This one thing showed the full
depth of ancient ignorance and superstition; and over this Michael
Angelo waxed quite eloquent, and proceeded to deliver himself of
a number of impressive sentences of a highly important character,
which he uttered with that fluent volubility peculiar to the whole
race of guides, ciceroni, and showmen, in all parts of the world.
These moral maxims were part of Michael Angelo's regular routine,
and the moment that he found himself here in this Temple of Isis,
the stream of wisdom would always begin to flow.

The next place to which Michael Angelo intended to take them was
the amphitheatre, which could be seen from where they were standing.
All this time David had been more eager than any of the others,
and far more profoundly moved. He felt his soul stirred to its
inmost depth by the thrilling scenes through which he had been
moving. It seemed to him as though there were revealed here to
his eyes, in one glance, all that he had been laboriously acquiring
from books by the study of years. But this was better than books.
These Roman houses, into which he could walk, were far better than
any number of plans or engraved prints, however accurately done.
These temples afforded an insight into the old pagan religion better
far than volumes of description. These streets, and shops, and
public squares, and wall, and gates, and tombs, all gave him an
insight into the departed Roman civilization that was far fresher,
and more vivid, and more profound, than any that he had ever gained
before. It seemed to him that one day was too small for such a
place. He must come again and again, he thought. He was unwilling
to go on with the rest, but lingered longer than any over each
spot, and was always the last to quit any place which they visited.

They stopped on their way at the Tragic and Comic Theatres, and
at length reached the Amphitheatre itself. This edifice is by
far the largest in the city, and is better preserved than any.
It is built of large blocks of a dark volcanic stone, and
constructed in that massive style which the Romans lived, and of
which they have left the best examples in these huge amphitheatres.
As this Amphitheatre now stands, it might still serve for one of
those displays for which it was built. Tier after tier those
seats arise, which once had accommodations for fifteen or twenty
thousand human beings. On these, it is said, the Pompeians were
seated when that awful volcanic storm burst forth by which the
city was rained. Down from these seats they fled in wildest
disorder, all panic-stricken, rushing down the steps, and crowding
through the doorways, trampling one another under foot, in that
mad race for life; while overhead the storm gathered darker and
darker, and the showers of ashes fell, and the suffocating
sulphuric vapors arose, and amid the volcanic storm the lightnings
of the sky flashed forth, illuminating all the surrounding gloom
with a horrid lustre, and blending with the subterranean rumblings
of the earthquake the thunder of the upper air.

From this cause the Amphitheatre may be considered the central spot
of interest in Pompeii. What little has been told of the fate of
the city gathers around this place, and to him who sits upon those
seats there is a more vivid realization of that awful scene than
can be obtained anywhere else.

On reaching the Amphitheatre they seated themselves on the stone
steps, about half way up the circle of seats, and each one gave
way to the feelings that filled him. They had walked now for hours,
and all of them felt somewhat wearied, so that the rest on these
seats was grateful. Here they sat and rested.




CHAPTER XIX.

_Lofty classical enthusiasm of David, and painful Lack of feeling
on the Part of Frank.--David, red hot with the Flow of the Past,
is suddenly confronted with the Present.--The Present dashes Cold
Water upon his glowing Enthusiasm.--The Gates.--Minor, Aeacus, and
Rhadamanthus.--The Culprits._


As they thus rested on the seats of the Amphitheatre, the classical
enthusiasm of David rose superior to fatigue, and his enthusiastic
feelings burst forth without restraint, in a long and somewhat
incoherent rhapsody about the fell of Pompeii. Full before them,
as they sat, rose Vesuvius; and they saw that which helped them to
reproduce the past more vividly, for even now the dense, dark cloud
of the volcano was gathering, and the thick smoke-volumes were
rolling forth from the crater. Far into the heavens the smoke clouds
arose, ascending in a dark pillar till they reached the upper strata
of the atmosphere, where they unfolded themselves, and spread out
afar--to the east, and the west, and the north, and the south. Some
such appearance as this the mountain may have had, as it towered
gloomily before the Pompeians on that day of days. Some such scene
as this may have appeared, only deepened into terrors a thousand
fold more gloomy, to the population of the doomed city, as they
gathered here on these seats for the last time.

Such were the ideas of David Clark; and these ideas he poured
forth in a long rhapsody, full of wild enthusiasm. At length,
however, that enthusiasm flagged, and he was compelled to stop
for want of breath.

"O, that's all very fine," said Frank, suddenly, as David stopped,
and breaking the silence which had followed his eloquent
outburst,--"that's all very fine, of course. You have a habit,
David, my son, of going into raptures over old bones and old stones,
but after all, I'd just like to ask you one question."

"What's that?" asked David, a little sharply.

"Why, this. Has this place, after all, come up to your idea?" And
Frank looked at him with very anxious eyes.

"This place?" said David. "What, Pompeii? Come up to my idea? Why,
of course it has. What makes you ask such a question as that? I
never spent such a day in all my life."

"Well, for my part," said Frank, in a very candid tone, "I'll be
honest. I confess I'm disappointed."

And saying this, Frank shook his head defiantly, and looked at all
the other boys, with the air of one who was ready and willing to
maintain his position.

"Disappointed!" exclaimed David, in an indescribable tone, in which
reproach, astonishment, and disgust were all blended together.

"Yes," said Frank, firmly, "disappointed--utterly, completely, and
tee-totally. I'll tell you what my idea was. My idea was, that the
streets would be streets, in the first place. Well, they're not
_streets_ at all. They're mere _lanes_. They're nothing more than
_foot-paths_. Secondly, my idea was, that the houses would be
_houses_. Well, they're not. They're old ruins; heaps of dust and
bricks--"

"Nonsense!" interrupted David, in indignant tones. "How could the
houses be standing after being buried for so many centuries? You
forget what a tremendous weight of ashes, and stones, and earth,
lay upon their roofs. Houses! Why, did you expect to find couches
to lie on? or chairs--"

"Well," said Frank, "my quarrel with Pompeii doesn't end here.
For, you see, even if the houses were whole and uninjured,
what would they be? Poor affairs enough. Just think how small
they are. Rooms ten by twelve. Narrow passage-ways for halls,
that'll scarcely allow two people to pass each other. The
rooms are closets. The ceilings were all low. And then look
at the temples. I expected to find stone walls and marble
columns. But what have I found? Nothing but shams--pillars
built of bricks, and plastered over to resemble marble. Do
you call that the right style of thing? Why, at home we sneer
at lath-and-plaster Gothic. Why should we admire lath-and-plaster
Greek because it's in Pompeii? Then, again, look at the Forums
--miserable little places that'll only hold about fifty people."

"Pooh!" said David; "as if they didn't know what was large enough!"

"I don't doubt that they knew it," said Frank. "But what I say
is, that if these were large enough for them, what a poor lot they
must have, been!"

"After all," said David, "Pompeii was not a great city. It was only
a small city. You expect to find here the magnificence of Rome."

"No, I don't. I merely expect to find something that'll carry out
the promise of those pictures that they make of scenes in Pompeii.
Why, there isn't anything in the whole town, except, perhaps, this
place, that looks large enough for an ordinary person to move about
in. Look at the walls--miserable things twenty feet high. Look at
the streets--only wide enough for a single cart. Look at the
sidewalks--only wide enough for a single man. The only thing in
the whole town that comes up to my idea is the Amphitheatre. This
is respectable. It corresponds with the pictures, and the descriptions
of travellers. But as to all the rest, I have only to remark that
they are, first, mean; secondly, small; and thirdly, in outrageously
bad taste."

Frank ceased, and looked steadfastly at David.

David looked at Frank, but his feelings were too strong for utterance.
His indignation at this desecration of a place that was so hallowed
in his eyes could not be expressed. He turned his face away in
silent scorn, and fixed his gaze on Vesuvius.

They waited a long time, and when at length they prepared to leave
Pompeii, it was late in the day. All the other visitors had left
long before, and they were the last in the city. They walked along
looking round them till the last, and at length reached the entrance.
Michael Angelo went off to get the carriage. They waited a little
while to take a last look, and then passed through the gate. Here
they found themselves confronted by three officials, the custodians
of the place.

One of these addressed them in very fair English.

"Messieurs," said he, "before you leave, I haf to inquire--Deed
you take anyting out from Pompeii?"

"Take anything?" said Uncle Moses, in an indignant voice. "What
do you mean?"

"A tousand pardons, sare," said the other, politely. "It ees a
formaletee. I mean de leetle stones, de pieces of steek, wood,
plastair. Ha! De reliques, de souvenirs."

He was rather an unpleasant looking man, with a very sallow face,
high cheek-bones, and a heavy goatee on the tip of his chin, which
wagged up and down as he talked in quite a wonderful way.

"Stones, sticks, plaster?" said Uncle Moses. "Course not."

The official looked intently at him, and then at the boys. After
this he conversed with his companion in Italian. These companions
were quite as unprepossessing in their appearance as himself. Then
the first speaker turned to the boys.

"You, sare," said he to Frank, in rather an unpleasant tone, "haf
you de stones or de bones?"

"Not a stone, not a bone," said Frank, smilingly. "I did take a
few at first, but I pitched them away."

"And you, sare?" said he to Bob.

"Don't deal in such articles," said Bob, with a grin--"not in my
line--not my style."

"Pardon," said the official, with a sickly smile, "but I must put
de usual interrogatoree. You, sare?" and he addressed himself to
David.

David turned pale.

He hesitated for a moment.

"Well," said he, "I believe I _have_ got a few little stones, just
two or three, you know; little relics, you know."

"Ah! ver good, ver nais," said the official, with the sunshine of
perfect content illuminating his sallow features. "And you, sare?"
he continued, turning to Clive.

"Well, yes," said Clive, "I've got a few, I believe; but they really
don't amount to anything in particular."

"O, no, not at all," said the Italian; "dey don't amount to notin;
but look you, de govairement haf made de law dat no pairson will
take no stone, nor steek, nor relique, nor bone, nor souvenir, from
Pompeii. You mus geef dem all oop."

"Why? They're only two or three," pleaded David, in a heartbroken
voice.

"So, dat is eet. Look you. Eet ees de law. O, yais. I cannot help.
Everybody will take two or tree. Very well. Ten tousand, twenty
tousand, hundred tousand come here every year, and all take away
hundred tousand pocket full. Ah, ha! See you? What den? Why, den
all Pompeii be carried away. Aha! dat great shame. Too bad, hey?
ha? You ondstand. So you sall gif dem all oop into my hand."

David and Clive remonstrated most vehemently, but the official was
obdurate. He pleaded the law. He insisted on the full restoration
of everything.

So the two lads began to disgorge, with the following result:--

   1 piece of brick from the Sidewalk.
   1 bit of stone,           Street.
   1        stucco,          Basilica.
   1        do.              Temple Venus.
   1        do.              Forum.
   1        do.              Temple Jupiter.
   1 bit of stone,           Public Bakery.
   1        do.              Sentry box.
   1        do.              Wall.
   1        do.              Gateway.
   1        do.              Street Tombs.
   1        do.              Villa Diomede.
   1        do.              do.
   1        bone,            Sepulchre.
   1        do.              do.
   1        package dust,    do.
   1        do.              Villa Sallust.
   1        do.              do.
   1        pebble,          Eating House.
   1        do.              House of Dioscuri.
   1        bit of plaster,  Pantheon.
   1        do.              Temple Mercury.
   1        do.              do. Isis.
   1        brick,           Tragic Theatre.
   1        do.              Comic Theatre.
   1        stone,           Amphitheatre.
   1        do.              do.

The above is by no means a complete inventory of, the articles
produced by Clive and David, but will serve to give an idea of the
nature of that heap which was spread upon the table before the
stern officials. One by one they were turned out from the well-filled
pockets of David and Clive. Slowly and reluctantly, the two boys
turned out those precious treasures. Sadly and mournfully they laid
them on the table, under the stern, the inflexible, the relentless
gaze of the three inexorable custodians, who, to David's mind,
seemed the impersonations of Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadamanthus. Yea,
all these, and many more,--fragments from houses, bits of mosaic
stone, little chips,--all were seized, and all were confiscated.
Not a word was spoken. It was a sorrow too strong for words; and
Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadamanthus stood, individually and collectively,
inflexible and inexorable. The rueful countenances of the two
culprits excited the sympathy and pity of their companions; but it
seemed a case where no help could avail them. Frank and Bob looked
upon the scene with a strong desire to interfere in some way, and
Uncle Moses looked quite as distressed as either David or Clive.
Suddenly a new actor entered upon the scene.

It was Michael Angelo.

He came in with a quick step, started as he noticed the sadness on
the faces of his party, and then threw a rapid glance around. One
glance was sufficient to show plainly enough what had happened. He
saw the table covered with the stones and bones already described.
He saw the heart-broken expression that was stamped upon the faces
of David and Clive as they gazed upon their parting treasures. He
saw the attitude and the expression of Uncle Moses, and Frank, and
Bob, as they watched their friends.

That one glance not only explained all to Michael Angelo, but
suggested to him a course of conduct upon which he instantly
proceeded to act.

He stepped up to the aide of Rhadamanthus, and accosting him in
Italian; he spoke a few words in a low voice. What he said was, of
course, unintelligible to the boys. After these few words, Michael
Angelo then slipped something into the hand of the inexorable one.

Then he turned to the despairing boys.

"It's all right," said Michael Angelo, cheerily. "I haf explained.
You may keep de tings."

David and Clive looked up, and stared at Michael Angelo in wonder,
not fully comprehending him.

"It's all right," said Michael Angelo. "Dey onderstand. I haf
explained. You put dem back into your pocket. You sall keep de
tings. It's all right. Dey are yours now. It's all r-r-r-r-right.
All r-r-r-r-right, I say."

David and Clive still hesitated, and looked at Rhadamanthus.

Rhadamanthus gazed benignantly at them, smiled a gracious smile,
and waved his hands with the air of a judge dismissing a case.

"All r-r-right," said Rhadamanthus; "he haf explained."

This language was somewhat unintelligible. What there was to be
explained they could not imagine. If the law prohibited the carrying
off of relics from Pompeii, no amount of "explanation" could give
them a claim to their unlawful possessions. But neither David nor
Clive was at all inclined to hesitate about the legality of their
possessions, or to make any inquiries about the nature of the
explanation which had been made by Michael Angelo. It was joy enough
for them to know that the difficulty was over, and that the relics
were theirs once more.

So the pile of relics went back from that table into the pockets
of David and Clive with a rapidity that is inconceivable. Away from
their faces passed that heart-broken expression which had been upon
them; the shadows passed away from their brows, the sunshine of
joy and exultation overspread them, and they looked at Michael
Angelo in silent gratitude.

A few minutes more and they were-in the carriage.

Then David asked Michael Angelo how it was that he had changed the
stern resolve of the inexorable Rhadamanthus into such easy,
gracious, and good-tempered indulgence.

Michael Angelo laughed.

"I gif him," said he, "just one half dollar. Dat was what he wanted
all de time. Aftaire dees you know what to do. All r-r-right. Ha,
ha, ha, ha, ha!"

And Michael Angelo burst into a peal of laughter.

Upon this Uncle Moses began to moralize about the corrupt morals
of the Italian race, and went on to speak of tyranny, priestcraft,
slavery, aristocracy, monarchy, primogeniture, brigandage, and ten
thousand other things.

And the carriage rolled back to Naples.




CHAPTER XX.

_The Glories of Naples.--The Museum.--The Curiosities.--How they
unroll the charred Manuscripts exhumed from Herculaneum and
Pompeii.--On to Rome.--Capua.--The Tomb of Cicero.--Terracina.--The
Pontine Marshes.--The Appii Forum._


The party remained in Naples some time longer, and had much to see.
There was the Royal Museum, filled with the treasures of antique
art, filled also with what was to them far more interesting--the
numerous articles exhumed from Herculaneum and Pompeii. Here were
jewels, ornaments, pictures, statues, carvings, kitchen utensils,
weights, measures, toilet requisites, surgical instruments, arms,
armor, tripods, braziers, and a thousand other articles, the
accompaniments of that busy life which had been so abruptly stopped.
All these articles spoke of something connected with an extinct
civilization, and told, too, of human life, with all its hopes,
fears, joys, and sorrows. Some spoke of disease and pain, others
of festivity and joy; these of peace, those of war; here were the
emblems of religion, there the symbols of literature.

Among all these, nothing was more interesting than the manuscript
scrolls which had been found in the libraries of the better houses.
These looked like anything rather than manuscripts. They had all
been burned to a cinder, and looked like sticks of charcoal. But
on the first discovery of these they had been carefully preserved,
and efforts had been made to unroll them. These efforts at first
were baffled; but at last, by patience, and also by skill, a method
was found out by which the thing might be done. The manuscripts
were formed of Egyptian papyrus--a substance which, in its original
condition, is about as fragile as our modern paper; the sheets were
rolled around a stick, and were not over eight inches in width,
and about sixteen feet in length. The stick, the ornaments, and
the cases had perished, but the papyrus remained. Its nature was
about the same as the nature of a scroll of paper manuscript would
be after passing through the fire. Each thin filament, as it was
unrolled, would crumble into dust. Now, this crumbling was arrested
by putting over it a coating of tough, gelatinous substance, over
which a sheet of muslin was placed, the gelatinous substance acting
also upon the charred sheet in such a way as to detach it from the
rest of the scroll. In this way it was unrolled slowly and carefully,
two inches at a time, and on being unrolled a facsimile copy was
at once made. Of course there was no attempt to preserve the
manuscripts; they were, too perishable; and after a short exposure,
just long enough to admit of a copy being made, they shrank up and
crumbled away.

There were other places of attraction in this beautiful city--the
Villa Reale, the chosen promenade of the Neapolitans, which stretches
along the shore, filled with trees, and shrubbery, and winding
paths, and flower-beds, and vases, and statues, and sculptures,
and ponds, and fountains, and pavilions. There was the Castle of
St. Elmo, with its frowning walls; the Cathedral of San Francisco,
with its lofty dome and sweeping colonnades; and very many other
churches, together with palaces and monuments.

But at last all this came to an end, and they left Naples far Rome.
They had a carriage to themselves, which they had hired for the
journey, and the weather was delightful The road was smooth and
pleasant, the country was one of the fairest on earth, and as they
rolled along they all gave themselves up to the joy of the occasion.
They passed through a region every foot of which was classic ground.
Along their way they encountered amphitheatres, aqueducts, tombs,
and other monuments of the past, some in ruins, others still erect
in stately though melancholy grandeur. Capua invited them to
tarry--not the ancient Capua, but the modern, which, though several
miles distant from the historic city, has yet a history of its own,
and its own charms. But among all these scenes and sights which
they encountered, the one that impressed them most was Cicero's
tomb. It is built on the spot where he was assassinated, of immense
stones, joined without cement. In shape it is square, but the
interior is circular, and a single column rises to the vaulted
roof. Of course whatever contents there may have been have long
since been scattered to the winds; no memorial of the great orator
and patriotic statesman is visible now; but the name of Cicero
threw a charm about the place, and it seemed as though they were
drawn nearer to the past. The boys expressed their feelings in
various ways, and David, who was most alive to the power of classical
associations, delivered, verbatim, about one half of the first
oration of Cicero against Catiline. He would have delivered the
whole of it, and more also, beyond a doubt, had not Frank put a
sudden stop to his flow of eloquence by pressing his hand against
David's mouth, and threatening to gag him if he didn't "stop it."

On the afternoon of the second day they arrived at Terracina. This
town is situated on the sea-shore, with the blue Mediterranean in
front, stretching far away to the horizon. Far out into the sea
runs the promontory of Circaeum,--familiar to the boys from their
studies in Homer and Virgil,--while over the water the white sails
of swift-moving vessels passed to and fro. The waves broke on the
strand, fishing-boats were drawn up on the beach, and there were
wonderful briskness and animation in the scene.

Terracina, like all other towns in this country, has remains of
antiquity to show. Its Cathedral is built from the material of a
heathen temple, probably that of Apollo, which was once a magnificent
edifice, but is now in ruins. But it was the modern beauty of the
town, rather than this or any, other of its antiquities, that most
attracted the boys,--the sea-beach, where the waters of the
Mediterranean rippled and plashed over the pebbles; the groves and
vineyards, that extended all around; the wooded hills; the orange
trees and the palm, the thorny cactus and the aloe; and above all,
the deep, azure sky, and the clear, transparent atmosphere. To the
intoxication of all this surrounding beauty they gave themselves
up, and wandered, and scrambled, and raced, and chased one another
about the slumberous town.

They slept soundly that night, lolled to rest by the long roll of
the Mediterranean waters, as they dashed upon the beach, and on
the following morning resumed their journey. The road now passed
through the Pontine Marshes, and they all entered upon this part
of their journey with strong feelings of curiosity.

The district which goes by the name of the Pontine Marshes is one
of the most famous places in Europe. It is about forty-five miles
long, and varies in breadth from four to eleven miles. The origin
of these marshes is not known. In the early ages of the republic
of Rome numerous cities are mentioned as existing here. But all
these gradually became depopulated; and now not a vestige remains
of any one of them. From a very remote period numerous efforts were
put forth to reclaim these lands. When the famous Appian Way was
constructed through, them, they were partially drained. Afterwards
a canal was formed, which ran by the road-side; and of this canal
Horace speaks in the well-known account of his journey to Brundusium.
Julius Caesar intended, among other great works, to enter upon the
task of reclaiming them; but his death prevented it. Under various
successive emperors, the attempt was made, and continued, until at
last, in the reign of Trajan, nearly all the district was recovered.
Afterwards it fell to ruin, and the waters flowed in once more.
Then they remained neglected for ages, down to modern times. Various
popes attempted to restore them, but without success, until at last
Pope Pius VI. achieved the accomplishment of the mighty task in
the year 1788, ever since which time the district has been under
cultivation.

The road was a magnificent one, having been built on the foundations
of the ancient Appian Way. It was lined on each side with trees,
and was broad and well paved. It is considered one of the finest
in Europe. Along this they rolled, the blue sky above them, on the
right hand the mountains, on the left the sea. The air was damp
and chill; but at first they did not feel it particularly, though
Uncle Moses complained of "rheumatics," and took precautionary
measures against his insidious enemy by wrapping himself up warmly.
As they went on they saw crowds of peasants coming to work in the
fields. These peasants lived in the hill country on the right, and
had to walk a great distance to get to their place of labor,--for
to live on the marshes was impossible. Men, women, and even children
were there; and their pale, sickly faces and haggard looks showed
how deadly were the effects of the noxious exhalations from this
marshy soil.

At about midday they reached an inn, which stood about half way
over the marshes, by the road-side. David speculated much as to
whether this place might or might not be the Forum Appii mentioned
in the book of Acts as a stopping-place of St. Paul on his way to
Rome; but the others were too hungry to take any interest whatever
in the question. They remained here nearly two hours, got something
to eat, and then resumed their journey.




CHAPTER XXI.

_The Pontine Marshes.--A Change comes over the Party.--The foul
Exhalations.--The Sleep of Death.--Dreadful Accident.--Despair of
Frank.--A Break-down.--Ingenuity of the Driver.--Resumption of
the Journey._


For the first half of the day the boys had been in great spirits.
Laughter, noisy conversation, jests, chaff, and uproarious songs
had all been intermingled, and the carriage was a miniature Bedlam.
But after their stoppage at the wayside inn a change took place,
and on resuming their journey, they seemed like a very different
company. The air of the marshes now began to act upon them. They
felt it to be raw, and chill, and unpleasant. A general feeling of
discomfort and a general sensation of gloom pervaded all of them.
Bob held out most bravely, and strove to regain the jollity which
they had felt before. For a long time his fun and nonsense provoked
a laugh; but at length his fun grew fainter, and his nonsense more
stupid; and the laughter grew less hearty and more forced, until
at length the fun, and the nonsense, and the laughter ceased
altogether.

Frank felt upon himself the responsibility of the rest to an unusual
degree. He was only a few weeks older than David, but he was far
stronger and more mature in many respects. David was a hard student,
and perhaps a bit of a book-worm, and had a larger share of the
knowledge that may be gained from books; but Frank had seen more
of the world, and in all that relates to the practical affairs of
common life he was immeasurably superior to David. For this reason
Frank often assumed, and very naturally too, the guardianship of
the party; and so appropriate was this to him, that the rest tacitly
allowed it. As for Uncle Moses, none of them ever regarded him as
their protector, but rather as an innocent and simple-hearted being,
who himself required protection from them.

Frank, therefore, on this occasion, kept warning the whole party,
above all things, not to let themselves go to sleep. He had heard
that the air of the Pontine Marshes had a peculiar tendency to send
one to sleep; and if one should yield to this, the consequences
might be fatal. Fever, he, said, would be sure to follow sleep,
that might be indulged in under such circumstances. The anxiety
which was created in his own mind by his sense of responsibility
was of itself sufficient to keep him awake, and left him to devote
all his energies to the task of trying to keep the others awake
also, and thus save them from the impending danger.

At first they, all laughed at him; but after a time, as each one
felt the drowsiness coming over him, they ceased to laugh. Then
they tried to sing. They kept up this for some time. They exhausted
all their stock of school songs, nigger songs, patriotic songs,
songs sentimental and moral, and finally tried even hymns. But the
singing was not a very striking success; there was a lack of spirit
in it; and under this depressing sense of languor, the voice of
music at last died out.

Singularly enough, the one who felt this drowsiness most strongly
was Bob. Frank had not thought of him as being at all likely to
fall asleep; but whether it was that his mobile temperament made
him more liable to extremes of excitement and dullness, or whether
the reaction from his former joviality and noisiness had been
greater than that of the rest, certain it is that Bob it was who
first showed signs of sleep. His eyes closed, his head nodded, and
lifting it again with a start, he blinked around.

"Come, Bob," said Frank, "this won't do. You don't mean to say that
_you're_ sleepy."

Bob said nothing. He rubbed his eyes, and yawned.

"Bob," said Frank, "take care of yourself."

"O, I'm all right," said Bob, with a drawl; "never fear about me.
I'm wide awake."

Scarce had he finished this when his eyes closed again, and his
head fell forward.

Frank shook him, and Bob raised himself up with an effort at
dignified surprise which was, however, a failure.

"You needn't shake a fellow," he said in a husky, sleepy voice.

"But I will shake you," cried Frank.

"Le'--me--'lone," said Bob, in a half whisper, nodding again.

"Here," cried Frank; "this'll never do. Bob!  Bob! wake up! Bob!
Bo-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-b! Wa-a-a-a-a-a-a-ake u-u-u-u-up!"

But Bob wouldn't wake up. On the contrary, he bobbed his head in
a foolish and imbecile way towards Frank, as though seeking
unconsciously to find a place on which to rest it. But Frank wouldn't
allow anything of the sort He made Bob sit erect, and held him in
this way for some time, bawling, yelling, and occasionally shaking
him.  David and Clive were a little roused by this, and surveyed
it with sleepy eyes. Uncle Moses, however, was as wide awake as
ever--he had his usual anxiety about the well-being of the boys,
and this made sleep out of the question. He now joined his entreaties
to those of Frank; and the two, uniting their shouts, succeeded in
making considerable uproar.

Still Bob would not wake.

"I'll make him get out and walk," said Frank.  "This'll never do.
If he sleeps here, he may never wake again."

Saying this, Frank turned to open the carriage door to call to the
driver. As he did so, he loosed his hold of Bob, who, being no
longer stayed tip on that side, fell over on Frank's lap with his
face downward.

Upon this, Frank turned back, and determined to lift Bob up again.

Shaking him as hard as he could, he yelled in his ears and shouted
to him to get up.

Now Bob was asleep, yet in his sleep he had a kind of under
consciousness of what was going on. He was stupidly conscious that
they were trying to raise him up to an uncomfortable sitting
posture--a bolt-upright position. This he was sleepily unwilling
to submit to. There wasn't any particular strength in his hands,
and his drowsy faculties didn't extend farther down than his head.
He felt himself lying on something, and to prevent them from raising
him from it, he seized it in his teeth.

"Bo-o-o-ob! Bo-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-b!" yelled Frank. "W-a-a-a-a-a-a-a-ake
u-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-p!"

But Bob wouldn't.

He only held on the tighter with his teeth.

Upon this, Frank seized him with all his strength, and gave Bob a
sudden jerk upward, when--

C-r-r-r-r-i-k-k-k-k!--

A sharp, ripping sound was heard, and as Bob's head was pulled up,
a long, narrow piece of cloth was exhibited, hanging down from his
mouth; and held in his teeth.

Frank looked at it in dismay, and then looked
down.

He gave a cry of vexation.

Bob had seized Frank's trousers in his teeth, and as he was pulled
up, he held on tight. Consequently the cloth gave way, and there
was poor Frank, reduced to rags and tatters, and utterly unpresentable
in any decent society.

He gave up Bob in despair, and began to investigate the extent of
the ruin that had been wrought in his trousers. It was a bad rent,
an irretrievable one, in fact; and all that he could do was to tie
his handkerchief around his leg.

Bob now slept heavily, held up by Uncle Moses.

The other boys grew drowsier and drowsier.  Frank was just deciding
to get out of the carriage and make them all walk for a time, when
a sudden event occurred which brought a solution to the problem.

It was a sudden crash.

Down sank the carriage under them, and away it went, toppling over
on one side. A cry of terror escaped all of them. Every one started
up, and each one grasped neighbor.

There was something in this sudden shock so dreadful and so startling,
that it broke through even the drowsiness and heavy stupor of Bob,
and penetrated to his slumbering faculties, and in an instant roused
them all. With a wild yell he flung his arms round Uncle Moses.
Uncle Moses, fell backward, and all the others were flung upon him.
They all lay thus heaped upon the side of the coach, a straggling
mass of humanity.

Frank was the first to come to himself, and regain his presence of
mind.

"All right," said he, in a cheerful voice. "We haven't gone over
quite. The horses have stopped.  All right."

A groan came from below the pile of humanity.

"Get off, get off!" exclaimed Bob's voice. "You're smothering
Uncle Moses." Frank, who was uppermost, disengaged himself, and
helped off the others; and finally Bob scrambled away, giving every
indication by this time that he was at last perfectly wide awake.

This restored Uncle Moses. He was able to take a long breath.

By this time Frank had torn open the carriage door, and jumped
down. The others followed.

He saw the driver holding the horses. The carriage was tilted over.
One of the hind wheels lay underneath, a shattered wreck.

Now all was bustle and confusion.

The driver proceeded to put into execution a plan by which they
could go forward, at least far enough to traverse the marshes. The
boys all helped, and their efforts drove away the last vestige of
drowsiness.

The plan consisted in taking out the tongue of the wagon, binding
it upon the fore axle, and letting its other end drag on the ground.
Now, as the tongue sloped down, the hind axle rested upon it, and
thus the trailing wood served to keep the coach erect, and to act
as a runner, which supplied very well the place of the lost wheel.
The horses were then hitched on by the traces, without any tongue,
and in this way they pulled along the broken carriage.




CHAPTER XXII.

_The March ended.--A lonely Inn.--Evil Faces.--Beetling
Brows.--Sinister Glances.--Suspicions of the Party.--They put
their Head together.--Conferences of the Party.--A threatening
Prospect.--Barricades.--In Time of Peace prepare for War.--The
Garrison arm themselves._


After completing their arrangements they resumed their journey;
but this time they all went on foot, with the exception of Uncle
Moses. They went on foot for two reasons:  first, because it was
impossible for the horses to pull them all when one of the wheels
was gone, since it was as much as they could do to maintain a
walking pace even with the empty carriage; and the other reason
was, that by walking they would be better able to fight off the
drowsiness which had menaced them. In truth, as far as drowsiness
is concerned, there did not now seem to be any particular danger;
for the shock of the break-down had been sufficient to rouse even
Bob, and the effects of that shock still remained. Uncle Moses,
however, on account of his years, his infirmities, and his tendency
to "rheumatics," together with his freedom from drowsiness, was
installed in the carriage, with all due honors, as its sole occupant.
Walking on thus, they did not regret, in the slightest degree, the
hardships of their lot, but rather exulted in them, since they had
been the means of rousing them out of their almost unconquerable
tendency to sleep. Frank felt the highest possible relief, since
he was now freed from the responsibility that had of late been so
heavy. In Bob, however, there was the exhibition of the greatest
liveliness. Bob, mercurial, volatile, nonsensical, mobile, was ever
running to extremes; and as he was the first to fall asleep, so
now, when he had awaked, he was the most wide awake of all.  He
sang, he shouted, he laughed, he danced, he ran; he seemed, in
fact, overflowing with animal spirits.

Fortunately they were not very far from the end of the marshes when
the wheel broke, and in less than two hours they had traversed the
remainder.  The driver could speak a little English, and informed
them that they could not reach the destination which he had proposed;
but he hoped before dark to get as far as an inn, where they could
obtain food and lodging. He informed them that it was not a very
good inn; but under the circumstances it was the best that they
could hope for. To the boys, however, it made very little difference
what sort of an inn they came to.  As long as they could get
something to eat, and any kind of a bed to lie on, they were content;
and so they told the driver.

Leaving the marshes, the road began to ascend; and after about a
half hour's farther tramp, they came, to a place which the driver
informed them was the inn.

It was by no means an inviting place. It was an old stone edifice,
two stories high, which had once been covered with, stucco; but
the stucco had fallen off in most places, disclosing the rough
stones underneath, and giving it an air of dilapidation and squalor.
The front was by the road-side.  A door opened in the middle, on
each side of which was a small, dismal window. In the second story
were two other small, dismal windows. At the end they law a window
on each story, and a third in the attic. These were all small and
dismal.  Some of them had sashes and glass; others had sashes
without glass; while others had no sashes at all.

A group of men were outside the house, all of whom stared hard
at the carriage as it drew near.  There was something in the
aspect of these men which was indescribably repulsive to the
boys:  their dirty, swarthy faces, covered with shaggy, jet-black
beards; their bushy eyebrows, from beneath which their black eyes
glowed like balls of fire; their hats slouched down over their
brows; their lounging attitudes, and their furtive glances; all
these combined to give them an evil aspect--a wicked, sinister,
suspicious appearance, by which all the boys were equally impressed.
They said nothing, however; and much as they disliked the look
of the place and its surroundings, they saw that there was no
help for it, and so they made up their minds to pass the night
here as well as they could.

Leaving the carriage, they waited a few moments to ask the driver
about the prospects for the next day. The driver had everything
arranged.  Velletre was only five miles away, and he was going to
send there for another carriage, or go himself. They would all be
able to leave early on the following day.

This reassured them somewhat, and though they all would have been
willing to walk to Velletre, rather than pass the night here, yet
Uncle Moses would not be able to do it, and so they had to make up
their minds to stay.

On entering the house, they found the interior quite in keeping
with the exterior. The hall was narrow, and on either side were
two dirty rooms, in which were some frowsy women. One room seemed
to be a kitchen, and the other a sitting-room.  A rickety stairway
led up to the second story. Here they came to a room, which, they
were informed, was to be theirs. The door was fragile, and without
any fastening. The room was a large one, containing a table and
three beds, with one small wash-stand. Two windows looked out in
front, and at either end was one. At the south end the window had
no sash at all, but was open to the air.

The aspect of the room was certainly rather cheerless, but there
was nothing to be done. So they sat down, and waited as patiently
as they could for dinner. Before it came, the sun set, and a feeble
lamp was brought in, which flickered in the draughts of air, and
scarcely lighted the room at all.

The dinner was but a meagre repast. There was some very thin soup,
then a stew, then macaroni.  There were also bread and sour wine.
However, the boys did not complain. They had footed it so far, and
had worked so hard, that they were all as hungry as hunters; and
so the dinner gave as great satisfaction as if it had been far
better.  While they were eating, an evil-faced, low-browed villain
waited on the table; and as he placed down each dish in succession,
he looked round upon the company with a scowl that would have taken
away the appetites of any guests less hungry than these. But these
were too near starvation to be affected by mere scowls, and so they
ate on, reserving their remarks for a future occasion.

So the dinner passed.

And after the dinner was over, and the dishes were removed, and
they found themselves alone, they all looked round stealthily, and
they all put their heads together, and then,--

"I don't like this," said Frank.
  do. said Clive.
  do. said David.
  do. said Bob.

"I don't feel altogether comfortable here," said Uncle Moses.

"Did you notice that scowl?" said Bob.
  do. said Clive.
  do. said David.
  do. said Frank.

"He's the ugliest creetur I ever see," said Uncle Moses. "I've been
expectin somethin o' this sort."

The boys looked all around, for fear of being observed. Frank got
up and closed the rickety door. Then he resumed his seat.

Then they all put their heads together again.

"This is a bad place," said Frank.
  do. said Clive.
  do. said David.
  do. said Bob.

"It's the onwholesomedest lookin place I ever see," said
Uncle Moses.

"I distrust them all," said Clive.
  do. said. Frank,
  do. said David.
  do. said Bob.

"I don't like the looks of that ere driver," said Uncle Hoses. "I
b'leve he contrived that there break-down a purpose, so as to bring
us to this here den."

Uncle Moses' remark sank deep into the minds of all. Who was the
driver, after all? That break-down was certainly suspicious. It
might have been all pre-arranged. It looked suspicions. Then the
men below. There were so many of them!

"There are a dozen of them," said Bob.
  do. said Frank.
  do. said David.
  do. said Clive.

"Thar's too big a gatherin here altogether," said Uncle Moses, "an
it's my idee that they've come for no good. Didn't you notice how
they stared at us with them wicked-looking eyes o' theirs?"

"I wish we'd gone on," said David.
  do. said Bob.
  do. said Clive.
  do. said Frank.

"Yes, boys, that's what we'd ort to hev done," said Uncle Moses.
"Why didn't some on ye think of it?"

"We did; but we thought you'd be too tired," said Frank.

"Tired? tired?" exclaimed Uncle Moses.  "Tired? What! me tired!
_me!_" And he paused, overcome with amazement. "Why, boys, ye must
all be ravin distracted! _Me_ tired! Why, I'm as fresh as a cricket;
an though rayther oldish, yet I've got more clear muscle, narve,
and sinnoo, than all on ye put together."

At this little outburst' the boys said nothing, but regretted that
they had not, at least, proposed going on.

"We're in a fix," said Clive.
  do. said Bob.
  do. said Frank.
  do. said David.

"We're in a tight place, sure," said Uncle Moses.

"There's no help near," said Frank.
  do. said David.
  do. said Bob.
  do. said Clive.

"It's the lonesomest place I ever see," said Uncle Moses.

"It's too dark to leave now," said David.
  do. said Clive.
  do. said Bob.
  do. said Frank.

"Yes, and they'd all be arter us afore we'd taken twelve steps,"
said Uncle Moses.

"They're the worst sort of brigands," said Bob.
  do. said Frank.
  do. said David.
  do. said Clive.

"Yes, reg'lar bloodthirsty miscreants," said Uncle Moses.

"The door has no lock," said Frank.
  do. said David.
  do. said Bob.
  do. said Clive.

"O, yes, it's a reg'lar trap, an we're in for it, sure," said Uncle
Moses. "I only hope we'll get out of it."

"That window's open, too," said David,
  do. said Frank.
  do. said Clive.
  do. said Bob.

"Yes, an thar ain't even a sash in it," said Uncle Moses; "no, nor
even a board to put agin it!"

"They'll come to-night," said Clive.
  do. said Frank.
  do. said Bob.
  do. said David.

"No doubt in that thar," said Uncle Moses, in lugubrious tones;
"an we've got to prepar ourselves."

"What shall we do?" said Frank.
  do. said Bob.
  do. said Clive.
  do. said David.

"The pint now is," said Uncle Moses,--"the pint now is, what air
we to do under the succumstances? That's what it is."

At this Frank rose and opened the rickety door.

He looked out.

He closed it again.

Then he went to each of the windows in succession.

He looked out of each.

Then he resumed his seat.

"Wal?" asked Uncle Moses, in an inquiring tone.

"There's no one to be seen," said Frank; "but I thought I heard
voices, or rather whispers, just under the end window."

There was a solemn silence now, and they all sat looking at one
another with very earnest faces.

"It's a solemn time, boys," said Uncle Moses, "a deeply
solemn time."

To this the boys made no reply, but by their silence signified
their assent to Uncle Moses' remark.

At length, after a silence of some time, Frank spoke.

"I think we can manage something," said he, "to keep them out for
the night. My idea is, to put the largest bedstead against the
door. It opens inside; if the bedstead is against it, it can't be
opened."

"But the windows," said Clive.

"O, we needn't bother about the windows, they're too high up," said
Frank, confidently.

And now they all set themselves fairly to work making preparations
for the night, which preparations consisted in making a barricade
which should offer resistance to the assaults of the bloody-minded,
murderous, beetle-browed, scowling, and diabolical brigands below,
Frank's suggestion about the bed was acted upon first. One of the
bedsteads was large, ponderous, old-fashioned, and seemed capable,
if placed against a doorway, of withstanding anything less than a
cannon ball. This they all seized, and lifting it bodily from the
ground, they placed it hard and fast against the door. The result
was gratifying in the highest degree to all of them.

They now proceeded to inspect the room, to search out any weak
spots, so as to guard against invasion. As to the windows, they
thought that their height from the ground was of itself sufficient
to remove all danger in that quarter.

But in their search around the room they noticed one very alarming
thing. At the south corner there was a step-ladder, which led up
into the attic, thus affording an easy entrance to any one who
might be above. Frank rushed up to the step-ladder and shook it.
To his great relief, it was loose, and not secured by any fixtures.
They all took this in their hands, and though it was very heavy,
yet they succeeded in taking it down from its place without making
any noise. They then laid it upon the floor, immediately underneath
the opening into the attic. They would have felt, perhaps, a trifle
more secure if they had been able to close up the dark opening
above; but the removal of the step-ladder seemed sufficient, and
in so doing they felt that they had cut off all means of approach
from any possible enemy in that quarter.

Frank drew a long breath of relief as he looked around. He felt
that nothing more could be done.  All the others looked around with
equal complacency, and to the apprehensions which they had been
entertaining there now succeeded a delicious sense of security.

"We're safe at last," said Clive.
  do. said Bob.
  do. said David.
  do. said Frank.

"Yes, boys," said Uncle Moses, "we're jest as safe now as if we
were to hum. We can defy a hull army of them bloody-minded miscreants,
fight them off all right, and by mornin there'll be lots of wagons
passin by, an we can git help. But before we go, let's see what
weepins we can skear up in case o' need. It's allus best to have
things handy."

"Well," said Frank, "I'm sorry to say I've got nothing but a knife;"
and saying this, he displayed an ordinary jackknife, not particularly
large, and not particularly sharp. "It isn't much," said he, as he
opened it, and flourished it in the air, "but it's something."

"Well," said Clive, "I haven't got even a knife; but I've heard
that there's nothing equal to a chair, if you want to disconcert
a burglar; and so I'll take this, and knock down the first brigand
that shows his nose;" and as he said this, he lifted a chair from
the floor, and swung it in the air.

"I rely on the barricades," said David, "and don't see the necessity
of any arms; for I don't see how we're going to be attacked. If we
are, I suppose I can use my knife, like Frank."

"Well," said Bob, "I've given my knife away, and I'll have to take
a chair."

"Wal," said Uncle Moses, "I've got a razor, an it's pooty ugly
weepin in the hands of a savage man--a desprit ugly weepin."

"And now let's go to bed," said David,
  do. said Bob.
  do. said Clive.
  do. said Frank.

"Yes, boys, that's about the best thing we can do," said Uncle
Moses, decisively.




CHAPTER XXIII.

_The sleepless Watch.--The mysterious Steps.--The low Whispers.--They
come! They come!--The Garrison roused.--To Arms! To Arms!--The
beleaguered Party.--At Bay.--The decisive Moment.--The Scaling
Ladders.--Onset of the Brigands._


So they all went to Bed.

So great was the confidence which they all felt in their preparations,
precautions, and barricades, that not the slightest thought of
danger remained in the mind of any one of them to create alarm,
with the single exception of Bob.

For some reason or other Bob was more excitable at this time than
the others. It may have been that this was his nature, or it may
have been that his nerves were more sensitive since his tremendous
adventures during the night of horror near Paestum; but whatever
was the cause, certain it is, that on this occasion he remained
wide awake, and incapable of sleep, while all the others were
slumbering the sleep of the innocent.

He and Frank had the same bed, and it was the bed which had been
placed against the door. It had been placed in such a way that the
head of the bed was against the door. On the north side of the
room, and on the left of this bed, was another, in which Uncle
Moses slept; while on the south side, or the right, was the bed
which was occupied by David and Clive. In this way they had disposed
of themselves.

Bob was very wakeful. The beds were father unprepossessing, and
consequently they had all retired without altogether undressing
themselves; but in spite of this comparative discomfort they soon
fell asleep. Bob alone remained awake.

He tried all he could to overcome his wakefulness. He resorted to
all the means for producing sleep that he had ever heard of or read
of. He tried counting, and went on counting and counting tens, and
hundreds, and thousands. He counted fast, and he counted slow. In
vain. Counting was useless, and when he had reached as high as
four thousand seven hundred and thirty-seven, he gave it up in
disgust.

Then he tried another infallible recipe for sleep He imagined, or
tried to imagine, endless lines of rolling waves. This also was
useless.

Then he tried another. He endeavored to imagine clouds of smoke
rolling before him. This was as useless as the others.

Then he tested ever so many other methods, as follows:--

  Waving grain.
  Marching soldiers.
  Funerals.
  A shore covered with sea-weed.
  An illimitable forest.
  A ditto prairie.
  The vault of heaven.
  The wide, shoreless ocean.
  A cataract.
  Fireworks.
  The stars.
  A burning forest.
  Looking at his nose.
  Wishing himself asleep.
  Rubbing his forehead.
  Lying on his back,
   do. do. right side.
   do. do. left side.
   do. do. face.

And about seventy-nine other methods, which need not be mentioned,
for the simple reason that they were all equally useless.

At last he gave up in despair, and rising up he sat on the side of
the bed, with his feet dangling down, and looked around.

The moon had risen, and was shining into the room. By its light he
could see the outline of the beds. Around him there ascended a
choral harmony composed of snores of every degree, reaching from
the mild, mellow intonation of Clive, down to the deep, hoarse,
sepulchral drone of Uncle Moses. In spite of his vexation about
his wakefulness, a smile passed over Bob's face, as he listened to
those astonishing voices of the night.

Suddenly a sound caught his ears, which at once attracted his
attention, and turned all his thoughts in another direction.

It was the sound of footsteps immediately in front of the house,
and apparently at the doorway. How much time had passed he did
not know; but he felt sure that it must be at least midnight. He
now perceived that there were some in the house who had not gone
to bed. The footsteps were shuffling and irregular, as though some
people were trying to walk without making a noise. The sound
attracted Bob, and greatly excited him.

In addition to the footsteps there were other sounds. There were
the low murmurs of voices in a subdued tone, and he judged that
there must be at least a half a dozen who were thus talking. To
this noise Bob sat listening for some time. It remained in the same
place, and of course he could make nothing out of it; but it served
to reawaken all the fears of brigands which had been aroused before
they went to bed.

At length he heard a movement from below. The movement was along
the ball. It was a shuffling movement, as of men walking with the
endeavor not to make a noise.

Bob listened.

His excitement increased.

At last he heard the sounds more plainly.

They were evidently at the foot of the stairway.

Bob listened in increasing excitement.

Then there came a creaking sound. It was from the stairway. They
were ascending it.

He thought of waking Frank, but decided to wait.

The sounds draw nearer. There must have been six or seven men upon
the stairway, and they were walking up. What for?

He had no doubt what it was for, and he waited, knowing that they
were coming to this room in which he was.

They tried to walk softly. There were low whispers once or twice,
which ceased as they drew nearer.

Nearer and nearer!

At last Bob knew that they were outside of the door, and as he sat
on the bed, he knew that there could not be more than a yard of
distance Between himself and those bloody-minded, beetle-browed,
ruthless, demoniac, and fiendish brigands.

His blood ran cold in his veins at the very thought.

He did not dare to move. He sat rigid, with every sense on the
alert, his eyes fixed on the door, listening.

Then came a slight creaking sound--the sound of a pressure against
the door, which yielded slightly, but was prevented by the heavy
bed from being opened at all. It was an unmistakable sound. They
were trying to open the door. They were also trying to do it as
noiselessly as possible. Evidently they thought that their victims
were all asleep, and they wished to come in noiselessly, so as to
accomplish their fearful errand.

For a moment it seemed to Bob as though the bed was being pushed
back. The thought gave him anguish inexpressible, but he soon found
that it was not so. Then he expected a savage push at the door from
the baffled brigands. He thought that they would drop all attempts
at secrecy, and begin an open attack.

But they did not do so.

There were whispers outside the door. Evidently they were
deliberating. They were unwilling, as yet, to resort to noisy
violence. They wished to effect their full purpose in secret and
in silence. Such were Bob's thoughts, which thoughts were strengthened
as he heard them slowly move away, and descend the stairs, with
the same carefulness, and the same shuffling sound, with which they
had ascended.

"They are going to try the windows," thought Bob.

And now as this thought came to him, he could restrain himself no
longer. It was no time for sleep. He determined to rouse the others.

He laid his hand on Frank's forehead, and shook his bead. Then,
bending down dose to him, he hissed in his ear,--

"Wake! wake! Brigands! Don't speak! don't speak! silence!"

Frank was a light sleeper, and a quick-witted lad, who always
retained his presence of mind. At Bob's cry he became wide awake,
and without a single word sat up in bed and listened. All was still.

"What's the matter?" he asked.

Bob told Him all in a few words.

Upon this Frank got up, stole noiselessly to the window on tiptoe,
and listened. Bob followed. As they stood close to the window,
they heard the sound of murmuring voices immediately beneath.
Several of the panes of glass were out of this window, so that the
voices were perfectly audible; though of course their ignorance of
the language prevented them from understanding what was said.

As they listened, there arose a movement among them. The voices
grew louder. The men were evidently walking out of the house. The
listeners heard the sound of their footsteps on the ground as they
walked away, and at a little distance off they noticed that the
voices became more free and unrestrained.

"They'll be back again," said Frank.

"Let's wake the others," said Bob.

Upon this suggestion they both proceeded at once to act, waking
them carefully, and cautioning them against making any noise. The
cautions against noise were so earnest, that not a word was spoken
above a whisper; but Clive and David, and finally Uncle Moses,
stepped out upon the floor, and the whole party proceeded to put
their heads together.

"I've got a chair," said Clive.

"I've got a knife," said Frank.

"I've got a chair," said Bob.

"I've got a knife," said David.

"An I've got my razor, which I shoved under my pillow," said Uncle
Moses; "an so let em come on. But where are they now?"

"H-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-h!" Said Frank.

All were silent, and listened. There came out from without the
sound of footsteps approaching the house, and of low voices.

"They're coming back again," said Bob.

The rest listened.

Frank stole to the window and looked cautiously out.

By the moonlight he saw plainly the figures of four men. They were
coming from the road to the house, and they were carrying a ladder.
The ladder was very long. The sight sent a shudder through him. He
had thought of the windows as being out of the reach of danger;
the idea of a ladder had never entered his head at all. Yet he now
saw that this-was one of the most simple and natural plans which
could be adopted by the brigands.

He came back and told the others. All felt the same dismay which
Frank had felt. None of them said a word, but they all stole up to
the window, and looking out they saw for themselves.

The brigands approached the house, carrying the ladder; and on
reaching it, they put their load on the ground, and rested for a
short time. As they did so, the boys noticed that they all looked
up at the upper windows of the house.

Then they saw the brigands gathering close together, and the murmur
of their conversation came up to their ears.

It was a thrilling sight. The boys stood in dread suspense. No one
said a word, not even a whisper.

The conversation among the brigands was followed by a movement on
their part which brought things nearer to a climax. They raised
the ladder once more, and moving it a little farther away, they
proceeded to put it up against the house. The ladder was put up
at the south end of the house, and as it was being carried there
for the purpose of erection, the boys and Uncle Moses all stole
over to that south window, where, standing a little distance back,
so as to be out of observation, they looked out. Each one grasped
his weapon of defence.

Clive his chair.

Frank his knife.

Bob his chair.

David his knife.

Uncle Moses his razor.

"Be ready, boys," said Uncle Moses, in a firm voice, as he grasped
his razor. "The hour air come, and the decisive moment air at hand!"

He said this in a whisper, and the boys made no reply whatever.

The brigands meanwhile elevated the ladder, and the upper end struck
the building. The dull thud of that stroke sent a thrill to the
hearts of those listeners in the room. As they saw one of the
brigands seize the ladder in order to mount, they all involuntarily
shrank back one step.

"It isn't this window, at any rate," said Frank, in a whisper.

This remark encouraged them for a moment. No, it was not their
window, but the attic window. They watched in silence now, and
saw the four brigands go up.

Overhead they heard the sound that announced them as they stepped
in through the window.

One brigand!

Two brigands!!

Three brigands!!!

Four brigands!!!!

And now the momentary relief which they had experienced at seeing
that the attack was not made upon their window was succeeded by
the darkest apprehensions, as they heard the entrance of those four
brigands, and knew that these desperate men were just above them.
They were there overhead. The hatchway was open. Through that
opening they could drop down one by one.

The same thought came to all of them, and with one common impulse
they moved softly to where the step-ladder lay on the floor. Frank
made this movement first; the others followed.

They stood ranged along the step-ladder.

First, Frank, with his knife.

Second, Bob, with his chair.

Third, Clive, with his chair.

Fourth, David, with his knife.

Fifth, Uncle Moses, with his razor.

Every one held his weapon in a grasp which the excitement of the
moment had rendered convulsive. Every eye was fixed upon the
hatchway above, which lay concealed in the gloom. Overhead they
heard, whispering, but no movement whatever.

"Let's jump out of the windows and run," whispered Bob, hurriedly.

"No," said Frank, "they are watching below--no use."

But further remarks were prevented by the sudden glimmer of a light
above. It was a light in the attic, not very bright, yet sufficiently
so to show the opening through which their enemies were about to
come.

The brigands had lighted a lamp!

The excitement grew stronger.

Voices arose, low and hushed.

Then footsteps!

The light above the opening grew brighter!

It was an awful moment!

The suspense was terrible!

Yet in the midst of that suspense they had no thought of surrender.
In fact, they did not think that surrender would be possible. These
bloody-minded miscreants would show no quarter; and the besieged
party felt the task imposed upon them of selling their lives as
dearly as possible. And so it was, that as the brigands came nearer
to the opening,--

Frank grasped his knife more firmly.

Bob   do. "  chair  do.

David do. "  knife  do.

Clive do. "  chair  do.

While Uncle Moses held up his razor in such a way, that the first
brigand who descended should fall full upon its keen edge.

The light grew brighter over the opening. The shuffling footsteps
drew nearer. Then there was a pause, and low whispers arose. The
brigands were immediately above them. The light shone down into
the room.

The suspense was now intolerable. It was Frank who broke the silence.

"_Who's there?_" he cried in a loud, strong, stern, menacing voice,
in which there was not the slightest tremor.

At this the whispering above ceased. Everything was perfectly still.

"WHO'S THERE?" cried Frank a second time, in a louder, stronger,
sterner, and more menacing voice.

No answer.

All was still.

What did it mean?

"WHO'S THERE?" cried Frank a third time, in the loudest, strongest,
sternest, and most menacing tone that he could compass, "SPEAK, OR
I'LL FIRE!!!!!!!!!"

This tremendous threat could not have been carried out, of course,
with the knives, chairs, and razor of the party below; but at any
rate it brought a reply.

"Alla raight!" cried a voice. "O, yais. It's onalee me. Alla safe.
Come up here to get some straps for de vettura. Alla raight. I haf
joosta come back from Velletre. Haf brot de oder vettura. Scusa de
interruption, but haf to-get de straps; dey up here. Alla raight!"

It was the voice of their driver!

At the first sound of that voice there was an instantaneous and
immense revulsion of feeling. The dark terror of a moment before
was suddenly transformed to an absurdity. They had been making
fools of themselves. They felt this very keenly. The chairs were
put quietly upon the floor; the knives were pocketed very stealthily;
and Uncle Moses' razor was slipped hurriedly into the breast pocket
of his coat.

"O!" said-Frank, trying to speak in an easy, careless, matter-of-fact
tone. "We didn't know. Shall we leave in the morning?"

"O, yais. Alla r-r-raight," said the driver.

Soon after the party descended the ladder, and took it away. The
boys and Uncle Moses made no remark whatever. They all crept
silently, and rather sheepishly, back to their beds, feeling very
much ashamed of themselves.

And yet there was no reason for shame, for to them the danger seemed
real; and believing it to be real, they had not shrunk, but had
faced it with very commendable pluck.

This was the end of their troubles on the road. For the remainder
of that night they slept soundly. In the morning they awaked
refreshed, and found a good breakfast waiting for them. They
found also another carriage, in which they entered and resumed
their journey.




CHAPTER XXIV.

_A beautiful Country.--Magnificent Scenery.--The Approach to
Albano.--Enthusiasm of the Boys.--Archaeology versus Appetite.--The
Separation of the Boys.--The Story of the Alton Lake and the
ancient subterranean Channel._


As they rolled along the road on this last stage of their eventful
journey, they were all in the highest spirits. On to Rome! was
the watchword. It was a glorious day; the sun shone brightly from
a cloudless sky; the air was pure, and brilliant, and genial, and
it also had such a wonderful transparency that distant objects
seemed much nearer from the distinctness with which their outlines
were revealed. The road was a magnificent one,--broad, well paved,
well graded,--and though for some miles it was steadily ascending,
yet the ascent was made by such an easy slope, that it was really
imperceptible; and they bowled along as easily and as merrily as
if on level ground. Moreover, the scenery around was of the most
attractive character. They were among the mountains; and though
there were no snow-clad summits, and no lofty peaks lost amid the
clouds, still the lowering forms that appeared on every side were
full of grandeur and sublimity. Amid these the road wound, and, at
every new turn some fresh scene of beauty or of magnificence was
disclosed to their admiring eyes. Now it was a sequestered valley,
with a streamlet running through it, and the green of its surface
diversified by one or two white cottages, or the darker hue of
olive groves and vineyards; again it was some little hamlet far up
the sloping mountain-side; again some mouldering tower would appear,
perched upon some commanding and almost inaccessible eminence--the
remains of a feudal castle, the monument of lawless power overthrown
forever. Sometimes they would pass through the street of a town,
and have a fresh opportunity of contrasting the lazy and easy-going
life of Italy with the busy, energetic, restless, and stirring life
of their own far-distant America.

On to Rome!

This day was to land them in the "Eternal City;" and though they
enjoyed the drive, still they were eager to have it over, and to
find themselves in that place which was once the centre of the
world's rule, and continued to be so for so many ages. Their
impatience to reach their destination was not, however, excessive,
and did not at all prevent them from enjoying to the utmost the
journey so long as it lasted. Uncle Moses was the only exception.
He was most eager to have it over, and reach some place of rest.
True, no accident had happened; but he had gone through enough
tribulation, both in body and in mind, to furnish the working,
material for a dozen very serious accidents indeed; and the general
effect produced upon him was precisely what might have resulted
from a really perilous journey.

At length they arrived at the town of Albano, where they intended
to remain two hours, and afterwards resume their journey. The town
stood on the side of a hill, and the hotel at which they drew up
was so situated that it commanded a boundless view.

Few places cherish a stronger local pride than Albano. Tradition
identifies this town with no less a place than Alba Longa, so famous
in early Roman legends; for though, according to the old accounts,
Tullus Hostilius destroyed the city proper of Alba Longa, yet
afterwards another town grew on its site, and all around rose up
the splendid villas of the Roman nobility. Here, too, Tiberius and
Domitian had palaces, where they sought relaxation from the cares
of empire in a characteristic way.

On reaching this place, their first care was to order dinner, and
then, as there would be some time taken up in preparation for that
meal, they looked about for some mode of pastime. The landlord
recommended to them a visit to a convent at the top of the hill.
He informed them that it stood on the site of a famous temple, and
that it was visited every day by large numbers of travellers. On,
referring to their guide-book, the boys learned that the temple
referred to by the landlord was that of the Latian Jupiter.

As they had nothing else to do, they set out for the convent, and
soon reached it. Arriving there, they found spread out before them
a view which surpassed anything that they had ever seen in their
lives. Far down beneath them descended the declivity of the Alban
hill, till it terminated in the Roman Campagna. Then, far away
before their eyes it spread for many a mile, till it was terminated
by a long blue line, which it needed not the explanation of the
monk at their elbow to recognize as the Mediterranean; and this
blue line of distant sea spread far away, till it terminated in a
projecting promontory, which their guide told them was the Cape of
Terracina. But their attention was arrested by an object which was
much nearer than this. Through that gray Campagna,--whose gray hue,
the result of waste and barrenness, seemed also to mark its hoary
age,--through this there ran a silver thread, with many a winding
to and fro, now coming full into view, and gleaming in the sun,
now retreating, till it was lost to sight.

"What is this?" asked David.

"The Tiber!" said the monk.

At the mention of this august historic name, a thrill involuntarily
passed through them. The Tiber! What associations clustered around
that word!

Along this silver thread their eyes wandered, till at length it
was lost for a time in a dark, irregular mass of something. The
atmosphere just now had grown slightly hazy in this direction, so
that they could not make out what this was, exactly; whether a
hill, or a grove, or a town; but it looked most like a town, and
the irregularities and projections seemed like towers and domes.
Prominent among these projections was one larger mass, which rose
up above all the others, and formed the chief feature in that
indistinct mass.

"What is all that?" asked David, in a hesitating way, like one who
suspects the truth, but does not feel at all sure about it.

"Dat," said the guide, "dat is Rome; and dat black mass dat you
see is de Church of St. Peter's. It's not clear to-day--some time
we can see it all plain."

At this the boys said nothing, but stood in silence, looking upon
the scene. It was one which might have stirred the souls of even
the least emotional, and among this little company there were two,
at least, who were quick to kindle into enthusiasm at the presence
of anything connected with the storied past. These were David and
Clive, who each, though from different causes, now felt himself
profoundly moved by this spectacle. David's enthusiasm was that
of a scholar; Clive's was that of a poet; yet each was keen in his
susceptibility, and eloquent in the expression of his feelings.

As for Frank and Bob, they were far less demonstrative; and though
they had plenty of enthusiasm of their own, yet it was not often
excited very violently by either poetic feeling or classical
reminiscences. The scene before them certainly moved their feelings
also, on the present occasion; but they were not in the habit of
indulging in exclamatory language, and so they looked on in quiet
appreciation, without saying anything.

Not so the other two, David and Clive. Each burst forth in his
own way.

"How magnificent!" cried Clive. "What a boundless scene! How
fortunate we are to have our first view of Rome! I don't believe
there is such another sight in all the world. But what a scene must
have appeared from these heights when Rome was in its glory!"

"Yes," said David, chiming in, "such a place doesn't exist anywhere
else in all the world. It's the cradle of history, and modern
civilization. Here is where the mighty Roman empire began. There
is the Rome of the kings and the consuls; and down there is the
arena, where they fought out that long battle that arranged the
course of future ages."

"Besides," said Clive; "there is the scene of all the latter part
of the Aeneid, and of all the immortal legends that arose out of
the early growth of Rome. What a place this would be to read
Macaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome!--

   "Hail to the great asylum!
   Hail to the hill-tops seven!
   Hail to the fire that burns for aye!
   And the shields that fell from heaven!"

At this moment Frank's attention was attracted to a place not very
far away, where the sheen of some silver water flashed forth from
amid the dark green hue of the surrounding hills.

"What is that?" he asked of the guide. "It looks like a lake."

"It is de Alban Lake."

"The Alban Lake!" cried David, in a fresh transport of enthusiasm;
"the Alban Lake! What, the lake that the Romans drained at the
siege of Veii?"

"It is de same," said the guide.

"Is it really? and is the canal or tunnel still in existence?

"It is."

"Is it far away?"

"Not ver far."

"Boys, we must go there. It is the greatest curiosity of the country
about here."

"Well," said Frank, "I'm in for any curiosity. But how long will
it take for us to see it?"

"It will take more dan one hour," said the guide.

"More than an hour!" said Frank. "Hm--that won't do--we've got to
go back at once to get our dinner. It's ready by this time, and
then we must leave for Rome."

"Well, it's a great pity," said David, sadly. "I think I should be
willing to go without my dinner, to see that wonderful tunnel."

"I shouldn't, then," said Frank, "not for all the tunnels in
the world."

"Nor should I," said Bob.

"But what a magnificent effect the lake has when embraced in our
view!" said Clive. "How finely is the description in Childe Harold
adapted to this scene--

   'And near, Albano's scarce divided waves
   Shine from a sister valley; and afar
   The Tiber winds, and the broad ocean laves
   The Latian coast, where sprung the Epic war,
   "Arms and the man," whose reascending star
   Rose o'er an empire; but beneath thy right
   Fully reposed from Rome; and where yon bar
   Of girdling mountains intercepts thy sight,
   The Sabine farm was tilled, the weary bard's delight.'

"Clive," said David, who had waited patiently for him to finish
his poetical quotation, "you'll come--won't you?"

"Come? Come where?"

"Why, I want to visit the tunnel of the Alban Lake, and it'll take
an hour to do it. If we go, we'll lose our dinner. What do you say?
You don't think a dinner's the most important thing in the world?"

"Of course not," said Clive. "Besides, we can pick up some scraps
when we return, and eat them in the carriage."

"That's right," said David. "Boys," he continued, appealing to
Frank and Bob, "you'd better come."

"What! and lose our dinners?" cried Frank, scornfully. "Catch us
at it. No. We require more substantial food than poetry and old
ruins. Don't we, Bob?"

"Certainly," said Bob. "For my part poetry and old ruins never were
in my line. As for 'Arms and the man' and the 'Sabine farm,' why,
all I can say is, I always hated them. I detested Virgil, and
Horace, and Cicero, and the whole lot of them, at school; and why
I should turn round now, and pretend to like them, I don't know,
I'm sure. Horace and Virgil, indeed! Bother Horace and Virgil, I
say."

At such flippancy as this both David and Clive looked too much
pained to reply. They turned away in silence, and spoke to the
guide.

"So you're not coming back to dinner?" said Frank.

"No," said David; "we want to see that tunnel."

"Well, you'll lose your dinner; that's all."

"Of course. We don't care."

"At any rate, don't go and forget about us. We want to leave, for
Rome after dinner, and you ought to be back in one hour, at the
very farthest."

"O, yes; the guide says it'll only take an hour. We don't intend
to spend any more time there than we can help."

"Well, I think you ought to come back," said Bob; "you know very
well how poor old Uncle Moses will fidget and worry about you."

"O, no; it's all right. Tell him that the guide is with us,
you know."

After a few more words, Frank and Bob, who were ravenously hungry,
hurried back to the hotel, and David and Clive, who were also, to
tell the truth, equally hungry, resisted their appetites as well
as they were able, and accompanied their guide to the Lake Albano.

Most boys are familiar with the story of the Alban Lake; but
for the benefit of those who may not have heard of it, or who,
having heard, have forgotten, it may be as well to give a
brief account of the famous tunnel, which was so very attractive
to Clive and David.

The city of Veii had been besieged for nine years, without success,
by the Romans; and at length, in the tenth year, a great prodigy
occurred, in the shape of the sudden rising of the waters of the
Alban Lake to an extraordinary height, without any apparent cause.
The Romans, in their bewilderment, sent a messenger to the oracle
of Delphi to inquire about it. Before this messenger returned, they
also captured a Verentine priest, who informed them that there were
certain oracular books in Veii, which declared that Veii could
never perish unless the waters of the Alban Lake should reach
the sea. Not long afterwards the messenger returned from Delphi,
who brought back an answer from the oracle at that place to the
same effect. Upon this, the Romans resolved to draw off the
waters of the lake so as to let them flow to the sea. Such an
undertaking was one of the most laborious kind, especially in an
age like that; but the Romans entered upon it, and worked at it
with that extraordinary tenacity of purpose which always
distinguished them. It was necessary to cut a tunnel through
the mountain, through rock of the hardest possible description.
But the same age had seen the excavation of other subterranean
passages far larger than this, and in the same country, preeminently
the Grotto of Posilipo, at Naples, and that of the Cumaean Sibyl,
and at length it was accomplished. The people of Veii heard of
it, and were filled with alarm. Ambassadors were sent to Rome,
with the hope of inducing the Romans to come to some other terms
less severe than the surrender of the city; but they were
disappointed, and according to the legend, could only comfort
themselves by announcing to the Romans a prophecy in the oracular
books of Veii, to the effect that, if this siege should be carried
through to the capture of the city, Rome itself should be taken
by the Gauls soon after. This prophecy, however, had no effect.
whatever upon the stern resolution of the Romans.

The subterranean passage to the lake was also supplemented by
another, which led to the citadel of Veii. As the time approached
for the final assault, the Roman Senate invited all the Roman people
to participate in it, and promised them a share of the booty. This
promise induced a vast multitude, old and young, to go there. The
time at last came. The water of the Alban Lake was let out into
the fields, and the party that entered the subterranean passage to
the citadel were led by Camillus, while, at the same time, a general
assault was made upon the walls by the rest of the army. At that
moment the king of Veii happened to be sacrificing in the Temple
of Juno, which was in the citadel, and Camillus, with his Romans,
were immediately beneath, close enough to hear what he said. It
happened that the attendant priest declared that whoever should
bring the goddess her share of the victim should conquer. Camillus
heard the words, and at once they burst forth upon the astonished
Veientans, seized upon the altar, offered the sacrifice, and thus
performed what had been declared to be the conditions of victory.
After this they held the citadel, and sent a detachment to open
the gates to the assaulting army outside. Thus Veil fell; and this
is the legend which, like many others belonging to early Roman
times, is more full of poetry than of truth.

The tunnel still remains, and is one of the chief curiosities left
from ancient times. It is about two miles long, six feet high, and
three and a half feet wide.

To this place the guide led David and Clive, and entertained them
on the way with the account of its origin, which accorded in most
particulars with that which is given above; and though both of the
boys were familiar with the story, yet it was not unpleasant to
hear it again, told by one who lived in the neighborhood of the
place, and had passed his life amid these scenes. It seemed to them
to give a certain degree of authenticity to the old legend.

There was not much to see, except an opening in the rock, the mouth
of the tunnel, with rushes, and mosses, and grasses, and shrubbery
growing around it. Having seen it, they were satisfied, and turned
to go back to the hotel. After a short distance, the guide showed
them where there was a path turning off through the fields, which
formed a short cut back. Upon this they paid him for his trouble,
and he went back to the convent, while they went along the path by
which he had directed them.




CHAPTER XXV.

_The lonely Path.--The sequestered Vale.--The old House.--A Feudal
Castle.--A baronial Windmill.--A mysterious Sound.--A terrible
Discovery.--At Bay.--The Wild Beasts Lair!--What is It!--A great
Bore!_


The path by which Clive and David returned to the hotel, went down
a slope of the hill into a valley, and led over a second hill,
beyond which was Albano. There were no houses visible, for the town
was hidden by the hill, except, of course, the convent, which, from
its conspicuous position, was never out of sight. As they descended
into the valley, they came to a grove of olive trees; and beyond
this there was a ruined edifice, built of stone, and apparently
long since deserted. It was two stories in height, but the stories
were high, and it looked as though it might once have been used,
for a tower of some sort. The attention of both of the boys was at
once arrested by it, and they stood and looked at it for some time.

"I wonder what it has been," said David.

"No doubt," said Clive, "it is the ruin of some mediaeval castle."

"It does not have much of the look of a castle."

"Why not?"

"O, why, there are no architectural features in it; no battlements;
it has, in fact, a rather modern air."

"Not a bit of it," said Clive. "See those old stones grown over
with moss; and look at the ivy."

"Yes, but look at the windows. They didn't have such large windows
in castles, you know."

"Yes, but these windows were probably made afterwards. The place
was once a castle; but at length, of course it became deserted,
and began to fall to ruins. Then somebody fixed it tip for a
dwelling-house, and made these windows in the walls."

"Well, that's not improbable."

"Not improbable! Why, I'm sure it's very natural. Look how thick
the walls are!"

"They do seem pretty thick."

"O, they are real castle walls; there's no doubt at all about that,"
said Clive, in a positive tone. "Why, they are three feet thick,
at least. And, you see, there are signs of an additional story
having been above it."

"Yes, I dare say," said David, looking up. "The edges there look
ragged, as though some upper portion has been knocked off."

"And I dare say it's been a great place for brigands," said Clive.

"O, bother brigands," said David. "For my part, I begin to think
not only that there are no brigands now, but even that there never
have been any such people at all.

"Well, I won't go as far as that," said Clive, "but I certainly
begin to have my doubts about them."

"They're all humbugs," said David.

"All of our brigands have been total failures," said Clive.

"Yes," said David; "they all turned out to be the most amiable
people in the world. But come; suppose we go inside, and
explore this old ruin. It may be something famous. I wish
the guide were, here."

"O, well look at it first all over, and then ask at the hotel."

"Yes, that's the way."

"But have we time?"

"O, of course; it won't take us five minutes."

Upon this Clive started off for the ruined structure, followed
by David.

It was, as has been said, two stories in height. In the lower
story was a small, narrow doorway. The door was gone. There were
no windows, and it was quite dark inside. It was about twelve feet
wide, and fifteen feet long. At one end were some piles of fagots
heaped together. The height was about fifteen feet. Before them
they saw a rude ladder, running up to the story above. Its feet
rested near the back of the room. There was no floor to the house,
but only the hard-packed earth.

"There's nothing here," said David, looking around.

"Let's go into the upper story," said Clive.

To this proposal David assented quite readily; and accordingly they
both entered, and walked towards the ladder. Clive ascended first,
and David followed. In a few moments they were in the upper story.

Here it was light, for there were two windows in front. There was
a floor, and the walls were plastered. Fragments of straw lay about,
intermingled with chaff, as though the place had been used for some
sort of a store-house.

Overhead there were a number of heavy beams, which seemed too
numerous and complicated to serve merely for the support of a roof;
and among them was one large, round beam, which ran across. At
this both of the boys stared very curiously.

"I wonder what all that can be for," asked David.

"O, no doubt," said Clive, "it's some of the massive wood-work of
the old castle."

"But what was the good of it?"

"Why, to support the roof, of course," said Clive.

"Yes, but there is too much. They would never have needed all that
to support so small a roof. It's a waste of timber."

"O, well, you know you mustn't expect the same ingenuity in an
Italian builder that you would in an American."

"I don't know about that. Why not? Do you mean to say that the
Italians are inferior to the Americans in architecture? Pooh, man!
in America there is no architecture at all; while here, in every
little town, they have some edifice that in America would be
considered something wonderful."

"O, well, you know they are very clumsy in practical matters, in
spite of their Artistic superiority. But apart from that I've just
been thinking that this is only a part of some large castle, and
this lumber work was, perhaps, once the main support of a massive
roof. So, after all, it would have its use."

David said nothing for some time. He was looking earnestly at the
wood-work.

"I'll tell you what it is," said he, at last. "I've got it. It
isn't a castle at all. It's a windmill."

"A windmill!" exclaimed Clive, contemptuously. "What nonsense!
It's an old tower--the keep of some mediaeval castle."

"It's a windmill!" persisted David. "Look at that big beam. It's
round. See in one corner those projecting pieces. They were once
part of some projecting wheel. Why, of course, it's a windmill.
The other end of that cross-beam goes outside for the fans to be
attached to it. This big cross-beam was the shaft. Of course
that's it."

Clive looked very much crest-fallen at this. He was unable to
disprove a fact of which the evidences were now so plain; but he
struggled to maintain a little longer the respectability of his
feudal castle.

"Well," said he, "I dare say it may have been used afterwards for
a windmill; but I am sure it was originally built as a baronial
hall, some time during the middle ages. Afterwards it began to go
to ruin; and then, I dare say, some miller fellow has taken possession
of the keep, and torn off the turrets and battlements, and rigged
up this roof with the beams, and thus turned it into a windmill."

"O, well, you may be right," said David. "Of course it's impossible
to tell."

"O, but I'm sure of it," said Clive, positively.

David laughed.

"O, then," said he, "in that case, I've got nothing to say about
it at all."

In spite of his reiterated conviction in the baronial castle, Clive
was unable to prevent an expression of disgust from being discernible
on his fine face, and without another word, he turned to go down.

David followed close after him.

As Clive put his feet down on the nearest rung of the ladder, he
was startled by a noise below. It came from the pile of fagots,
and was of the most extraordinary character. It was a shuffling,
scraping, growling, snapping noise; an indescribable medley of
peculiar sounds.

Clive instantly drew back his foot, as though he had trodden
on a snake.

"What's the matter?" cried David, in amazement.

"Didn't you hear it?"

"Hear what?"

"Why, that noise!"

"Noise?"

"Yes."

"What noise?"

Clive's eyes opened wide, and he said in a low, agitated whisper,--

"Something's down there!"

At this David's face turned pale. He knelt down at the opening,
and bent his head over.

The sounds, which had ceased for a moment, became once more audible.
There was a quick, beating, rustling, rubbing noise among the
fagots, and he could occasionally hear the rap of footfalls on the
floor. It was too dark to see anything, for the narrow door was
the only opening, and the end of the chamber where the fagots lay
was wrapped in deep gloom.

Clive knelt down too, and then both boys, kneeling there, listened
eagerly and intently with all their ears.

"What is it?" asked Clive.

"I'm rare I don't know," said David, gloomily.

"Is it a brigand?" whispered Clive, dismally.

"I don't know, I'm sore," said poor David, who, in spite of his
recent declaration of his belief that all brigands were humbugs,
felt something like his old trepidation at Clive's suggestion.

They listened a little longer.

The noise subsided for a time, and then began again. This time it
was much louder than before. There was the same rustling, rubbing,
cracking, snapping sound made by something among the fagots; there
was a clatter as of feet on the hard ground; then there was a quick,
reiterated rubbing; then another peculiar noise, which sounded
exactly like that which a dog makes when shaking himself violently
after coming out of the water. After this there was a low, deep
sound, midway between a yawn and a growl; then all was still.

David and Clive raised themselves softly, and looked at one another.

"Well?" said Clive.

"Well?" said David.

"I don't know," said Clive.

"I don't know," said David.

"What shall we do?" said Clive.

David shook his head. Then, looking down the opening once more, he
again raised his eyes, and fixing them with an awful look on Clive,
he said, in a dismal tone,--

"It's not a brigand!"

"No," said Clive, "I don't think it is, either."

David looked down again; then he looked up at Clive with the same
expression, and said in the same dismal tone as before,--

"Clive!"

"Well?"

"_It's a wild beast!_"

Clive looked back at David with eyes that expressed equal horror,
and said not a word.

"Don't you think so?" asked David.

"Yes," said Clive.

Then:--

"How can we get down?" said David.
  do. said Clive.

"I, don't know!" said David.
  do. said Clive.

Once more the boys put their heads down to the hole and listened.
The noises were soon renewed--such noises as,--
  Snapping, with variations.
  cracking,       "  do.
  deep-breathing, "  do.
  scratching,     "  do.
  sighing,        "  do.
  yawning,        "  do.
  growling,       "  do.
  grunting,       "  do.
  smacking,       "  do.
  thumping,       "  do.
  jerking,        "  do.
  rattling,       "  do.
  pushing, with variations,
  sliding,   "  do.
  shaking,   "  do.
  jerking,   "  do.
  twitching, "  do.
  groaning,  "  do.
  pattering, "  do.
  rolling,   "  do.
  rubbing,   "  do.
together with many more of a similar character, all of which went
to indicate to the minds of both of the boys the presence in that
lower chamber, and close by that pile of fagots, of some animal,
in a state of wakefulness, restlessness, and, as they believed, of
vigilant watchfulness and ferocity.

"I wonder how it got there," said David. "That olive grove--that's
it--O, that's it. He saw us come in here, and followed us."

"I don't know," said Clive. "He may have been among the fagots when
we came in, and our coming has waked him."

"I wonder that the guide didn't warn us."

"O, he never thought, I suppose."

"No; he thought we would keep by the path, and go straight to the
hotel."

"What fools we were!"

"Well, it can't be helped now."

"I wonder what it is," said Clive, after another anxious pause.

"A wild beast," said David, dismally.

"Of course; but what kind of a one?"

"It may be a wolf."

"I wonder if there are many wolves about here."

"Wolves? Of course. All Italy is fall of them."

"Yes, but this beast has hard feet. Don't you hear what a noise he
makes sometimes with his feet? A wolf's feet are like a dog's. I'm
afraid it's something even worse than a wolf."

"Something worse?"

"Yes."

"What can be worse?"

"Why, a wild boar. Italy is the greatest country in the world for
wild boars."

After this there followed a long period of silence and despondency.

Suddenly Clive grasped the upper part of the ladder, and began to
pull at it with all his might.

"What are you trying to do?" asked David.

"Why, we might draw up the ladder, and put it out of one of the
windows, you know, and get out that way--mightn't we?"

"I don't know," said David. "We might try."

Upon this both boys seized the ladder, and tried to pull it from
its place. But their efforts were entirely in vain. The ladder was
clumsily made out of heavy timbers, and their puny efforts did not
avail to move it one single inch from its place. So they soon
desisted, and turned away in despair. Clive then went to one of
the windows, and looked down. David followed him. They looked out
for some time in silence.

"Couldn't we let ourselves drop somehow?" asked Clive.

David shook his head.

"It's nearly twenty feet from the window ledge," said he, "and I'm
afraid one of us might break some of our bones."

"O, it's not so very far," said Clive. "Yes, but if we were to
drop, that wild boar would hear us, and rush out in a moment."

At this terrible suggestion, Clive turned away, and regarded David
with his old look of horror.

"It's no use trying," said David; "that horrible wild boar waked
up when we entered his den. He saw us going up, and has been watching
ever since for us to come down. They are the most ferocious, most
pitiless, and most cruel of all wild beasts. Why; if we had the
ladder down from the window, and could get to the ground, he'd
pounce upon us before we could get even as far as the path."

Clive left the window, and sat down in despair, leaning against
the wall, while David stood staring blankly out into vacancy. Their
position was now not merely an embarrassing one. It seemed dangerous
in the extreme. From this place they saw no sign of any human
habitation. They could not see the convent. Albano was hidden by
the hill already spoken of; nor had they any idea how far away it
might be. This path over which they had gone had not appeared like
one which was much used; and how long it might be before any
passers-by would approach was more than they could tell.

"Well," said Clive, "we've lost our dinner, and it's my firm belief
that we'll lose our tea, too."

David made no reply.

Clive arose, and walked over to him.

"Dave," said he, "look here. I'm getting desperate. I've a
great mind to go down the ladder as quietly as possible, and
then run for it."

"No, don't--don't," cried David, earnestly.

"Well, I'm not going to stay here and starve to death," said Clive.

"Pooh! don't be impatient," said David. "Of course they'll hunt us
up, and rescue us. Only wait a little longer."

"Well, I don't know. If they don't come soon, I'll certainly
venture down."

After an hour or so, during which no help came, Clive did as he
said, and, in spite of David's remonstrances, ventured down. He
went about half way. Then there was a noise of so peculiar a
character that he suddenly retreated up again, and remarked to
David, who all the time had been watching him in intense anxiety,
and begging him to come back,--

"Well, Dave, perhaps I'd better wait They ought to be here
before long."

So the two prisoners waited.




CHAPTER XXVI.

_Despair of Uncle Moses.--Frank and Bob endeavor to offer
Consolation.--The Search.--The Discovery at the Convent.--The
Guide.--The old House.--The Captives.--The Alarm given.--Flight
of Uncle Moses and his Party.--Albans! to the Rescue!--The Delivering
Host!_


On leaving the convent, Frank and Bob had hurried back to Albano,
where they found dinner ready, and Uncle Moses waiting for them in
anxious impatience. This anxious impatience was not by any means
diminished when he saw only two out of the four coming back to him,
nor was it alleviated one whit when they informed him that David
and Clive had gone to see some subterranean passage, of the nature
or location of which they had but the vaguest possible conception.
His first impulse was to go forth at once in search of them, and
bring them back with him by main force; and it was only with extreme
difficulty that Frank and Bob dissuaded him from this.

"Why, they're perfectly safe--as safe as if they were here," said
Frank. "It isn't possible for anything at all to happen to them.
The convent guide--a monk--is with them, and a very fine fellow he
is, too. He knows all about the country."

"O, yes; but these monks ain't to my taste. I don't like 'em,"
said Uncle Moses.

"It'll take them an hour to get back here from the place. There's
no use for you to try to go there, for you don't know the way; and
if you did go, why, they might come back and find you gone, and
then we'd have to wait for you. So, you see, the best thing to do,
Uncle Moses, is for us all to set quietly down, get our dinner,
and wait for them to come back."

The numerous frights which Uncle Moses had already been called on
to experience about his precious but too troublesome charges had
always turned out to be groundless; and the result had invariably
been a happy one; yet this did not at all prevent Uncle Moses from
feeling as anxious, as worried, and as unsettled, on this occasion,
as he had ever been before. He sat down to the table, therefore,
because Frank urged it, and he hardly knew how to move without his
cooperation. He said nothing. He was silenced, but not convinced.
He ate nothing. He merely dallied with his knife and fork, and
played listlessly with the viands upon his plate. Frank and Bob
were both as hungry as hunters, and for some time had no eyes but
for their food. At last, however, they saw that Uncle Moses was
eating nothing; whereupon they began to remonstrate with him, and
tried very earnestly to induce him to take something. In vain.
Uncle Moses was beyond the reach of persuasion. His appetite was
gone with his wandering boys, and would not come back until they
should come also. The dinner ended, and then Uncle Moses grew more
restless than ever. He walked out, and paced the street up and
down, every little while coming back to the hotel, and looking
anxiously in to see if the wanderers had returned. Frank and Bob
felt sorry that he should feel so much unnecessary anxiety, but
they did not know what to do, or to say. They had done and said
all that they possibly could. Uncle Moses refused to be comforted,
and so there was nothing more for them to do.

At length the hour passed which Frank had allotted as the time of
their absence, and still they did not come. Uncle Moses now came,
and stared at them with a disturbed face and trembling frame. He
said not a word. The situation was one which, to his mind, rendered
words useless.

"O, come now, Uncle Moses," said Frank; "they're all right. What's
the use of imagining all sorts of nonsense? Suppose they are delayed
a few minutes longer--what of that? They couldn't reckon upon being
back in exactly an hour. The guide said, 'about an hour.' You'll
have to make some allowance."

Uncle Moses tried to wait longer, and succeeded in controlling
himself for about half an hour more. Then he found inaction
intolerable, and insisted on Frank and Bob accompanying him on a
search for the lost ones. Frank suggested the necessity of going
to the convent first, and getting another guide. He left word at
the hotel where they had gone, and why, so that David and Clive
might follow them, or send word; and then they all three set forth
for the convent.

On reaching the place, the first man that they saw was no other
than the guide himself. At this sight even Frank was amazed, and
a little disturbed. He asked him hurriedly where the boys were.

"De boys?" said the guide. "Haf dey not come to de hotel?"

"No."

"But I did leave dem on de road to go back, and dey did go. Dey
must be back."

"But they're not back. And I want to hunt them up," said Frank.
"Where was the road where you say you left them?"

"I will go myself and show you de ver place," said the guide. "Do
not fear. Dere can come no harm. It is not possibile."

With these words the guide set forth to take them', to the place.
These words of the guide added; if possible, to the deep distress
and dismay of Uncle Moses. He was only conscious now that the boys
were without any guide in some unknown, perhaps dangerous place.
If he feared while he supposed that they had a guide, his fears
under these new and worse circumstances were far greater.

On the way the guide explained all about it. He told about the
tunnel, about the path which he had recommended as a short cut. He
declared that it was perfectly straight, and that it was impossible
for any one to get lost between Albano and the place where he left
them. There was no place, he declared, for them to get lost in. It
was quite open--a little valley--that was all.

But this gave no comfort to poor Uncle Moses. He walked along
looking ten years older, with his face full of grief. At length
the guide came to the path along which he had sent David and Clive,
and turning into this, he walked along in the direction where he
had seen them go.

"We haf now," he said, "to walk to de hotel at Albano, and you sall
find dey did come back, and will be dere at dis moments."

"What a joke it would be," cried Frank, "if they have got back,
and have started off after us! I wonder whether they would. Not
they. I don't believe it. They're starving, and will think of
nothing but their dinners."

But poor Uncle Moses refused to see any "joke" at all. It was a
deeply solemn reality to his poor, distracted breast.

At length they came within sight of the house.

As they walked on, there came to their ears a long, shrill yell.
All of them started. At first they did not detect the source of
the sound. Then it was repeated.

"Hallo-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o!"

They looked all around. Frank saw two figures, one at each window
of the old house.

"Hallo-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o!"

The cry was repeated. It came from these two figures. Those must
be David and Clive; but how in the name of wonder had they got
there, and what were they doing? But he said not a word. He merely
pointed, and then started off at a full run, followed first by Bob,
then by the guide, and last by Uncle Moses, who did not yet comprehend
why Frank was running, or where.

A smart run of only a few minutes brought them to the place. There
they saw David at one window, and Clive at the other. Both of them
appeared to be tremendously excited, and were shouting to them most
vociferously, both together, in an utterly confused an unintelligible
manner. At length some words in the midst of their outcries became
distinguishable.

"Keep back! O, keep back! The wild boar! The wild boar! Run for
help! Keep back! You'll be torn to pieces! Keep back! Run for help."

At this Uncle Moses shrank back in spite of himself, and the
guide looked much disturbed; but Frank and Bob stubbornly
stood their ground.

"What do you mean?" cried Frank. "Don't kick up such a row. What
wild boar? Where is he?"

"Underneath!" bawled Clive.

"He's watching us," shouted David.

"He was hid in there, and we came in and waked him. We got up here,
and he won't let us out!"

"He'll spring at you if you come any nearer," shouted David.

"Keep back! O, keep back! I hear him now," bawled Clive.

"Go and get help!" cried David. "Get a gun--or something!"

"Help us out soon," cried Clive; "we're starving!"

"Keep back!" cried Clive.
  do.  cried David.

"Go and get help!" cried Clive.
  do.  cried David.

"Get a gun!" cried Clive.
  do.  cried David.

"Help!" cried Clive.
  do.  cried David.

"Take care!" cried Clive.
  do.  cried David.

"He'll tear you to pieces!" cried Clive.
  do.  cried David.

Etc., etc., etc.!

"Come back," said the guide, in evident anxiety. "We are too near.
We can do notin', We mas get arm."

"But do you think there really is a wild boar there?" asked Frank.

The guide said nothing, but shook his head solemnly, and looked
unutterable things. Mean while he continued to retreat, watching
the small door of the old house, and the rest followed him, as they
thought he knew better what ought to be done than they did. The
guide took up that line of retreat which led towards Albano, and
as he did so he watched the door of the house with evident anxiety,
as though fearful of seeing at any moment the formidable beast
bound forth to rush upon them. But at length, after he had placed
a considerable distance between himself and the old house, he began
to breathe more freely, and to think about what ought next to be
done.

"Do you think it really is a wild boar?" asked Frank once more of
the guide.

"Dey did say dat, dey did see him," said he.

"Yes; but how do they know? They never saw a wild boar," objected
Frank.

"Any man dat sees a wild boar will know him," said the guide.

"I didn't know that there--were any about here."

"About here?"

"Yes; so near the town, and public roads. I thought that an animal
like the wild boar prefers the moat solitary places, and will never
come near where men are living."

"Dat is right," said the guide. "Dat is so. Bot sommataime dey go
wild--dey lose der young--or sommatin like dat, so dey go wild,
and wander, an if dey happen to come near a villa, dey are terrible."

"But how could this one have come here?"

"Italia is full of dem--dey wander about like dis."

"But they live so far off."

"O, no; dis one come from de mountain--not far--dat old house in
de valley, just de place for his den."

After this Frank could doubt no longer, although he had been so
obstinate in his disbelief. The affair of the previous night had
produced a powerful effect on his mind; and he was exceedingly
unwilling to allow himself again to be beguiled into a belief in
any danger that was not real. Had the guide not believed this so
firmly, and insisted on it so strongly, he would have felt certain
that the animal in the house was some commonplace one--a goat--a
dog--anything, rather than a wild boar. However, as it was, he had
nothing left but to believe what was said.

As for Uncle Moses, he was now quite himself again. The boys were
safe, at any rate. True, they were confined in the loft of an old
house, with a ferocious wild beast barring the way to liberty; but
then he reflected that this ferocious wild beast could not get near
them. Had it been a bear, the affair would have been most serious;
but a wild boar, as he knew, could not climb into a loft. For among
the intelligence which David and Clive had managed to communicate,
was the very reassuring fact that the boar could not get at them,
as the loft was only reached by a ladder. The return to Albano
was in every way satisfactory to his feelings, for he saw that this
was the only way of delivering the boys, who could not be rescued
without some more formidable arms than their own unassisted strength.

In a short time they were back in Albano, and soon the news flew
about the town. In accordance with the invariable rule, the story
was considerably enlarged as it passed from mouth to mouth, so that
by the time it reached the last person that heard it,--a poor old
bed-ridden priest, by the way,--it had grown to the following highly
respectable dimensions:--

Two wealthy English milors had gone into the Alban tunnel in search
of adventures. While down there they had discovered the lair of a
wild boar, and had killed the young, the old ones being away. They
had then made good their retreat, carrying their slaughtered victims
with them. The wild boar had returned with the wild sow, and both,
scenting their young pigs' blood in the air, had given chase to
the murderers. These last had fled in frantic haste, and had just
succeeded in finding a refuge in the old windmill, and in climbing
into the upper loft as the infuriated animals came up. Seeing the
legs of the murderers just vanishing up into the hole, one of the
beasts had leaped madly upward, and had bitten off a portion of
the calf of the leg of one of them. Then, in sullen vengeance, the
two fierce animals took up their station there, one in the chamber
below, the other in front of the door, to guard their prey, and
effect their destruction. They had already been there a week. One
of the prisoners had died from the effects of his terrible wound,
and the other was now dying of starvation. Fortunately, Brother
Antonio (the guide) had been told about this in a vision the night
before, had visited the surviving milor, had talked with him from
a safe distance, had seen the terrible animals, and had now come
to Albano to get help towards releasing the unhappy survivor.

From the above it may readily be conjectured that the call for
help was not made in vain. The sufferings of the imprisoned
captive excited universal sympathy, and the presence of the wild
boars in so close proximity, filled all men with a desire to
capture them or slay them. The story that was generally believed
was one which may be briefly described as occupying a position
somewhere about midway between the above startling fiction and
the truth. Such as it was, it had the effect of drawing forth
the population of Albano as it bad never been drawn forth before;
and as they went forth they presented a scene such as those of
which the mediaeval legends tell us, where the whole population
of some town which had been desolated by a dragon, went forth en
masse to do battle with the monster.

So they now marched forth,--
  Men with scythes.
  do. "  hoes.
  do. "  rakes.
  do. "  shovels.
  do. "  tongs.
  do. "  brooms.
  do. "  bean-poles.
  do. "  carving-knives.
  do. "  umbrellas.
  do. "  stones.
  do. "  earthen pans.
  do. "  bricks.
  do. "  charcoal.
  do. "  chairs.
  do. "  spits.
  do. "  bed-posts.
  do. "  crowbars.
  do. "  augers.
  do. "  spades.
  do. "  stakes.
  do. "  clubs.
  Men with staves,
  do. "  opera-glasses.
  do. "  sickles.
  do. "  colters.
  do. "  ploughshares.
  do. "  wheelbarrows.
  do. "  pitchforks.
  do. "  posts.
  do. "  beams.
  do. "  bolts.
  do. "  bars.
  do. "  hinges.
  do. "  pokers.
  do. "  saucepans.
  do. "  mallets.
  do. "  hammers.
  do. "  saws.
  do. "  chisels.
  do. "  ropes.
  do. "  chains.
  do. "  grappling irons.
together with a miscellaneous collection of articles
snatched up at a moment's warning by an excited
multitude, men, women, and children, headed by
Frank, who wielded triumphantly an old fowling-piece,
loaded with a double charge, that could do
no damage to any one save the daring individual
that might venture to discharge it.




CHAPTER XXVII.

_Arma Virumque cano!--The Chase of the Wild Boar!--The Prisoners
at the Window.--The Alban Army.--Wild Uproar.--Three hundred and
sixty-five Pocket Handkerchiefs.--Flame.--Smoking out the
Monster.--A Salamander._


Arma puerosque cano!

Sing, O muse, the immortal Albanian Boar Hunt!

How outside the doomed town of Albano lurked the mighty monster in
his lair.

How the frightened messengers roused the people to action.

How the whole population, stimulated to deeds of bold emprise,
grasped each the weapon that lay nearest, whether bolt, or bar, or
tool of mechanic, or implement of husbandry, and then, joining
their forces, went forth to do battle against the Fell Destroyer.

How the pallid victims, imprisoned in the topmost tower, gazed with
staring eyes upon the mighty delivering host, and shouted out
blessings upon their heads.

How the sight of the pallid victims cheered the bold deliverers,
and drew them nearer to the lair of the monster.

And so forth.

Very well.

To resume.

Stationed at the window, David and Clive saw their friends vanish
in the direction of Albano, and knew that they had gone for help.
This thought so cheered them, that in spite of a somewhat protracted
absence, they bore up well, and diversified the time between
watchings at the window, and listenings at the head of the ladder.
From the window nothing was visible for a long time; but from the
head of the ladder there came up at intervals such sounds as
indicated that the fierce wild boar was still as restless, as
ruthless, as hungry, and as vigilant as ever.

Then came up to their listening ears the same sounds already
described, together with hoarser tones of a more pronouncedly
grunting description, which showed more truly that the beast was
in very truth a wild boar. But Clive did not venture down again,
nor did he even mention the subject. His former attempt had been
most satisfactory, since it satisfied him that no other attempt
could be thought of. In spite of this, however, both the boys had
risen to a more cheerful frame of mind. Their future began to look
brighter, and the prospect of a rescue served to put them both.
into comparative good humor, the only drawback to which was their
now ravenous hunger.

At length the army of their deliverers appeared, and David, who
was watching at the window, shouted to Clive, who was listening at
the opening, whereupon the latter rushed to the other window.

The delivering host drew nigh, and then at a respectable distance
halted and surveyed the scene of action.

Frank and Bob came on, however, without stopping, followed by Uncle
Moses, after whom came the guide. Frank with his old fowling-piece,
Bob with a pitchfork, Uncle Moses with a scythe, and the guide with
a rope. What each one proposed to do was doubtful; but our travellers
had never been strong on weapons of war, and the generous Alban
people seemed to be in the same situation.

As Frank and his companions moved nearer, the rest of the multitude
took courage and followed, though in an irregular fashion.

Soon Frank came near enough to speak.

"Is he there yet?" was his first remark.

"Yes," said Clive.

"Where?"

"At the left end of the lower room, under a pile of fagots."

"Can't you manage to drive him out, so that I can get a shot at
him?" asked Frank, proudly brandishing his weapon.

"O, no. We can't do anything."

"I wish you could," said Frank.

"I wish we could too." said David, fervently.

Upon this Frank talked with the guide. The question was, what
should they do now? The most desirable thing was, to draw the
wild beast out of his lair, so that they might have a fair chance
with him; but, unfortunately, the wild beast utterly refused to
move from his lair.

After some talk with his guide, Frank suggested that a large number
of the crowd should go to the rear, and the left end of the house,
and strike at it, and utter appalling cries, so as to frighten the
wild boar and drive him out. This proposal the guide explained to
the crowd, who at once proceeded with the very greatest alacrity
to act upon it. Most of them were delighted at the idea, of fighting
the enemy in that fashion; and so it happened that the entire crowd
took up their station in a dense mass at the rear of the building;
and then they proceeded to beat upon the walls of the house, to
shout, to yell, and to utter such hideous sounds, that any ordinary
animal would simply have gone mad with fright, and died on the
spot. But this animal proved to be no ordinary one in this respect.
Either he was accustomed to strange noises, or else he had such
nerves of steel, that the present uproar affected him no more than
the sighing of the gentlest summer breeze; indeed, David and Clive
were far more affected, for at the first outbreak of that tumultuous
uproar, they actually jumped from the floor, and thought that the
rickety old house was tumbling about their ears.

During this proceeding, Frank stood bravely in front of the door,
about a dozen yards off, with his rusty fowling-piece; and close
beside him stood Bob with his pitchfork, Uncle Moses with his
scythe, and the guide with his rope.

"He doesn't care for this at all," said Frank, in a dejected tone.
"We must try something else. What shall we do?"

And saying this, he turned once more and talked with the guide.

Meanwhile David and Clive, who had recovered their equanimity,
rushed to the opening, and began to assist their friends by doing
what they could to frighten the wild boar.

"Shoo-o-o-o-o-o!" said David.

"Hs-s-s-s-s-s-s!" said Clive.

"Bo-o-o-o-o-o-o!" said David.

"Gr-r-r-r-r-r-r!" cried Clive.

But the wild boar did not move, even though the uproar without
still continued.

Then Clive went down the ladder a little distance, far enough down
so that by bending, his head was below the upper floor. Then he
took his hat and hurled it with all his might and main at the pile
of fagots.

Then he went up again.

But the wild boar did not move.

Thereupon David went down, and he went a little lower. He took his
hat, and uttering a hideous yell, he threw it with all his force
at the fagots.

But even this failed to alarm the wild boar. David stood for a
moment after this bold deed and listened. The only satisfaction
that he had was the sound of a low, comfortable grunt, that seemed
to show that the present situation was one which was rather
enjoyed than otherwise by this formidable, this indomitable, this
invincible beast.

They came back to the windows in despair, and by this time Frank
had finished his discussion with the guide. He was looking up
anxiously towards them.

"Look here," said he; "that miserable wild boar won't come
out. The guide thinks the only way to get at him is to smoke
him out. The only trouble is about you. Will the smoke bother
yon, do you think?"

"I don't know," said Clive.

"Can you stop up the opening?"

"No."

"Can you keep your heads oat of the windows?"

"We'll try. But I wish you'd only thought of bringing a ladder, so
as to get us out first, before smoking him."

"Yes, I wish we had," said Frank, thoughtfully. "But never mind,"
he added, cheerily, "there's no use going back for one, because,
you see, we'll have you out of that long before a ladder could be
brought here."

It was only by yelling at the top of their voices that they were
able to make themselves heard by one another, for the crowd behind
the house still kept up their yells, and knockings, and thumpings,
and waited to hear that the wild boar had fled. As the time passed
without any such news, they were only stimulated to fresh efforts,
and howled more fearfully and yelled more deafeningly.

"There's an awful waste of energy and power about here, somehow,"
said Frank. "There ought to be some way of getting at that wretched
beast, without all this nonsense. Here we are,--I don't know how
many of us, but the whole population of a town, at any rate, against
one,--and what's worse, we don't seem to make any impression."

Meanwhile the guide had gone off among the crowd, and while Frank
was grumbling, he was busying himself among them, and was engaged
in carrying out a very brilliant idea that had just suggested itself
to him. In a short time he returned with an armful of something,
the nature of which Frank could not quite make out.

"What have you got there?" he asked. "What are you going to do?"

"Dey are all handkerchiefs."

"Handkerchiefs?"

"Yes; de handkerchiefs of de population of Albano. Dey are as many
as de days of de year."

"I should think so," cried Frank, in amazement. "But what are you
going to do with them?"

"Do wit dem? I am going to make a smoke."

"A smoke? What? Are you going to burn them up?"

"Dere is notin else to burn; so I must burn what I can. See, I make
a bundle of dese. I set fire to dem. Dey burn--dey smoke--and de
boar smoke out. Aha! he suffocate--he expire--he run!"

"Well, if that isn't the greatest idea I ever heard of!" cried
Frank. "Handkerchiefs! Why, you must have hundreds of them in
that bundle."

The guide smiled, and made no answer. It was a brilliant idea.
It was all his own. He was proud of it. He was pleased to think
that the number of them was equal to the number of days in the
year. Three hundred and sixty-five handkerchiefs collected from
the good, the virtuous, the self-sacrificing people of Albano,
who were now yelling and howling as before, at the rear of the
house, and diversifying the uproar by loud calls and inquiries
about the wild boar.

The guide smiled cheerily over the handkerchiefs. He was so proud
of his original idea! He went calmly on, forming them into a
rough bundle, doing it very dexterously, so that the bundle might
be tight enough to hold together, yet loose enough to burn, Frank
watched him curiously. So did Bob. So did Uncle Moses. So did Clive.
So did David. Three hundred and sixty-five handkerchiefs! Only
think of it!

At last the work was finished. The handkerchiefs rolled up into a
big ball, loose, yet cohesive, with ends hanging out in all
directions.

"You had better be careful what you do," said Clive. "The end of
the chamber below is full of dry fagots. If they were to catch
fire, what would come of us?"

"O, alla right," said the guide. "Nevare fear. I trow him so
he sall not go near de wood. He make no flame, only de smoke.
Nevare fear."

At this the trepidation which these preparations bad excited in
the minds of Clive and David, departed, and they watched the
subsequent proceedings without a word.

The guide now took the bundle which he had formed out of the
handkerchiefs of the population of Albano, and holding it under
his left arm, he drew forth some matches, and breaking off one, he
struck it against the sole of his boot. It kindled. Thereupon he
held the Same to the bundle of handkerchiefs. The flame caught.
The bundle blazed. The guide held it for some time till the blaze
caught at one after another of the projecting ends of the rolled-up
handkerchiefs, and the flame had eaten its way into the mass, and
then venturing nearer to the doorway, he advanced, keeping a little
on one side, and watching for an opportunity to throw it in. Frank
followed with his rusty gun, Bob with his pitchfork, and Uncle
Moses with his scythe. All were ready, either for attack or defence,
and all the while the bellowing of the crowd behind the house went
on uninterruptedly.

The guide reached at length a point about ten feet from the door.
Then he poised himself and took aim. Then he threw the burning ball.

But his aim was bad. The ball struck the side of the doorway, and
fell outside. In an instant Frank rushed forward, and seizing it,
threw it inside. It fell on the floor, and rolled towards the foot
of the ladder, where it lay blazing, and smouldering, and sending
forth smoke enough to satisfy the most exacting mind.

Then Frank drew back a little, poising his gun, while Bob, Uncle
Moses, and the guide, took up their stations beside him.

The smoke rose up bravely from the burning mass; but after all,
the result was not what had been desired. It rolled up through the
opening above, and gathered in blue masses in the room where Clive
and David were imprisoned. They felt the effects of the pungent
vapors very quickly, more especially in their eyes, which stung,
and smarted and emitted torrents of tears. Their only refuge from
this new evil was to thrust their heads as far out of the windows
as was possible; and this they did by sitting on the window ledge,
clinging to the wall, and projecting their bodies far forward
outside of the house. For a time they were sustained by the hope
that their enemy below was feeling it worse than they were, and
that he would soon relax his vigilant watch and fly. But alas!
that enemy showed no signs of flight, and it soon became evident
to them and to those outside, that all the smoke went to the upper
room, to oppress the prisoners, and but little spread through the
lower room; so little, indeed, that the wild boar did not feel any
inconvenience in particular.

"Can't you do something?" asked Clive, imploringly.

"We can't stand this much longer," said David, despairingly, with
streaming eyes, and choking voice.

Their words sounded faint and low amidst the yelling of the crowd
behind the house, who still maintained their stations there, from
preference, and kept up their terrific outcry. Amid the yells
there came occasional anxious inquiries as to the success of
their efforts. At times messengers would venture from the rear
to the front to reconnoitre. These messengers, however, were
only few in number, and their reconnoitring was of the most
superficial description possible.

The latest experiment of the guide was the cause of more frequent
and more urgent inquiries. So many handkerchiefs had been invested
in this last venture, that it was brought nearer home than before.
Each man felt that he was concerned personally in the affair;
that, in fact, he, in the shape of a representative of so important
a kind as his own handkerchief, was already inside, and assailing
the obstinate monster with a more terrible arm than any which had
yet been employed--smoke and fire.

But the clamor of the crowd had not so much effect on the little
band in front, as the sight of poor Clive and David, who, clinging
to the window with their faces flushed, and their eyes red, swollen,
and streaming with tears, appeared unable to hold out much longer.

"Do something or other, quick," cried Clive.

"I'll have to jump down," said David.

And both, of them tried to push themselves farther out, while their
faces were turned down, and they seemed anxiously measuring with
their eyes the distance between themselves and the ground.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

_The Salamander inaccessible to Fire.--The last Appeal.--Frank
takes Action.--He fires.--Casualty to Frank and Bob.--Onset of the
Monster.--Flight.--Tremendous Sensation.--The Guide's Story.--Another
Legend of Albano.--On to Rome._


For some time Frank had felt an intolerable impatience, and had
been deliberating in his own mind about the best way of ending a
scene which was not only painful to the poor prisoners, but
humiliating to himself. In spite, however, of the immense odds in
favor of the attacking party, Frank could not think of any way of
making those odds available under present circumstances, when the
last plaintive appeal and the desperate proposal of Clive and David
came to his ears. He saw that they were suffering tortures from
the smoke, that they could not endure it much longer, and that they
would have to make a descent from the window. To prevent this, and
the danger that might result from it, Frank resolved upon immediate
action.

So he grasped his rusty fowling-piece with a deadly purpose, and
rushed to the narrow doorway of the old house. Bob followed at once
with his pitchfork, resolved to go wherever Frank led the way, and
to stand by him at all hazards. The guide stood looking on. Uncle
Moses also stood still, and made a feeble attempt to order the two
boys back; but his words were neither heard nor heeded. At this
David and Clive stopped in their desperate design, and looked down
at Frank and Bob.

Frank stood by the doorway.

He put his head inside, and looked all around, cautiously, yet
resolutely. The interior, however, was always a dark place; and
now the fumes of blue smoke made it yet darker. But though his eyes
saw nothing of the fierce beast, his ears could detect the rustle
and the crackle which were produced by the motion of something
among the fagots. This noise showed him plainly where it must be.

Thereupon he hesitated no longer.

He raised his rusty fowling-piece to his shoulder!

He took deadly aim!

He fired!

Bang!!!

The flash illumined the dark interior, and the smoke from the
gun united with the smoke that was already there. Bat simultaneous
with the bang and the flash, Frank felt himself hurled back-ward,
and to the ground, knocked down by the recoil of the gun, flat
on his back.

Up rushed Bob, full of the deepest anxiety.

But just as he reached the prostrate form of Frank, there was a
hurried clatter from within, and then--down he also went--head
first--over and over--struck down by some rushing figure that had
emerged from the pile of fagots, burst through the doorway, and
was now careering wildly over the fields.

Uncle Moses saw that figure, and then hurried up to his two
prostrate boys.

David and Clive from their stations at the window saw it, and then
instantly hurried down the ladder, and out of the house, where they
stood panting and staring wildly at vacancy.

The guide saw it, and as he saw it there came over his face an
expression of an utterly indescribable kind. He clasped his hands
together, and then uttered a series of exclamations for which the
English language, or indeed any other language but the Italian,
can afford no equivalent.

While he was thus standing with clasped hands, vociferating and
staring, in company with David and Clive, at the receding figure,
Frank had sprung to his feet, and so had Bob; Uncle Moses, too,
stood gazing at the object of universal interest; and thus all of
them stood staring, with feelings that defy description, at the
scene before them.

What was this scene that thus held their gaze?

Well, in the first place, there was that valley, already so familiar
to David and Clive--a smooth slope on either side, some olive trees
near, but beyond that all bare, and no houses visible in that
direction. Now, over this open space there was running--so swift
and so straight that it was evidently impelled by pain or panic--what?

_A little black pig!_

A pig, small, as has just been said, an ordinary domestic pig--of
no particular breed--the commonest of animals. Moreover, it was
black. It was also, undoubtedly, as has just been remarked, either
suffering from some of the shot of Frank's rusty gun, or from the
terror that might have been excited by its report. And now this
little black pig was running as fast as its absurd little legs
could carry it--far away across the fields.

"O, holy saints!" cried the guide; "it's the little black pig, that
we missed from the convent yesterday morning--the pig--the little
black pig--the pig--the pig! Is it possible? O, is it possible?"

Every word of this was heard by the boys. They understood it all
now. It seemed also that the little black pig, having accomplished
as much mischief as any single pig can ever hope to bring about,
was evidently making the best of its way to its home, and steering
straight, for the convent. This they saw, and they gazed in silence.
Nothing was said, for nothing could be said. They could not
even look at one another. David and Clive were of course the
most crestfallen; but the others had equal cause for humiliation.
After all their gigantic preparations, their cautions advances,
and their final blow,--to find their antagonist reduced to
this was too much.  Now, the fact is, that if it had really
been a wild boar, Frank's act would have been the same; and
as he acted under the belief that it was so, it was undoubtedly
daring, and plucky, and self-sacrificing; but, unfortunately,
the conclusion of the affair did not allow him to look upon
it in that light.

Now, all this time the crowd behind the house maintained their
shouts and outcries. Under the circumstances, this uproar became
shockingly absurd, and out of place; so the guide hastened to put
an end to it. On the whole, he thought it was not worth while to
tell the truth, for the truth would have so excited the good people
of Albano, that they would, undoubtedly, have taken vengeance on
the strangers for such a disgrace as this. Therefore the guide
decided to let his fancy play around the actual fact, and thus it
was that the guide's story became an idealized version.

It was something to the following effect:--

The terrible wild boar, he said, had been completely indifferent
to their outcry, or had, perhaps, been afraid to come forth and
face so many enemies. He (the guide) had therefore determined to
try to smoke him out, and had borrowed their handkerchiefs for that
purpose, as there were no other combustibles to be had. Of this
they were already aware. He had tied these handkerchiefs together
in such a way that they would burn, and after setting fire to them,
had burled the blazing mass into the house. There it emitted its
stifling fumes till they confused, suffocated, frightened, and
confounded the lurking wild boar. Then, in the midst of this, the
heroic youth, armed with his gun, rushed forward and poured the
deadly contents of his piece into the body of the beast. Had it
been any other annual, it would undoubtedly have perished; but the
wild boar has a hide like sheet iron, and this one was merely
irritated by the shot. Still, though not actually wounded, he was
enraged, and at the same time frightened. In his rage and fear he
started from his lurking-place; he bounded forth, and made a savage
attack upon the party in front of the house. They stood their ground
firmly and heroically, and beat him off; whereupon, in despair, he
turned and fled, vanquished, to his lair in the Alban tunnel.

In this way the guide's vivid imagination saved the travellers from
the fury of the Alban people, by preventing that fury, and supplying
in its place self-complacency. The Alban people felt satisfied with
themselves and with this story. They accepted it as undoubted; they
took it to their homes and to their hearts; they enlarged, adorned,
improved, and lengthened it out, until, finally, it assumed the
amplest proportion, and became one of the most popular legends of
the place. What is still more wonderful, this very guide, who had
first created it, told it so often to parties of tourists, that he
at length grew to believe every word of it himself; and the fact
that he had been an actor in that scene never failed to make his
story quite credible to his hearers.

At this time, however, he had not advanced so far, and he was able
to tell the actual facts of the case to the boys and Uncle Moses.

They were these:--

At the convent they kept a number of pigs, and on the previous
day, early in the morning, they had missed the very animal which
had created this extraordinary scene. He had escaped in some way
from his pen, and had fled for parts unknown. They had searched
for him, but in vain. He must have wandered to this old house at
the first, and taken up his quarters here until he was so rudely
driven out from them. The guide could only hope that the little
black pig would learn a lesson from this of the evils of running
away from home.

To all this the boys listened without any interest whatever, and
did not condescend to make any remarks. The guide himself became
singularly uninteresting in their eyes, and they got rid of him as
soon as possible, paying him liberally, however for the additional
trouble to which they had put him. Uncle Moses also had some words
of remonstrance, mingled with congratulation, to offer to David
and Clive; but these also were heard in silence. They might have
found ample excuse for their delay in this ruined house; but they
did not feel inclined to offer any excuses whatever.

The fact is, this reduction of the great wild boar to the very
insignificant proportions of a little black pig--commonplace,
paltry, and altogether contemptible--was too much for their
sensitive natures. It had placed them all in a false position.
They were not cowards, but they had all been alarmed by the most
despicable of animals. Frank felt profoundly humiliated, and
reflected, with a blush, upon the absurd figure that he had made
of himself in hesitating so long before such an enemy, and then
advancing upon it in such a way. Bob's feelings were very similar.
But it was for David and Clive that the deepest mortification
was reserved. They had been the cause of it all. It was their
vivid imaginations which had conjured up out of nothing a terrible
wild beast, which had kept them prisoners there for hours in
loneliness and hunger, and which had thrown ridicule upon the
population of Albano, by drawing them forth to do battle with
one poor little harmless runaway pig.

As they walked back to the hotel, they kept far in the rear of the
citizens of Albano; and Uncle Moses began to "improve" the occasion,
and moralized in a solemn strain.

"Wal," said he, "my dear boys, I must say that you hev one and all
the greatest talent for gittin' yourselves into trouble that I ever
see. Ever sence we landed on these ill-fated shores you've ben
a-goin' it, and a drivin' of me wild with anxiety; and the only
thing I can say is, that thus far your misadventoors hain't turned
out so bad as I have feared in each individdool case. In fact thar's
allus ben what they call a anticlimax; that is, jest at the moment
when thar'd ought to be a te-rific di-saster, thar's ben nothin'
but some trivial or laugherble tummination. Now, I'm free to confess,
boys, that thus far my fears hev ben gerroundless. I'm free to
say that thus far thar hain't ben what we can conscuentionsly call
a accident. But what of that? The incidents hev all ben thar. Every
individdool thing that can make a accident has ben thar--it's ony
the conclusion that has somehow broke down. And now I ask you,
boys, what air we goin' to do about it? Is this to go on forever?
Is it perrobable that advuss circumstances air goin' to allus
eventooate thus? I don't believe it. The pitcher that goes often
to the fountain is broke at last, and depend upon it, if you go
for to carry on this way, and thrust yourselves in every danger
that comes in your way--somethin'll happen--mind I tell you."

This, and much more of the same sort, did Uncle Moses say; but to
all of it the boys paid very little attention. In fact, the subject
was to all of them so painful a one, that they could not bear to
have it brought forward even as the text of a sermon. They only
wanted to forget all about it as soon as possible, and let it sink
into complete oblivion.

On reaching the hotel they found that it was quite late; but they
were eager to go on. Albano, the historic, had lost all its charms
for them. They did not wish to remain, a moment longer. They could
not hope now to see Rome to advantage, for the daylight would be
over long before they could enter the city; still they were determined
to go on to Rome, even if they had to enter it after dark.
Accordingly, the carriage was made ready as soon as possible; Clive
and David procured some fragments of food, which they took into
the carriage with them, to devour on their way; and thus they left
Albano, and drove on to Rome.




END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Among the Brigands, by James de Mille

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMONG THE BRIGANDS ***

***** This file should be named 29297.txt or 29297.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/2/9/29297/

Produced by Gardner Buchanan

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
