The Project Gutenberg EBook of In the Days of  Drake, by J. S. Fletcher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: In the Days of  Drake

Author: J. S. Fletcher

Release Date: July 4, 2009 [EBook #29304]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE DAYS OF  DRAKE ***




Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 IN THE DAYS OF DRAKE

 BY

 J. S. FLETCHER,

 AUTHOR OF

 "WHEN CHARLES I. WAS KING," "WHERE
 HIGHWAYS CROSS."

 CHICAGO AND NEW YORK:
 RAND, MCNALLY & COMPANY.
 MDCCCXCVII.




Copyright, 1897, by Rand, McNally & Co.




INTRODUCTION.


In the whole history of the English people there is no period so
absolutely heroic, so full of enthralling interest, as that in which
the might of England made itself apparent by land and sea--the period
which saw good Queen Bess mistress of English hearts and Englishmen and
sovereign of the great beginnings which have come to such a magnificent
fruition under Victoria. That was indeed a golden time--an age of great
venture and enterprise--a period wherein men's hearts were set on
personal valor and bravery--the day of great deeds and of courage most
marvelous. To write down a catalogue of all the names that then were
glorious, to make a list of all the daring deeds that then were
done--this were an impossible task for the most painstaking of
statisticians, the most conscientious of historians and chroniclers.
For there were men in those days who achieved world-wide fame, such as
Drake, Frobisher, Hawkins, Raleigh, Grenville, and Gilbert--but there
were also other men, the rough "sea-dogs" of that time, whose names have
never been remembered, or even recorded, and who were yet heroes of a
quality not inferior to their commanders and leaders. All men of that
age whose calling led them to adventure and enterprise could scarcely
fail to find opportunity for heroism, self-denial, and sacrifice, and
thus the Elizabethan Englishman of whatever station stands out to us of
these later days as a great figure--the type and emblem of the England
that was to be. It is this fact that makes the Elizabethan period so
fascinating and so full of romance and glamour. Whenever we call it up
before our mind's eye it is surrounded for us with all those qualities
which go toward making a great picture. There is the awful feud 'twixt
England, the modern spirit making toward progress and civilization, and
Spain, the well-nigh worn-out retrogressive force that would dam the
river of human thought. There is the spectacle of the Armada, baffled
and beaten, and of the English war-ships under men like Drake and
Frobisher, dropping like avenging angels upon some Spanish port and
working havoc on the Spanish treasure galleons. There, too, are the
figures of men like Grenville and Raleigh, born adventurers, leaders of
men, who knew how to die as bravely and fearlessly as they had lived.
And beyond all the glory and adventure there looms in the background of
the picture the black cruelties of Spain, practiced in the dark corners
of the earth, against which the English spirit of that day never ceased
from protesting with speech and sword. It was well for the world that in
that fierce contest England triumphed. Had Spain succeeded in
perpetuating its hellish system, how different would life in east and
west have been! But it was God's will that not Spain but England should
win--and so to-day we find the English-speaking peoples of the world in
Great Britain and America, in Australia and Africa, free, enlightened,
full of great purpose and noble aims, working out in very truth their
own salvation. It is when one comes to think of this, that one first
realizes the immeasurable thanks due to the heroes, known and unknown,
of the Elizabethan age. Whether they stand high on the scroll of fame or
lie forgotten in some quiet graveyard or in the vast oceans which they
crossed, it was they, and they only, who laid the great foundations of
the England and the United States of to-day.

J. S. FLETCHER.




IN THE DAYS OF DRAKE.




CHAPTER I.

OF MY HOME, FRIENDS, AND SURROUNDINGS.


Now that I am an old man, and have some leisure, which formerly I did
not enjoy, I am often minded to write down my memories of that
surprising and remarkable adventure of mine, which began in the year
1578, and came to an end, by God's mercy, two years later.

There are more reasons than one why I should engage in this task. Every
Christmas brings a houseful of grandchildren and young folks about me,
and they, though they have heard it a dozen times already, are never
tired of hearing me re-tell the story which seems to them so wonderful.

Then, again, I am often visited by folk who have heard of my travels,
and would fain have particulars of them from my own lips; so that
ofttimes I have to tell my tale, or part of it, a dozen times in the
year. Nay, upon one occasion I even told it to the King's majesty, which
was when I went up to London on some tiresome law business. Sir Ralph
Wood, who is my near neighbor and a Parliament man, had mentioned me to
the King, and so I had to go to Whitehall and tell my story before the
court, which was a hard matter for a plain-spoken country gentleman, as
you may well believe.

Now all these matters have oft prompted me to write down my story, so
that when any visitor of mine might ask me for it, I could satisfy him
without trouble to myself, by simply putting the manuscript into his
hand and bidding him read what I had there written. But until this
present time I have never seemed to have opportunity such as I desired,
for my duties as magistrate and church-warden have been neither light
nor unimportant. Now that I have resigned them to younger hands, I have
leisure time of my own, and therefore I shall now proceed to carry out
the intention which has been in my mind for many years.

I was born at York, in the year 1558. My father, Richard Salkeld
was the youngest son of Oliver Salkeld, lord-of-the-manor of
Beechcot-on-the-Wold, and he practiced in York as an attorney. Whether
he did well or ill in this calling I know not, for at the early age of
six years I was left an orphan. My father being seized by a fever, my
mother devoted herself to nursing him, which was a right and proper
thing to do; but the consequence was disastrous, for she also contracted
the disease, and they both died, leaving me alone in the world.

However, I was not long left in this sad condition, for there presently
appeared my uncle, Sir Thurstan Salkeld of Beechcot, who settled my
father's affairs and took me away with him. I was somewhat afraid of him
at first, for he was a good twenty years older than my father, and wore
a grave, severe air. Moreover, he had been knighted by the Queen for his
zealous conduct in administering the law. But I presently found him to
be exceeding kind of heart, and ere many months were over I had grown
fond of him, and of Beechcot. He had never married, and was not likely
to, and so to the folks round about his home he now introduced me as his
adopted son and heir. And thus things went very pleasantly for me, and,
as children will, I soon forgot my early troubles.

I think we had nothing to cause us any vexation or sorrow at Beechcot
until Dame Barbara Stapleton and her son Jasper came to share our lot.
Jasper was then a lad of my own age, and like me an orphan, and the
nephew of Sir Thurstan. His mother, Sir Thurstan's sister, had married
Devereux Stapleton, an officer in the Queen's household, and when she
was left a widow she returned to Beechcot and quartered herself and her
boy on her brother. Thereafter we had trouble one way or another, for
Dame Barbara could not a-bear to think that I was preferred before her
own boy as Sir Thurstan's heir. Nor did she scruple to tell Sir Thurstan
her thoughts on the matter, on one occasion at any rate, for I heard
them talking in the great hall when they fancied themselves alone.

"'Tis neither right nor just," said Dame Barbara, "that you should make
one nephew your son and heir to the exclusion of the other. What! is not
Jasper as much your own flesh and blood as Humphrey?"

"You forget that Humphrey is a Salkeld in name as well as in blood,"
said Sir Thurstan. "If the lad's father, my poor brother Richard, had
lived, he would have succeeded me as lord of Beechcot. Therefore, 'tis
but right that Dick's boy should step into his father's place."

"To the hurt of my poor Jasper!" sighed Dame Barbara.

"Jasper is a Stapleton," answered Sir Thurstan. "However, sister, I will
do what is right as regards your lad. I will charge myself with the cost
of his education and training, and will give him a start in life, and
maybe leave him a goodly sum of money when I die. Therefore, make your
mind easy on that point."

But I knew, though I was then but a lad, that she would never give over
fretting herself at the thought that I was to be lord of all the broad
acres and wide moors of Beechcot, and that Jasper would be but a
landless man. And so, though she never dare flout or oppress me in any
way, for fear of Sir Thurstan's displeasure, she, without being openly
unfavorable, wasted no love on me, and no doubt often wished me out of
the way.

At that time Jasper and I contrived to get on very well together. We
were but lads, and there was no feeling of rivalry between us. Indeed, I
do not think there would ever have been rivalry between us if that
foolish woman, my Aunt Barbara, had not begun sowing the seeds of
discord in her son's mind. But as soon as he was old enough to
understand her, she began talking to him of Beechcot and its glories,
pointing out to him the wide park and noble trees, the broad acres
filled with golden grain, and the great moors that stretched away for
miles towards the sea; and she said, no doubt, how grand a thing it
would be to be lord of so excellent an estate, and how a man might enjoy
himself in its possession. Then she told him that I was to have all
these things when Sir Thurstan died, and thereafter my cousin Jasper
hated me. But he let his hate smoulder within him a good while before
he showed it openly. One day, however, when we were out in the park with
our bows, he began to talk of the matter, and after a time we got to
high words.

"My mother tells me, Humphrey," said he, "that when my uncle Thurstan
dies all these fair lands will pass to thee. That is not right."

"'Tis our uncle's land to do with as he pleases," I answered. "We have
naught to do with it. If he likes to leave it to me, what hast thou to
say in the matter? 'Tis his affair; not thine, Master Jasper. Besides, I
am a Salkeld, and you are not."

"Is not my mother a Salkeld?" he asked.

"It counts not by the mother," I answered. "And, moreover, my father
would have heired the estate had he lived. But be not down-hearted about
it, Jasper, I will see that thou art provided for. When I am lord of
Beechcot I will make thee my steward."

Now, that vexed him sore, and he flew into a violent rage, declaring
that he would serve no man, and me last of all; and so violent did he
become that he was foolish to look at, and thereupon I laughed at him.
At that his rage did but increase, and he presently fitted an arrow to
his bow and shot at me meaning, I doubt not, to put an end to me
forever. But by good fortune his aim mischanced, and the arrow did no
more than pin me to the tree by which I stood, passing through my
clothes between the arm and the body. And at that we were both sobered,
and Jasper cooled his hot temper.

"What wouldst thou have done if the arrow had passed through my heart,
as it might easily have chanced to do?" I inquired of him.

"I would have gone home and told them that I had killed thee by
accident," he answered readily enough. "Thou wouldst have been dead,
and therefore no one could have denied my tale."

I said naught to that, but I there and then made up my mind that if ever
I went shooting with him again I would keep my eyes open. For I now saw
that he was not only false, but also treacherous. Indeed, I was somewhat
minded to go to my uncle and tell him what had taken place between us,
but I remembered that the good knight was not fond of carried tales, and
therefore I refrained.

After that there was peace for some years, Dame Barbara having evidently
made up her mind to take things as they were. She was mortally afraid of
offending Sir Thurstan, for she had no jointure or portion of her own,
and was totally dependent upon his charity for a sustenance. This made
her conduct herself towards me with more consideration than I should
otherwise have received from her. Possibly she thought that it might be
well to keep in good favor with me in view of my succeeding Sir
Thurstan at no distant period. At any rate I had no more trouble with
Jasper, and I overheard no more unpleasant discussions between Dame
Barbara and the knight.

From our tenth year upwards Jasper and myself daily attended the
vicarage, in order to be taught Greek, Latin, and other matters by the
Reverend Mr. Timotheus Herrick, vicar of Beechcot. He was a tall, thin,
spindle-shanked gentleman, very absent-minded, but a great scholar. It
was said of him, that if he had not married a very managing woman in the
shape of Mistress Priscilla Horbury, he would never have got through the
world. He had one child, Rose, of whom you will hear somewhat in this
history, and she was three years younger than myself. When Jasper and I
were thirteen and Rose ten years of age, she began to learn with us, and
presently made such progress that she caught up to us, and then passed
us, and so made us ashamed of ourselves. After that she was always in
advance of us, and we used to procure her help in our lessons; then she
lorded it over us, as little maidens will over big lads, and we were her
humble slaves in everything.




CHAPTER II.

PHARAOH NANJULIAN.


Now it chanced that one afternoon in the June of 1575 Jasper and I were
on our way from the vicarage to the manor, our lessons for that day
being over. We had to pass through the village of Beechcot on our
homeward journey, and it was when we were opposite the inn, then kept by
Geoffrey Scales, that there occurred an incident which was to have a
greater influence upon our future lives than we then imagined. In the
wide space by the inn, formed by the meeting of four roads, there was
gathered together a goodly company of people, who seemed to be talking
as one man, and looking as with one eye at something in their midst.

"What have we here?" said Jasper, as we paused. "Is it some bear-ward
with his bear, or one of those wandering Italians that go about with a
guitar and a monkey?"

"I hear no music," said I. "It seems to be something of more importance
than either bear or monkey. Let us see for ourselves."

So we ran forward and joined the crowd, which began presently to make
way for us. Then we saw that nearly everybody in the village, saving
only the men who were at work in the fields, had run together with one
accord in order to stare and wonder at a man, who sat on the bench just
outside the ale-house door. It was clear to me at once that he was not a
native of those parts, and might possibly be a foreigner. He seemed to
be of thirty-five or forty years of age, his skin and hair were very
dark, and he wore a great black beard, which looked as if it had known
neither comb nor scissors for many a long month. Also he was of great
size and height, and on his brawny arms, which were bare from the
elbows downwards, there were figures and patterns traced in blue and
red, so that I at once set him down for a sailor, who had seen much life
in strange countries. As for his garments, they were much stained and
worn, and his feet, which were naked, were evidently callous and
hardened enough to stand even the roughest roads.

When we first set eyes upon him the man was leaning back against the
wall of the ale-house, looking defiantly at John Broad, the constable,
who stood by him, and at Geoffrey Scales, the landlord, who stood behind
Broad. In the rear, holding his chin with one hand, and looking
exceeding rueful of countenance, stood Peter Pipe, the drawer. All round
them hung the crowd of men and women, lads and lasses, staring
open-mouthed at the great man with the black beard.

"What's all this?" said I, as we pushed our way to the front.

The sailor jumped to his feet and touched his forelock civilly enough.
He looked at John Broad.

"Marry, Master Humphrey," answered John Broad, "you see this great
fellow here, with a beard so long as the Turks? A' cometh into our
village here, God knows where from, and must needs fall to breaking the
heads of peaceable and honest men."

"'Tis a lie," said the sailor. "At least, that part of it which refers
to peaceable and honest men. As to the breaking of heads, I say naught."

"But whose head hath he broken?" asked Jasper.

"Mine, sir," whined Peter Pipe. "God ha' mercy!--it sings like Benjamin
Good's bees when they are hiving."

"And why did he break thy head?"

"Let him say," said the sailor. "Aye, let him say."

Peter Pipe shuffled his feet and looked out of his eye-corners. He was
a creature of no spirit, and always in deadly fear of something or
somebody.

"Maybe he will clout me again," said Peter.

"Fear not," said the sailor. "I would not hurt thee, thou
two-penny-halfpenny drawer of small beer. Say on."

"This man, then, Master Humphrey, a' cometh into our kitchen and demands
a pot of ale. So I fetched it to him and he paid me--"

"Was his money good?"

"Oh, aye, good money enough, I warrant him," said Geoffrey Scales.

"I said naught to the contrary," continued Peter. "But no sooner had he
drunk than he fell to cursing me for a thief, and swore that I had
served him with small beer, and with that he caught up the tankard and
heaved it at me with such force that my jaw is well-nigh broken."

"And didst serve him with small beer?"

"I serve him with small beer! Nay, Master Humphrey, bethink you. As if I
did not know the difference betwixt small beer and good ale!"

"That thou dost not," said the sailor. "Young sir, listen to me. I know
thee not, and I fear thee not, and I know not why I should trouble to
talk to thee. But thou seemest to be in authority."

"'Tis Sir Thurstan's nephew," whispered the constable.

"What know I of Sir Thurstan? Young sir, I am a man of Cornwall, and my
name it is Pharaoh Nanjulian. They know me in Marazion. I have been on a
venture to the North Seas--plague take it, there is naught but ice and
snow there, with white bears twenty feet long--"

"List to him!" said someone in the crowd.

"I will show thee the white bear's trick, an' thou doubtest me. But to
proceed. Young sir, we were wrecked--sixteen good men and true we
were--off the Norroway coasts, which methinks are fashioned of iron, and
we underwent trials, yea, and hunger. After a time we came to
Drontheim--"

"Where is that?"

"A sea-coast town of Norroway, young sir. And thence we took ship to
Scarborough. But there was no ship at Scarborough going south, wherefore
I set out for mine own country on foot. And to-day, which is my first on
this journey, I came to this inn for a pint of good ale, and paid my
money for it too, whereupon yonder scurvy knave gives me small beer,
thin as water. And I, being somewhat hot and choleric of temper, threw
the measure at him, and rewarded him for his insolence. So now I will go
on my way, for 'tis a brave step from here to Marazion, and I love not
ye north-country folk."

"Not so fast," quoth John Broad. "Thou must needs see Sir Thurstan
before we let thee go."

"What want I with Sir Thurstan?"

"Marry, naught; but he may want something with thee. We allow not that
wandering rascals shall break the peace in our village."

"If thou talkest to me like that, Master Constable, I shall break thy
head, and in such a fashion that thou wilt never more know what peace
is. We men of Devon and Cornwall allow no man to lord it over us."

"Thou shalt to Sir Thurstan, anyhow," said John Broad. "We will see what
the law says to thee. I fear me thou art a man of lawless behavior; and,
moreover, there are strange characters about at this moment."

"Dame Good had two fowls stolen last night," said a voice in the crowd.

"Yea, and there are two fine linen sheets stolen from the vicarage
hedge," piped another.

"He looks a strange mortal," said a third.

"And wears gold rings in his ears," cried a fourth. "A' must be a
foreigner, and maybe a Papist."

"Foreigner or Papist I am not, good folks, but a true-born Englishman,
and a good hater of all Frenchmen and Spaniards. So let me go forward
peaceably. As for the clout I gave Master Peter, here is a groat to mend
it. I have but a round dozen, or I would give him two."

With that he would have moved forward, but John Broad barred the way.

"Not till I have taken thee before his worship," said he. "What, am I
not constable of this parish, and duly sworn to arrest all suspicious
persons, sturdy beggars, and what not?"

The sailor paused and drew his breath, and looked at the constable's
round figure as if in doubt what to do.

"I am loth to hurt thee," said he, "but if I hit thee, Master Constable,
thou wilt never more drink ale nor smell beef. Know that once in
Palermo there came upon me a great brown bear that had got loose from
his ward, and I hit him fair and square between the eyes, and he fell,
and when they took him up, his skull it was cracked. Is thy skull harder
than the bear's?"

At this John Broad trembled and shrank away, but continued to mutter
something about the law and its majesty.

"You had better go with him before my uncle," said I. "He will deal
justly with thee. He is hard upon no man, but it might fare ill with
John Broad if Sir Thurstan knew that he had suffered you to go
unapprehended."

"Oh, if you put it in that way," he answered, and turned again, "I will
go with you. Heaven send that the good gentleman do not detain me, for I
would fain reach York to-night."

So we all moved off to the manor, and as many as could find room crowded
into the great hall where Sir Thurstan sat to deliver judgment on all
naughty and evilly-disposed persons. And presently he came and took his
seat in the justice-chair and commanded silence, and bade John Broad
state his case. Then Peter Pipe gave his testimony, and likewise
Geoffrey Scales, and then Sir Thurstan called upon the sailor to have
his say, for he made a practice of never condemning any man unheard.

After he had heard them all, my uncle considered matters for a moment
and then delivered judgment, during which everybody preserved strict
silence.

"I find, first of all," said he, "that Peter Pipe, the drawer, did serve
this man with small beer instead of good ale. For what! I watched the
man as he told his story, and he did not lie."

"I thank your honor," said the sailor.

"Wherefore I recommend Geoffrey Scales to admonish Peter at his
convenience--"

"Yea, and with a stick, your honor," said Geoffrey.

"So that he transgress not again. Nevertheless, the sailor did wrong to
maltreat Peter. There is law to be had, and no man should administer his
own justice. Wherefore I fine thee, sailor, and order thee to pay ten
groats to the court."

"As your honor wills," said the man, and handed over the money. "I have
now one left to see me all the way to Marazion. But justice is justice."

"Clear my hall, John Broad," said my uncle. This order the constable
carried out with promptitude. But when the sailor would have gone, Sir
Thurstan bade him stay, and presently he called him to his side and held
converse with him.

"Dost thou propose to walk to Marazion?" he asked.

"With God's help, sir," answered the man.

"Why not try Hull? Thou mightest find a ship there for a southern port."

"I had never thought of it, your honor. How far away may Hull be?"

"Forty miles. What means hast thou?"

"But one groat, sir. But then I have become used to hardships."

"Try Hull: thou wilt find a ship there, I doubt not. Hold, here are
twelve shillings for thee. Humphrey, have him to the kitchen and give
him a good meal ere he starts."

"Your honor," said the sailor, "is a father and a brother to me. I shall
not forget."

"Do thy duty," said Sir Thurstan.

So I took the man to the kitchen, and fed him, and soon he went away.

"Young master," said he, "if I can ever repay this kindness I will, yea,
with interest. Pharaoh Nanjulian never forgets."

With that he went away, and we saw him no more.




CHAPTER III.

ROSE.


There being no disposition on my part to renew our differences, and none
on his to lead up to an open rupture, my cousin Jasper Stapleton and I
got on together very well, until we had reached the age of nineteen
years, when a new and far more important matter of contention arose
between us.

Now, our first quarrel had arisen over the ultimate disposition of my
uncle's estates; our second was as to which should be lord over the
heart and hand of a fair maiden. To both of us the second quarrel was
far more serious than the first--which is a thing that will readily be
understood by all young folks. It seemed to both of us that not all the
broad acres of Beechcot, nay, of Yorkshire itself, were to be reckoned
in comparison with the little hand of Mistress Rose Herrick.

For by that time Mistress Rose had grown to be a fair and gracious
maiden, whose golden hair, floating from under her dainty cap, was a
dangerous snare for any hot-hearted lad's thoughts to fall entangled in.
So sweet and gracious was she, so delightful her conversation, so
bewitching her eyes, that I marvel not even at this stretch of time that
I then became her captive and slave for life. Nor do I marvel, either,
that Jasper Stapleton was equally enslaved by her charms. It had indeed
been wonderful if he or I had made any resistance to them.

As to myself, the little blind god pierced my heart with his arrow at a
very early stage. Indeed, I do not remember any period of my life when I
did not love Rose Herrick more dearly than anything else in God's fair
world. To me she was all that is sweet and desirable, a companion whose
company must needs make the path of life a primrose path; and,
therefore, even when I was a lad, I looked forward to the time when I
might take her hand in mine, and enter with her upon the highway which
all of us must travel.

However, when I was come to nineteen years of age, being then a tall and
strapping lad, and somewhat grave withal, it came to my mind that I
should find out for myself what feelings Rose had with regard to me, and
therefore I began to seek her company, and to engage her in more
constant conversation than we had hitherto enjoyed. And the effect of
this was that my love for her, which had until then been of a placid
nature, now became restless and unsatisfied, and longed to know whether
it was to be answered with love or finally dismissed.

Thus I became somewhat moody and taciturn, and took to wandering about
the land by myself, by day or night, so that Sir Thurstan more than
once asked me if I had turned poet or fallen in love. Now, both these
things were true, for because I had fallen in love I had also turned
poet; as, I suppose, every lover must. In sooth, I had scribbled lines
and couplets, and here and there a song, to my sweet mistress, though I
had never as yet mustered sufficient courage to show her what I had
written. That, I think, is the way with all lovers who make rhymes.
There is a satisfaction to them in the mere writing of them; and I doubt
not that they often read over their verses, and in the reading find a
certain keen and peculiar sort of pleasure which is not altogether
unmixed with pain.

Now it chanced that one day in the early spring of 1578 I had been
wandering about the park of Beechcot, thinking of my passion and its
object, and my thoughts as usual had clothed themselves in verses.
Wherefore, when I again reached the house, I went into the library and
wrote down my rhymes on paper, in order that I might put them away with
my other compositions. I will write them down here from the copy I then
made. It lies before me now, a yellow, time-stained sheet, and somehow
it brings back to me the long-dead days of happiness which came before
my wonderful adventure.

      TO ROSE.

     When I first beheld thee, dear,
       Day across the land was breaking,
     April skies were fine and clear
       And the world to life was waking;
          All was fair
          In earth and air:
     Spring lay lurking in the sedges:
          Suddenly
          I looked on thee
     And straight forgot the budding hedges.

     When I first beheld thee, sweet,
       Madcap Love came gayly flying
     Where the woods and meadows meet:
       Then I straightway fell a-sighing.
          Fair, I said,
          Are hills and glade
     And sweet the light with which they're laden,
          But ah, to me,
          Nor flower nor tree
     Are half so sweet as yonder maiden.

     Thus when I beheld thee, love,
       Vanished quick my first devotion,
     Earth below and heaven above
       And the mystic, magic ocean
          Seemed to me
          No more to be.
     I had eyes for naught but thee, dear,
          With his dart
          Love pierced my heart
     And thou wert all in all to me, dear!

Now, as I came to an end of writing these verses I was suddenly aware of
someone standing at my side, and when I looked up, with anger and
resentment that anyone should spy upon my actions, I saw my cousin
Jasper at my elbow, staring at the two words, "To Rose," which headed
my composition. I sprang to my feet and faced him.

"That is like you, cousin," said I, striving to master my anger, "to act
the spy upon a man."

"As you please," he answered. "I care what no man thinks of my actions.
But there," pointing to the paper, "is proof of what I have long
suspected. Humphrey, you are in love with Mistress Rose Herrick!"

"What if I am?" said I.

"Nothing, but that I also am in love with her, and mean to win her," he
replied.

After that there was silence.

"We cannot both have her," said I at last.

"True," said he. "She shall be mine."

"Not if I can prevent it, cousin. At any rate she has the principal say
in this matter."

"Thou hast not spoken to her, Humphrey?"

"What is that to thee, cousin? But I have not."

"Humphrey, thou wilt heir our uncle's lands. Thou hast robbed me of my
share in them. I will not be robbed of my love. Pish! do not stay me.
Thou art hot-tempered and boyish, but I am cold as an icicle. It is men
like me whose love is deep and determined, and therefore I swear thou
shalt not come between me and Rose Herrick."

I watched him closely, and saw that he valued nothing of land or money
as he valued his passion, and that he would stay at nothing in order to
gain his own ends. But I was equally firm.

"What do you propose, Jasper?" I asked. "It is for Mistress Rose Herrick
to decide. We cannot both address her at the same time."

"True," he said; "true. I agree that you have the same right to speak to
her that I have. Let us draw lots. The successful one shall have the
first chance. Do you agree?"

I agreed willingly, because I felt certain that even if Jasper beat me
he would have no chance with Rose. There was something in my heart that
told me she would look on me, and on me only, with favor.

We went out into the stackyard, and agreed that each of us should draw a
straw from a wheat-stack. He that drew the longest straw should have the
first right of speaking. Then we put our hands to the stack and drew our
straws. I beat him there--my straw was a good foot longer than his.

"You have beaten me again," he said. "Is it always to be so? But I will
wait, cousin Humphrey."

And so he turned away and left me.

Now, seeing how matters stood, it came to my mind that I had best put my
fortune to the test as quickly as possible, and therefore I made haste
over to the vicarage in order to find Rose and ask her to make me
either happy or miserable. And as good luck would have it, I found her
alone in the vicarage garden, looking so sweet and gracious that I was
suddenly struck dumb, and in my confusion could think of naught but that
my face was red, my attire negligent, and my whole appearance not at all
like that of a lover.

"Humphrey," said Rose, laughing at me, "you look as you used to look in
the days when you came late to your lessons, from robbing an orchard or
chasing Farmer Good's cattle, or following the hounds. Are you a boy
again?"

But there she stopped, for I think she saw something in my eyes that
astonished her. And after that I know not what we said or did, save that
presently we understood one another, and for the space of an hour
entirely forgot that there were other people in the world, or, indeed,
that there was any world at all.

So that evening I went home happy. And as I marched up to the manor,
whistling and singing, I met my cousin. He looked at me for a moment,
and then turned on his heel.

"I see how it is," he said. "You have no need to speak."

"Congratulate me, at any rate, cousin," I cried.

"Time enough for that," said he.

And from that moment he hated me, and waited his opportunity to do me a
mischief.




CHAPTER IV.

FOUL PLAY.


When a man has conceived a deadly hatred of one of his fellow-men, and
has further resolved to let slip no chance of satisfying it, his revenge
becomes to him simply a question of time, for the chance is sure to come
sooner or later.

It was this conviction, I think, that kept my cousin Jasper Stapleton
quiet during the next few months. He knew that in due course his revenge
would have an opportunity of glutting itself, and for that evil time he
was well content to wait. You may wonder that so young a man should have
possessed such cruel feelings toward one who had never done him any
willful wrong. But as events proved Jasper was of an exceeding cruel
and malignant nature, and his wickedness was all the worse because it
was of a cold and calculating sort. If a man gave him an honest
straightforward blow or buffet, it was not Jasper's way to strike back
there and then, face to face, but rather to wait until some evil chance
presented itself--and then, his adversary's back being turned, Jasper
would plant a dagger between his shoulders. In other words, he bided his
time, and when he did strike, struck at an unguarded place.

Now at that time I had very little idea that Jasper entertained such
hard thoughts of me--my knowledge of his cruelty only came by later
experience. All that spring and summer of 1578 I was living in a very
paradise, and cared not for Jasper or Dame Barbara or anybody else. My
uncle had sanctioned the betrothal of Rose Herrick and myself, and the
good vicar had given us his blessing in choice Latin. There had been
some little scolding of us from both manor-house and vicarage, for Sir
Thurstan and Master Timotheus both thought us too young to talk of love
and marriage; but in the end our pleadings prevailed, and it was
arranged that we were to consider ourselves plighted lovers, and that
our wedding was to take place in two years. This settled, there was
naught but happiness for me and Rose. I think we spent most of that
summer out of doors, wandering about the Chase, and talking as lovers
will, of all the days to come. Never once did there come a cloud over
the fair heaven of our hopes, unless it was once, when in a remote
corner of the woods, we suddenly came face to face with Jasper
Stapleton. He had been out with his bow, and when we met him he was
advancing along the path, with a young deer slung over his shoulders. At
the sound of our footsteps on the crackling underwood, he stopped,
looked up, and, recognizing us, turned hastily away and vanished in the
thick bushes.

"Why did Jasper go away so suddenly?" asked Rose.

"Because he was not minded to meet us," said I.

"But why? And I have not seen him these many weeks--he seems to avoid
me. Did you mark his face, Humphrey,--how white it turned when he set
eyes on us? And there was a look on it that frightened me--a look that
seemed to promise no love for you, Humphrey," she said.

"Have no fear, sweetheart," I answered. "Jasper is a strange fellow,
but he will do me no harm. He is only disappointed because I have won
a flower that he would fain have possessed himself."

"What do you mean?" she asked.

"I mean, sweetheart, that Jasper was much in love with Mistress Rose
Herrick, and liked not that Humphrey Salkeld should win her.
There--perhaps I have done wrong to tell thee this; but, indeed, I like
not mysteries."

But so strange are women, that Rose immediately fell to sighing and
lamenting on Jasper's woes. "It is sad," she said, "that any man should
sorrow over a maiden's pretty face, when there are so many girls in the
world." This train of thought, however, suddenly slipped from her when
she remembered Master Jasper's ugly looks.

"He will do you a mischief, Humphrey," she said. "I saw it in his eyes.
He hates you. They say that jealousy breeds murder--oh! what if Jasper
should try to kill you?"

I laughed at the notion. I was so cock-a-whoop at that time, so elated
with my love and my fair prospects, that I did not believe anything
could harm me, and said so. Nevertheless, I believe Rose was from that
time much concerned as to the relations between me and Jasper, having
some woman-born notion that all might not go so well as I, in my boyish
confidence, anticipated. But when she set forth her fears from time to
time, I only laughed at her, never thinking that my cousin's opportunity
was already close at hand.

Early in the month of October in that year Sir Thurstan called Jasper
and myself into the library one morning, and informed us that he had
business for us at the port of Scarborough. There was, he said, a ship
coming over from Hamburg, the master of which had been entrusted with a
certain commission from him, and as the vessel was now due, he wished us
to go over to Scarborough and complete the matter, by receiving certain
goods and paying the master his money. Neither Jasper nor I were
displeased at the notion of this trip, for we were both minded to see a
little of the world. True, I did not like the idea of being separated
from my sweetheart for several days; but then, as she said, there would
be the delight of looking forward to our meeting again. Alas! neither of
us knew that that meeting was not to take place for three long and
weary years.

We set out from Beechcot, Jasper and I, one Monday morning, having with
us money wherewith to pay the charges of the ship-master. From the
manor-house to Scarborough there was a distance of twenty odd miles, and
therefore we rode our horses. Sir Thurstan had given us instructions to
put up at the Mermaid Tavern, near the harbor, and there we accordingly
stabled our beasts and made arrangements for our own accommodation. The
ship which we were expecting had not yet arrived, and was not likely to
come in before the next day, so that we had naught to do but look about
us and derive what amusement we could from the sights of the little
fishing town. Small as the place was, it being then little more than a
great cluster of houses nestling under the shadow of the high rock on
which stands Scarborough Castle, it was still a place of importance to
us, who had never for many years seen any town or village bigger than
our own hamlet of Beechcot, where there were no more than a dozen
farmsteads and cottages all told. Also the sailors, who hung about the
harbor or on the quay-side, or who sat in their boats mending their nets
and spinning their yarns one to another, were sources of much interest,
so that we felt two or three days of life in their company would not be
dull nor misspent. Moreover, the merchant, whose ship it was that
carried Sir Thurstan's goods, showed us much attention, and would have
us to his house to talk with him and tell him of our uncle, whose
acquaintance he had made many years previously, but had not been able to
cultivate.

There is, near the harbor of Scarborough, lying half-hid amongst the
narrow streets which run up towards the Castle Hill, a quaint and
curious inn known as the Three Jolly Mariners. At its door stands
a figure carved in wood, which at some time, no doubt, acted as
figurehead to a ship, but whether it represents Venus or Diana, Hebe or
Minerva, I do not know. Inside, the house more resembles the cabin of a
vessel than the parlor of a tavern. On the walls are many curious things
brought by mariners from foreign parts, together with relics of ships
that had made many voyages from the harbor outside, and had finally come
home to be broken up. In this place, half-parlor, half-cabin, there
assembled men of seafaring life: salts, young and old, English, Scotch,
Norwegians, and Danes, with now and then a Frenchman or Spaniard, so
that there is never any lack of interesting and ofttimes marvelous
discourse.

Our ship not having come in on the Tuesday night, Jasper and I, in
company with the merchant aforesaid, entered the Three Jolly Mariners,
and having saluted the assembled company, sat down to wait awhile, the
harbor-master thinking it likely that our vessel would shortly be
signaled. There were several men in the inn, drinking and talking, and
all were of interest in my eyes, but one of them much more so than the
others. He was a stoutly-built, tall man of middle age, dressed in what
seemed to my eyes a very fantastic style, there being more color in his
dress than was then usual. He had a high, white forehead, over which his
jet-black hair was closely cropped, his eyes were set rather too near
together to be pleasant, his nose was long, his teeth very white and
large, and his beard, almost as black as his hair, was trimmed to a
point. As he sat and listened to the conversation around him he never
laughed, but occasionally he smiled, exposing his cruel teeth, and
reminding me of a dog that shows its fangs threateningly.

Our friend the merchant whispered to us that this gentleman was a
certain Captain Manuel Nunez, who came trading to Scarborough from
Seville. He further informed us that his ship now lay outside in the
harbor, and was a fine vessel, of very graceful proportions, and much
more beautiful to look at than our English ships, which are somewhat
squat and ugly, though not difficult to handle.

"And although he is a Spaniard," continued our friend, "this Senor Nunez
is well liked here, for he makes himself courtly and agreeable to those
who have to do with him, so that our recent relations with his country
have not prevented him from coming amongst us."

However, there was something about the man which almost made me afraid.
He reminded me of a viper which I once killed in Beechcot Woods. And
though we entered into conversation with him that night, and found him a
mightily agreeable companion, I still preserved the notion that he was a
man not to be trusted, and like to prove cruel and treacherous.

The following day, going down to the harbor-wall to see if there were
any signs of our ship, I saw my cousin engaged in close conversation
with Senor Nunez. I did not intrude myself upon them, but presently the
Spaniard, catching sight of me, came to my side, and with a courteous
salutation addressed me.

"I have been inviting your good cousin, Master Stapleton, to go aboard
my vessel yonder," said he, "and I would tender the same courtesy to
yourself, Master Salkeld. It is not often that an English country
gentleman has a chance of seeing a Spanish ship in these sad days,
unless, alack! it be in this deplorable warfare; and, therefore, I
thought you might both be glad of this opportunity."

"What do you say, Humphrey?" asked Jasper, who had now approached us. "I
would like to see the inside of a Spanish ship. If 'tis aught like the
outside it should be well worth an examination."

"A look at the Santa Luisa will repay your trouble, gentlemen," said the
Spaniard with a proud smile. "There is no faster ship for her size on
the high seas."

"I am agreeable," said I. "Our own ship is not yet come, and time begins
to hang heavy."

"Then you shall come on board to-night," said Captain Nunez. "Until six
of the clock I am engaged on shore, but at that hour I will have a boat
awaiting us at the harbor stairs, and you shall go aboard with me,
gentlemen."

So we agreed and parted with him, Jasper full of the matter, and
exclaiming that we should have much to tell the folks at home. I,
however, was beginning to get somewhat impatient with respect to our own
ship, which its owner now believed to have been unexpectedly detained,
and I only regarded the visit to the Santa Luisa as a diversion.

At six o'clock that night, Jasper and I met the Spaniard at the harbor
stairs and went on board his vessel. We found the Santa Luisa to be a
very fine ship, and of much more pretentious appearance as regarded her
fittings than our own English trading vessels. We passed an hour or so
in examining her, and were then pressed by Senor Nunez to enter his
cabin and enjoy his hospitality.

I have no very clear recollection of what followed. I remember that we
ate and drank, that the Spaniard was vastly amusing in his discourse,
and that I began to feel mighty sleepy. After that I must have gone to
sleep.

When I came to my full senses again I was lying in a hammock, and I
could tell from the motion of the ship that we were at sea in a good,
fresh wind. The Spaniard stood by me, regarding me attentively. I
started up and addressed him.

"Senor Nunez! I have been asleep. Where am I? The ship seems to be
moving!"

"The ship is moving, Master Salkeld," he answered, in his smooth, rich
voice. "At this moment she is off the Lincolnshire coast. You have slept
for twelve hours."




CHAPTER V.

PHARAOH NANJULIAN AGAIN.


I do not know to this day how I got out of the hammock, but no sooner
did I hear the Spanish captain utter these words than I made haste to go
on deck and examine the truth of his statement for myself. But before
I could reach the companion I reeled and staggered, and should have
fallen, if Nunez had not seized my arm and supported me. He helped me to
a seat, and handed me a glass containing a restorative.

"You are not well," he said. "But you will come round presently."

"Senor!" I cried, "what is the meaning of this? Why am I on this ship,
and why are we at sea? How is it that I am not at Scarborough? There has
been some treachery--some foul play!"

"Nay," said he, "be moderate, I entreat you, Senor. Do not let there be
any talk of treachery. Am I not serving you as a friend?"

"I do not comprehend anything of what you say," I answered. "There is
some mystery here. Again I ask you--why am I on board your ship and at
sea?"

"And I ask you, Senor, where else did you expect to be but on board my
ship and at sea?"

I stared at the man in amaze and wonder. He returned my gaze
unflinchingly, but I felt certain that in his eyes there was a cruel
mockery of me, and my blood seemed to turn cold within me as I
recognized that I was in the Spaniard's power. But, being now in a
desperate mood, I strove to be cool and to keep my wits about me.

"I expected to be at Scarborough, Senor," I said. "Where else? I
remember coming aboard your vessel and eating and drinking with you,
but after that I must have fallen asleep. I wake and find myself at
sea."

"Naturally you do," said he with a smile. "Allow me, Master Salkeld, to
recall to you certain incidents which took place last night. You came on
board my ship with your cousin, Master Stapleton, and I offered you my
poor hospitality. Was that all that took place?"

"It was," said I, confidently enough.

"That is strange," said he, giving me another of his queer looks. "I
fear you have undergone some strange mental change in your long sleep.
But as I perceive that you do not understand me, I will explain matters
to you. Last night, Master Salkeld, as you and your cousin sat at meat
with me, you explained to me that you had committed some great crime
against the laws of your country, and that it was necessary, if you
would save your head, to leave England at once. I remarked that I was
about to set sail for the West Indies, and should be pleased to take
you as my passenger, whereupon you and your cousin having consulted
together, you paid me the passage-money--and here we are."

The man told me all this with the utmost assurance, his face utterly
unmoved and his strange eyes inscrutable. It was a lie from beginning to
end, and I knew it to be a lie. Nevertheless, I knew also that I was
powerless, and I made up my mind to act prudently.

"Senor," I replied, "as between you and me, I may as well tell you that
I do not believe a single word of what you have said. There has been
treachery--and it lies with you and my rascal cousin, Jasper Stapleton.
I have committed no crime against the laws, and I wish to be put ashore
at your earliest opportunity."

"You shall be obeyed, Master Salkeld," he replied, bowing low, but with
a mocking smile about his lips.

"Where do you first touch land?" I inquired.

"I have already told you, Master Salkeld. Somewhere in the West Indies."

"But you do not mean to carry me to the West Indies?" I cried. "Why,
'tis a journey of many thousands of miles!"

"Precisely. Nevertheless, you must undertake it. We touch no land until
we make Barbadoes or Martinique."

I said no more; it was useless. I was in the man's power. Nothing that I
could say or do would alter his purpose. There had been villainy and
treachery--and my cousin, Jasper Stapleton, had worked it. I
comprehended everything at that moment. I had been lured on board the
Spanish vessel and subsequently drugged, in order that Jasper might rid
himself of my presence. That was plainly to be seen. But what of the
future? The West Indies, I knew, were thousands of miles away. They were
in the hands of our hereditary enemies, the Spaniards. From them I
should receive scant mercy or consideration. I was penniless--for my
money had disappeared--and even if I had possessed money, what would it
have benefited me in a savage land like that to which I was being
carried? I might wait there many a long year without meeting with an
English ship. I turned to the Spaniard.

"So I am a prisoner, Senor,--your prisoner?"

"My ship and my goods are at your disposal, Senor," he replied.

"So long as I do not make any demands upon them, eh?"

"Say unreasonable demands, Master Salkeld. As a matter of fact you are
free to walk or stand, sit or lie, wake or sleep as you please. I
entertain you as I best can until we touch land--and then you go your
own way. You have made a contract with me, you have paid your money, and
now I have nothing to do but carry out my share of the bargain."

"And that is----?"

"To take you to the West Indies."

"Very good, Senor. Now we understand each other. You will perhaps not
object to my telling you, that when I next meet my cousin, Master Jasper
Stapleton, I will break his head for his share in this foul conspiracy."

"I do not object in the least, Master Salkeld. But you do well to say,
when you next meet him."

"Why so, Senor?"

"Because it is so highly improbable. Indeed, you will never be so near
England again as you are at this moment."

I looked through the port, and saw the long, flat Lincolnshire coast.
The day was dull and heavy, and the land was little more than a gray
bank, but it meant much to me. I was being carried away from all that I
loved, from my sweetheart, my uncle, my friends, from everything that
had grown a part of my daily life. And I was going--where? That I knew
not. Not to the West Indies--no, I was sure of that. Captain Manuel
Nunez was an accomplished liar in everything, and I felt sure that he
had another lie in reserve yet. At the thought of him and of Jasper's
villainy the blood boiled in my veins, and tears of rage and despair
gathered in my eyes. But what was the use of anger or sorrow? I was
powerless.

I now made up my mind to show a good face to all these troubles and
difficulties, and, therefore, I strove to be as much at my ease as was
possible under the circumstances. I walked the decks, talked with such
of the men as knew a word or two of English, and cultivated as much of
the captain's acquaintance as my aversion to his wickedness would
permit. I learnt the names of masts, sheets, stays, and sprits, and
picked up other information of seafaring matters, thinking that it
might some day be useful to me. I am bound to say that Senor Manuel
Nunez was very courteous towards me. But what avails courtesy, when the
courteous man is only waiting his time to injure you?

We had been at sea something like three weeks, and had passed Ushant
four days previously, when, sailing south-by-west, we were overtaken by
a gale and had to run before it with bare poles. Upon the second
morning, our lookout, gazing across a stormy sea, cried that he saw a
man clinging to a piece of wreckage on the lee bow, and presently all
those on deck were conscious of the same sight. The man was drifting and
tossing half a mile away, and had seen us, for he was making frantic
efforts to attract our notice. I was somewhat surprised when Captain
Nunez took steps to rescue him, for it would have fitted in with my
notion of his character if he had suffered the wretch to remain unaided,
However, he sent off a boat, which eventually brought away the man from
his piece of wreckage, and had hard work to make the ship again, for the
sea was running hard and high. The rescued man crouched in the stern,
hiding his head in his hands, so that I did not see his face until he
came aboard. Then it seemed familiar, but I could not bethink me where I
had seen it before.

"And who art thou, friend?" asked Nunez.

"A mariner of Plymouth, good sir," answered the man, "and sole survivor
of the ship Hawthorn. Lost she is, and all hands, save only me."

Then I suddenly recognized him. It was the Cornish sailor, Pharaoh
Nanjulian. So the sea had given me a friend in need.




CHAPTER VI.

SCHEMES AND STRATAGEMS.


I was not minded to let Captain Nunez and the crew--every man of which
was either Spaniard or Portugee--see that I had any knowledge of the man
whom they had rescued, and therefore I presently went below and kept out
of the way for a while. Somehow I felt a considerable sense of
gratification at the thought of the Cornishman's presence on board. He
seemed to me a man of resource and of courage, and I no sooner set eyes
on him in this remarkable fashion, than I began to think how he might
aid me in making my escape from my present position.

After a time Nunez came down into the cabin where I sat, and began to
talk with me.

"We have fallen in with a countryman of yours, Master Salkeld," said
he, regarding me closely, as if he wished to see how I took the news.

"Indeed!" said I. "The man just come aboard?"

"The same. A native of Cornwall, with an outlandish name, and an
appetite as large as his body, judging by the way he eats."

"He is no doubt hungry, Senor," I said. "Perhaps he has been tossing
about for a while."

"A day and a night. One additional mouth, Master Salkeld, is what I did
not bargain for."

"But you would not have allowed the man to drift away to starvation and
death?" I said.

"His life was no concern of mine, Master Salkeld. But I can make him
useful; therefore he was worth saving. I shall enroll him as one of my
crew, and carry him to the Indies."

"And then?"

"Then he will go ashore with you, unless he prefers to go back with me
to Cadiz--which he probably will not do."

He left me then, and I sat wondering what he meant by saying that the
English sailor would probably not care to go back to Spain with him.
There seemed something sinister in his meaning. But I gave over thinking
about it, for I was by that time firmly convinced that Captain Manuel
Nunez was a thorough-paced scoundrel, and well fitted to undertake all
manner of villainy, despite his polished manners and fine words. Also, I
was certain that there was in store for me some unpleasant and possibly
terrible fate, which I was powerless to avoid and which was certain to
come. Therefore I had resigned myself to my conditions, and only hoped
to show myself a true Englishman when my time of trouble came.

Nevertheless, many a sad hour and day did I spend, looking across the
great wild waste of gray water and wondering what they were doing at
Beechcot. In my sad thoughts and in my dreams I could see the little
hamlet nestling against the purple Wold; the brown leaves piled high
about the shivering hedgerows; the autumn sunlight shining over the
close-cropped fields; and in the manor-house the good knight, my uncle,
seated by his wood-fire, wondering what had become of me. Also I could
see the old vicarage and the vicar, good Master Timotheus, thumbing his
well-loved folios, and occasionally pushing his spectacles from his nose
to look round and inquire whether there was yet news of the boy
Humphrey. But more than these, I saw my sweetheart's face, sad and weary
with fear, and her eyes seemed as if they looked for something and were
unsatisfied. And then would come worse thoughts--thoughts of Jasper and
his villainy, and of what it might have prompted him to in the way of
lies. He would carry home a straight and an ingenious tale--I was very
sure of that. He would tell them I was drowned or kidnaped, and nobody
would doubt his story. That was the worst thought of all--that my dear
ones should be thinking of me as one dead while I was simply a prisoner,
being carried I knew not where, nor to what fate.

On the evening of the second day after the Cornish sailor came aboard,
the weather having moderated and the ship making good progress, I was
leaning over the port bulwarks moodily gazing at the sea, when I felt a
touch on my hand. Looking round, I saw the Englishman engaged in coiling
a rope close to me. He continued his task and spoke in a low voice.

"I recognized you, master," said he. "I looked through the skylight last
night as you talked with the captain, and I knew you again. I know not
how you came here, nor why, but it is strange company for a young
English gentleman."

"I was trapped on board," I said.

"I thought so," he responded. "But speak low, master, and take no heed
of me. We can converse while I work, but it will not do for us to be
seen talking too much. The less we are noticed together the better for
our necks. How came you here, master? I had no thought of seeing you in
such company."

I told him as briefly as possible while he continued to coil the rope.

"Aye," said he, when I had finished my story, "I expected something of
that sort. Well, I am glad that the old Hawthorn left me swimming,
though sorry enough that all her merry men are gone down below. But
what! death must come. Now, young master, what can we do? I swore a
solemn oath when your good uncle befriended me that I would serve you.
This is the time. What can I do?"

"Alas," said I, "I know not."

"Do you know whither we are bound?" he asked.

"The Captain says to the West Indies. But I do not know if that be true
or false."

"More likely to be false than true, master. Now, then, hearken to me,
young sir. I have seen a deal of life, and have been a mariner this
thirty year or more. We must use our wits. Can you, do you think, find
out what our destination really is?"

"I am afraid not," I replied. "Nunez will not tell me more than he has
already told me."

"True," said he; "true--you will get naught out of him. But I have a
better chance. I can talk to the men--well it is that I know their lingo
sufficiently for that. But nay, I will not talk to them, I will listen
instead. They do not know that I understand Spanish. There are three of
them speak broken English--they shall do the talking. I will keep my
ears open for their Spanish--peradventure I shall hear something worth
my trouble. You see, master, if we only know where we are going, and
what we have to expect when we get there, we shall be in a much better
position than we are now. For now we are as men that walk in a fog, not
knowing where the next step will take them."

"I will do whatever you wish," said I.

"Then be careful not to have over-much converse with me, master. Yon
Nunez has the eye of a hawk and the stealth of a viper, and if he does
but suspect that you and I are in treaty together, he will throw me
overboard with a dagger wound under my shoulder-blade."

"How shall we hold converse, then?"

"As we are now doing. If I have aught to tell you I will give you a sign
when you are near me. A wink, or a nod, or a cough--either will do. And
what I have to say I will say quickly, so that whoever watches us will
think we do no more than pass the time of day."

So for that time we parted, and during the next few days I watched for
Pharaoh Nanjulian's sign eagerly, and was sadly disappointed when I
received it not. Indeed, for nearly a week he took no notice of me
whatever, giving me not even a sign of recognition as I passed him on
the deck, so that Nunez was minded to remark upon his indifference.

"Your countryman seems but a surly dog," said he. "I should have thought
he would have sought your company, Master Salkeld, but he seems to care
no more for it than for that of the ship's dog."

"He is a Cornishman and a sailor, and I am a Yorkshireman and a
gentleman," said I. "In England we should not associate one with the
other, so wherefore should we here?"

"Nay, true, unless that you are companions in adversity, and that makes
strange bedfellows," said he. "But you English are not given to
talking."

I hoped that he really thought so, and that he had no idea of the
thoughts within me. I was ready enough to talk when Pharaoh Nanjulian
gave the signal.

It came at last as he stood at the wheel one night, and I stood near,
apparently idling away my time.

"Now, master," said he, "continue looking over the side and I will talk.
I have found out where we are going."

"Well?" I said, eager enough for his news.

"We are bound for Vera Cruz, master."

"Where is that? In the West Indies?"

"It is a port of Mexico, master, and in the possession of the Spaniards,
who are devils in human shape."

"And what will they do with us there?"

"That I have also found out. It seems that your good cousin, Master
Stapleton, did make a bargain with this noble Spanish gentleman, Captain
Nunez, for getting you out of the way. The bo's'n, Pedro, says that
your cousin suggested that Nunez should sail you out to sea, and then
knock you on the head and heave you overboard. But Nunez would have none
of that, and decided that he would carry you with him to Vera Cruz."

"And what will befall me at Vera Cruz?"

"He, being a pious man, will hand you over to the Holy Office."

"To the Holy Office! You mean the Inquisitors? And they----"

"They will burn you for a Lutheran dog, master."

We were both silent for awhile. I was thinking of naught but the
fiendish cruelty which existed in such a man as Manuel Nunez. Presently
I thought of Pharaoh Nanjulian.

"And yourself?" I said. "What will he do with you?"

"I am to share your fate, master. Senor Nunez is a good and pious son of
Mother Church, and he will wipe out a score or two of sins by
presenting the stake with two English heretics."

After that I thought again for a time.

"Pharaoh," I said at last, "we will not die very willingly. I have a
good deal to live for. There is my sweetheart and my uncle to go back
to, and also I have an account to settle with Jasper Stapleton. I will
make an effort to do all this before my time comes."

"I am with you, master," said he.

"Have you thought of anything?" I asked.

"Nothing, but that we must escape," he answered.

"Could we manage that after the ship reaches Vera Cruz?"

"No, for a surety. We shall be watched as cats watch mice. If we ever
set foot on a quay-side in that accursed port, master, we are dead men.
God help us! I know what the mercies of these Spaniards are. I stood in
the City of Mexico and saw two Englishmen burnt. That was ten years
ago. But more of that anon. Let us see to the present. We are dead men,
I say, if we set foot in Vera Cruz, or any port of that cruel region."

"Then there is but one thing for us," I said.

"And that, master?"

"We must leave this ship before she drops anchor."

"That is a good notion," said he, "a right good notion; but the thing
is, how to do it?"

"Could we not take one of the boats some night, and get away in it?"

"Aye, but there are many things to consider. We should have to victual
it, and then we might run short, for we should have no compass, and no
notion, or very little, of our direction. We might starve to death, or
die of thirst."

"I had as soon die of thirst or hunger, as of fire and torture."

"Marry, and so would I. Yea, it were better to die here on the wide
ocean than in the market-place of Mexico or Vera Cruz."

"Let us try it, Pharaoh. Devise some plan. I will not fail to help if I
can be of any use."

"I will think," he said; "I will think till I find a means of escape. I
reckon that we have still a month before us. It shall go hard if our
English brains cannot devise some method whereby we may outwit these
Spanish devils."

So we began to plot and plan, spurred on by the knowledge of what
awaited us in Mexico.




CHAPTER VII.

WE ESCAPE THE SPANIARDS.


Now that I knew his real sentiments towards me, it was very difficult to
preserve my composure and indifference in the presence of Captain Manuel
Nunez. As I sat at table with him, or talked with him on deck or in his
cabin, I had hard work to keep from telling him my real thoughts of his
wicked nature. Nay, sometimes I was sore put to it to keep my hands from
his throat. Nothing would have pleased me better than to find either him
or my cousin Jasper in some lonely spot where no odds could have favored
them or me. Then my wrongs should have received full vengeance, and none
would have blamed me for meting it out to these two villains. Judge how
hard it was for me to have to associate, week after week, with one of
the men who had so deeply wronged me, and, moreover, to have to
preserve towards him a certain degree of cordiality. Try as I would,
however, I could not give Nunez as much in the way of politeness as
Nunez gave me. My manners were surly at the best, and I had much ado to
preserve them at all.

Getting in the way of fair winds, we sighted the Bahamas, and passed the
north-west coast of Cuba somewhere about the beginning of September. We
were then some five hundred miles from Vera Cruz, but it was not until
Christmas week that we bore down upon the Mexican coast. It was, I
think, on Christmas morning that I first saw the shores of that
beautiful land, whose natural loveliness served but to make more evident
the horrible cruelties of the men who had seized and possessed it. Fair
and wonderful it was as the mists lifted under the sun's warmth to see
the giant peak of Orizaba lifting its head, snow-white and awful, into
the clear air, while full seventeen thousand feet below it the land lay
dim and indistinct, nothing more than a bank of gray cloud.

"You would think a country with such a mountain as that would be a place
of much delight, master, would you not?" said Pharaoh Nanjulian,
pointing to the great white peak. "It looks fair and innocent enough,
but it is a very devil's land, this Mexico, since the Spaniards overran
it; and yonder peak is an emblem of nothing in it, except it be the
innocence of those who are murdered in God's name."

"What mountain is that?" I inquired.

"Orizaba, master. It lies some sixty miles beyond Vera Cruz, and is of a
height scarcely credible to us Englishmen. God be thanked that there is
so little wind to-day! With a fair breeze we should have been in port
ere nightfall. As it is, we must take our chance to-night, master, or
fall into the hands of the Inquisition."

"I am ready for aught," said I. "But have you thought of a plan?"

"Aye, trust me for that. Marry! I have thought of naught else since we
came through the Bahamas. Certainly our chances are exceedingly small,
for we must needs land in a country that is infested with our enemies,
but we will do our best."

"Tell me your plan, Pharaoh."

"'Tis simplicity itself, master. To-night it is my watch. When the
captain is asleep in his cabin, do you come on deck and go aft. You will
find a boat alongside, and into it you must contrive to get as you best
can. Hide yourself there so that no one can see you from the deck. When
the watch is changed, instead of going forward I shall make for the
boat. No one will see me, I promise you. When I am with you we shall cut
the boat adrift and let the vessel outsail us. Then we must make for the
coast in the direction of Tuxtla. We shall know which way to steer
because of the volcano. But after that--why, I know not what we shall
do."

"Have you no plan?"

"Marry, I have ideas. We might go across country to Acapulco, hoping to
find there an English ship; but 'tis a long and weary way, and what with
Indians and wild beasts I fear we should never get there. Howbeit let us
tackle one danger at a time."

Being then called to dinner I went below, and was perforce once more
obliged to sit at meat with my jailer, who, now that his charge of me
was coming to an end, was more polite than ever, and treated me with
exceeding great courtesy.

"You have been on deck, Master Salkeld," said he, "and have doubtless
perceived that we are in sight of land."

"I have seen the great mountain, Senor," I answered.

"True, the land is yet little more than a line. If the wind had been
fair we should have dropped anchor ere midnight. Your voyage has been a
long one, but I trust you have not been inconvenienced."

"Only as a man may be by the loss of his liberty, Senor."

"You will soon be free," he answered, giving me one of his strange,
mocking smiles. "And I trust that when we part it will be with a full
recognition on your side of the way in which I have carried out our
bargain."

"As I do not remember our bargain, Senor, I am afraid that is hardly
possible," I made answer.

"Chut! your memory is certainly at fault. However, the facts will
probably occur to you--later."

"Part of the bargain, if I remember your first mention of it, Senor, was
that you should carry me to the West Indies."

"You are right in that," said he.

"Are we approaching the West Indies?"

"The West Indies is a wide term, Master Salkeld. We are certainly not
approaching the West India islands. We are, in fact, off the coast of
Mexico, and the mountain you see in the distance is the famed peak of
Orizaba. To-morrow morning we shall drop anchor in the port of Vera
Cruz."

"And what shall I do there, Senor?"

He smiled at the question--a mysterious smile, which had a grim meaning
behind it.

"Who knows, Senor? There are many occupations for a young and active
gentleman."

Now, for the life of me I could not help asking him a very pertinent
question before I left the cabin to return on deck.

"Senor," I said, "seeing that we are to part so soon you will perhaps
not object to giving me some information. How much did my cousin, Master
Jasper Stapleton, pay you for your share in this matter?"

He gave me a curious glance out of his eye corners.

"The amount of your passage-money, Master Salkeld, was two hundred
English guineas. I hope you consider the poor accommodation which I have
been able to give you in accordance with that sum."

"I have no fault to find with the accommodation, Senor," I replied. "So
far as the bodily comfort of your prisoner was concerned you have proved
yourself a good jailer."

"Let us hope you will never find a worse, Master Salkeld," he answered,
with another mocking smile. "But, indeed, you wrong me in speaking of me
as a jailer. Say rather a kind and considerate host."

I repressed the words which lay on the tip of my tongue ready to fling
at him, and went on deck. The wind was still against us, and the ship
made little progress, for which both Pharaoh and I were devoutly
thankful, neither of us being minded to make Vera Cruz ere night fell.
Certainly there was little to choose between the two courses open to
us. If we were handed over to the Inquisitors by Nunez, we should
certainly be burned at the stake, or, at any rate, racked, tortured, and
turned over to a slave-master. If we reached shore we should have to
undergo many privations and face all manner of perils, with every
probability of ultimately falling into the hands of the Spaniards once
more. Indeed, so certain did it seem that we should eventually meet our
fate at the stake, or the rack, that more than once I doubted whether it
was worth our while to attempt an escape.

But life is sweet, however dark its prospects may be, and a true man
will always fight for it, though the odds against him are great. And,
moreover, when a man knows what manner of death it is that awaits him,
he will make the most desperate efforts to escape it, if it be such a
death as that intended for us by the Spaniards. Now, although I had
lived in such an out-of-the-way part of England, I had heard many a
fearful story of the wrongs and cruelties practiced by the Inquisitors
in Mexico. Tales came across the wide ocean of rackings and tormentings
and burnings, of men given over to slavery, wearing their San-benitos
for many a weary year, and perhaps dying of torture in the end. We would
do something to escape a fate like that, God helping us!

Late that night Captain Nunez stood by my side on deck. The wind now
blew from the north-west, and the ship was making headway towards land.
To the south-east, through the darkness, glimmered the volcanic fire of
Tuxtla, but the giant peak of Orizaba had disappeared.

"To-morrow at sunrise, Master Salkeld, we shall be in the port of Vera
Cruz," said Nunez. "I have some friends there to whom I will give you an
introduction. Till then, Senor, sleep well."

He smiled at me in the dim lantern light and went below. I remained
pacing the deck for another hour. Once or twice I looked over the side
and saw the boat swinging below our stern. Now, the poop of the Spanish
ship was of a more than usual height, and I foresaw that I should have
some difficulty in getting into the boat, and run a fair chance of
drowning. Better drown, I thought, than burn; and so, after a time, the
deck being quiet, I climbed over the side and managed to drop into the
boat, where I made haste to hide myself as I best could.

It was some two hours after that when Pharaoh Nanjulian joined me, and
immediately cut us adrift.

The ship seemed to glide away from us into the darkness.




CHAPTER VIII.

AN UNKNOWN LAND.


Now, although we were adrift in a perilous sea, and had no hope of
making land, save in a wild and savage country, where there was more
hope of mercy from the Indians than from the civilized Spaniards, I was
yet so thankful to find myself free of the ship and of Senor Manuel
Nunez, that for some moments I could scarcely believe in my freedom.

"I could swear that I am but dreaming and shall presently awake to find
myself a prisoner," I said to Pharaoh, who was busily engaged in
examining the boat.

"'Tis no dream, master," said he. "This is a very stern reality, as you
shall quickly find. Nor is it time for dreaming. If we mean to come out
of this adventure with whole skins, we shall have to acquit ourselves
like true men."

"I am ready," said I. "Tell me what to do, and I will do it."

"Well said," he answered approvingly. "But I could see from the outset
that you had the true spirit in you. You are a Yorkshireman, master, and
I am a sea-dog of Cornwall; but, marry, we are both Englishmen, and we
will come out of this scrape yet. 'Tis not the worst I have been in--but
more of that anon. Now to begin with, we will discuss our present
situation, and then, having determined our course of action, we will put
it into execution."

So we talked things over, and eventually came to these conclusions. We
were, so far as Pharaoh could reckon, about ten miles from land, and we
must reach the coast during the night if we wished to escape
observation. That accomplished, we must strike across country for
Acapulco, where it was possible we might meet with an English ship. The
distance was some three hundred miles in a bee-line, and the character
of the country rough; but that mattered little, for we should of
necessity be obliged to keep away from the roads and bridges. There was
no considerable town on our way, save Oaxaca, and that we must leave to
our left. If we fell in with Spaniards we were lost men, for they would
certainly carry us to Vera Cruz or to Mexico, and there hand us over to
the Inquisitors. As for wild beasts and Indians, we must take our
chance, trusting in God's mercy for protection and help.

We now examined the boat, which was but a small craft that had been
unstrung the day before, in order that the ship's carpenter might
examine some fancied defect in the rudder. Fortunately a pair of oars
had been left in her, and these Pharaoh now took in hand, bidding me
steer for the volcanic flame, which played over the peak of Tuxtla,
immediately before us.

"I can pull ten miles in this sea," said he, "and I warrant you have had
little experience in that line, master. Now, you see that the wind has
drifted us due south until to-night, and therefore Nunez has come some
five-and-thirty miles out of his course for Vera Cruz. He will now beat
up along the coast, heading north and west, and so if we steer
south-by-east he will have hard work to catch us when he finds that we
are gone, as he will ere morning. And now to work."

Thereupon he fell to the oars, and with such good-will, that the light
craft, her nose kept towards the volcanic fire, began to shoot through
the regular swell of the placid ocean at a comfortable rate. Hour after
hour he toiled, and would hear naught of my relieving him, though his
throat grew dry with thirst and his arms ached. Gradually the coast
loomed higher and higher through the gloom, and at length Pharaoh pulled
in his oars, and stood up in the bow to look around him.

"When I was off this coast ten years ago," said he, "I remember a spot
hereabouts where a boat might land with safety and ease. We will lie
quiet till the light comes, master, and then attempt a landing."

"But suppose Nunez should see us?"

"He could not catch us ere we land if he did, unless by some strange
chance he has gotten to the east of us--and that's not possible," said
Pharaoh. "I reckon that by this time he is twenty miles to westward of
us, and therefore we are well out of his reach."

So we hove-to until the morning began to break, when, spying a
convenient creek, we ran the boat ashore, and so set foot on Mexican
soil, wondering what was to befall us next.

Now, to me, who had never seen aught of any land save England, these new
surroundings were exceeding strange and wonderful. Although it was yet
but a half-light all round us on shore, the giant peak of Orizaba,
rising high and magnificent across the land to the north-west, was
already blazing in the saffron-colored tints of early morning, while
directly above us the lower heights of Tuxtla also reflected the rays of
the rising sun. Once away from the shore the vegetation surprised and
delighted me exceedingly. Great trees, such as I had never seen or heard
of, sprang from the rocks and towered above us like gigantic ferns; the
undergrowth was thick and luxurious, and the grass under foot was soft
and heavy as velvet. Also, though it was winter, there were flowers and
plants blossoming in the open such as never blossom in our English
glass-houses, so that altogether I was amazed at the richness and
prodigality of the land, and said so to my companion.

"Aye," said he, "'tis indeed a fair land, master, and would be very well
if these murderous Spaniards had left it alone. As it is, they have
simply turned it into a pandemonium, such as all lands, fair or foul,
become when men go a-lusting for gold and treasure. Yea, not even the
Indians, with all their heathenish practices, were half so cruel as
these Spaniards with their racks and thumb-screws, their stakes and
daggers. And therefore the more reason why we should avoid them."

Having somewhat refreshed ourselves by a brief rest, and armed ourselves
with two stout cudgels cut from a neighboring tree by Pharaoh's knife,
which was the only weapon we had, we set forth through the woods, he
leading the way. By that time we were faint with hunger and could well
have done with a meal, but though there were, doubtless, Indian villages
close at hand we dare enter none of them, and so went forward with empty
stomachs. In the woods, however, we came upon prickly pears, which there
grow wild, and these we essayed to eat; but had great difficulty in
stripping them of the prickles, which, if they enter the tongue, do
cause an unpleasantness that is not soon forgot. Our hunger growing
very keen we sought to capture or slay some bird or animal, and Pharaoh
being accustomed to this sort of hunting--for he had known many
adventures--presently succeeded in knocking down a wild turkey, flocks
of which bird we constantly encountered. We lighted a fire by means of
his flint and steel, and cooked our quarry, and so went forward again
refreshed by the food, which was pleasant enough to hungry men.

We pressed on for two days through the woods, living as we best could
upon such animals as Pharaoh was able to knock down, and on the pears,
which were all the more aggravating to our hunger because of their sharp
spines. During those two days we did not come in contact with human
beings, though we thrice saw parties of Indians and had to conceal
ourselves from them. We followed no path, and if we chanced to cross
one we immediately left it and plunged deeper into the woods. By the end
of the first day our clothes were torn to rags, and hung in strips from
our backs; by the end of the second our shoes had been cut to pieces,
and so we looked as wretched and lost a couple of vagabonds as you ever
saw.

On the evening of the second day we came to the verge of the wooded
heights, and saw before us the wide plain of Orizaba, which lay between
us and Acapulco, and must needs be crossed if we meant to reach the
Pacific coast.

"It is here that I see most reason to be a-feared," said Pharaoh, as we
halted and looked out across the plain. "There is precious little cover
or shelter on this plain, and it will be a miracle if we escape
observation in crossing it. Moreover, there are constantly traversing it
bodies of Spaniards, going to and from Oaxaca and Mexico, so that we
shall be liable to capture at any moment, having nowhere to hide
ourselves."

"How would it do to hide ourselves as we best can by day, and to go
forward by night?" said I.

"'Tis a good notion, master, and we will try it," he answered. "But I
fear me there is little in which we can hide, and as for food, I do not
see how we are to manage. Howbeit, we will not despair yet awhile,
having managed so far."

That night we accordingly made our way across the wide and lonely plain,
having for our guide the constellation Virgo, which Pharaoh Nanjulian
knew and pointed out to me with some learning.

"Them that go down to the sea in ships," said he, "must needs learn a
good deal if they would prosper. I have studied the heavens somewhat,
because more than once it has been my lot to find myself at sea without
a compass, and in a plight like that a knowledge of the stars and
planets is a good thing for a man to have at his command. Now, if we do
but set our faces to yonder constellation we shall keep in a straight
line for Acapulco--and God send we may land there safely!"

We made fairly good progress across the plain, but when morning broke
from the eastern horizon we were still many a long mile from the great
terrace of mountainous land which divides Mexico from Oaxaca and the
Pacific coast. Therefore we had to cast about us for some shelter. This
we had great difficulty in securing, for the plain at that part was
entirely barren of shrub or tree, and there was not even a water-course
at which we could slack our parched throats. But coming upon a
half-ruined hut, which had evidently been the home of some Mexican
Indian, tending his sheep in those wild parts, we took refuge in it and
lay down to sleep, hoping that no one passing that way would feel
curious enough to stop and examine our shelter.

This sort of life continued to be our lot for another day and night,
during which we had scarcely anything in the way of food, and also
suffered severely from thirst. And what with this, and with our fear of
meeting Indians and Spaniards materially increased, our condition was by
no means a happy one. But we still continued to hope, and to cheer each
other onward.




CHAPTER IX.

AN ADVENTURE OF SOME IMPORTANCE.


We traveled in this fashion, sleeping in the daytime and pressing
forward during the night, until the sixth day after our departure from
the ship. By that time we were both considerably changed in health and
appearance. Our clothes were torn to rags, our feet and arms were torn
and bleeding, and our vagabond air increased with every mile we covered.
Of our looks, however, we thought nothing; but we were perforce obliged
to think a good deal of our unfortunate stomachs, which had not been
either filled or reasonably satisfied since we set foot in those
regions. Hunger and privation, in short, were doing their work upon us,
and we were doubtful if we should manage to hold out until we had
crossed the country and made Acapulco.

Towards evening of the sixth day of our travels, we were lying asleep in
a little gully formed by the descent of a mountain stream into the plain
which we were then quitting. We had arrived at this spot early that
morning, and finding sweet and fresh water there had drunk heartily of
it and lain down to sleep in a sheltered spot. We were both well-nigh
exhausted that morning, and our hunger was exceeding fierce; but
sharp-set as we were our limbs refused to carry us on any foraging
expedition, and therefore we sank to sleep, and slept despite our hunger
and danger. It was well towards evening when I suddenly awoke. I know
not what it was that made me open my eyes so suddenly, but there flashed
through my mind at that moment a notion that we were being watched. It
was a strange feeling, and one that occasioned me considerable
discomposure, not to say fright, and it seemed to enter my brain with
the same ray of sunlight that lifted my eyelids. And so strong was this
feeling, that I experienced no surprise or astonishment when I saw two
eyes looking straight into mine from over the top of a rock which rose
immediately in front.

Nevertheless it was a hideous and fearful sight that I looked upon. The
eyes shone, not out of a human face foul or fair, but out of the slits
in a black cowl, drawn so tightly over its wearer's head that nothing of
him was to be seen from forehead to chin. There was this horrible black
thing, a blot upon the bright sunlit sky behind, peeping at me from over
the rock, and out of its eye-holes gleamed two eyes, as keen and bright
as those of a wild animal. If I had not just then been parched with
thirst I should have screamed in my terror. As it was, I gave a feeble
cry, and the black head instantly vanished. I leapt to my feet and ran
forward to the rock. Below it the ground was broken and rocky, and at a
few yards' distance was a belt of wood which stretched down to the
plain. I fancied I could see a black robe disappearing amongst the
trees, but though I waited a few moments I saw no further signs of a
human being.

I returned to Pharaoh Nanjulian and woke him up. He was sound asleep
when I touched him, but started to his feet as soon as I laid my hand on
his shoulder.

"What is it, master?" he asked, scanning my face narrowly, as if he saw
some sign of disturbance there. "You look alarmed."

"I have seen a man watching us."

"What kind of a man? Where has he gone?"

"Nay, that I know not. When I opened my eyes just now they fell full
upon him. He stood behind that rock, peering over it at me. I saw naught
of him but his head, and that was hidden in a black cowl with eye-slits,
through which his eyes gleamed like fire."

Pharaoh shook his head.

"'Tis a Familiar," said he. "One of those accursed fanatics, master,
that dog and pry after honest men like sleuth-hounds, and leave them not
until the flame licks their bodies. This is bad news, i' faith. Which
way went he?"

I told him that I thought I had seen a black robe vanishing among the
trees below, but could not be certain. At that he seized his staff and
went down the slope himself, examining all the likely places in which a
man might have concealed himself. But he found naught, and so came back
to me, shaking his head.

"You are sure you were not dreaming?" he asked. "Men dream of strange
things when hunger is on them."

"How could I dream of what I never saw in my life?" said I.

"You mean the black hood, master? Alas! I have seen it, and so has many
a good man, to his sorrow. Those accursed fanatics! They creep about in
God's blessed sunlight like reptiles. You should see them walk the
streets. Close to the walls they go, their hands meekly folded, their
cowled heads bent to the ground, and yet their eyes note everything. God
is on their lips--yea, but the devil is in their hearts."

"What shall we do, Pharaoh?" I asked him.

"Marry, all we can do is to leave this spot and push forward up the
mountains. There are yet two hours of daylight, but we must chance that.
If we can escape this fellow until darkness sets in, we may yet give him
the slip altogether."

So we set out once more, our bodies refreshed by our long sleep, but the
hunger still fiercely gnawing within us. We were driven to plucking the
prickly pears again, troublesome as was the peeling of them, for we
could eat them as we walked, whereas if we had gone a-hunting for wild
turkeys or rabbits we should have had to light a fire, and that would
have attracted attention to our whereabouts. However, we were successful
in knocking down one or two birds, and these we took along with us,
intending to cook them as soon as we considered ourselves in safety.

As night fell we emerged from the wooded slope up which we had painfully
traveled, and found ourselves on a good road, evidently much used for
traffic.

"This must be the highway that leads from Oaxaca to Vera Cruz," said
Pharaoh, looking out upon it from a sheltering tree; "and lo! yonder is
a post-house. We must bide awhile where we are or we shall be seen."

So we sat down amongst the undergrowth, which was there thick and
luxurious, as it was in every wood we had yet crossed, and served to
conceal us very well from observation. More than once, as we stayed
there, we heard the voices of people passing along the highroad above,
and we judged from that, that if we ventured to show ourselves upon it
before nightfall we should certainly be seen and stopped. Therefore,
apart from our usual hunger and discomfort, we were very well content to
remain hidden until such time as the coast cleared.

Now about dark, and just as we were making up our minds to a fresh
start, and wondering how we should fare in the mountainous range which
we had yet to cross, there arose not far away along the highroad a
chorus of shouts and screams of such exceeding bitterness, that we felt
sure murder was being done. We leapt to our feet and advanced to the
edge of the highway, but feared to go further lest we should be seen.

"'Tis some footpad affray," said Pharaoh, "and none of our business."

But just then came still shriller cries of entreaty for help, and they
were so pleading and full of agony, that we both leapt into the road
with one accord.

"That is a woman's voice," said Pharaoh. "We must needs go to her
assistance, come what will. Have your staff in readiness, master, and if
there is need, strike hard."

We ran swiftly down the road for some fifty yards, and then, turning a
sharp corner, came suddenly upon the cause of the disturbance. In the
middle of the highway stood a coach, drawn by two mules, and on either
side of it were two tall fellows of ferocious aspect, striving to drag
from it the occupants, who screamed for help without ceasing. There was
no driver or servant visible; the rogues had doubtless escaped to the
woods at the first sign of danger.

"Take the two on the left," said Pharaoh, "and get in the first blow,
master. Look out for their daggers."

Now I had never been engaged in a fight since the days when Jasper and I
occasionally came to fisticuffs with the village boys at Beechcot, but
I felt my blood warm at the notion of combat, and so I sprang in between
the two desperadoes who were busy at the left side of the coach, and
laid my staff about their ears with hearty good-will. They were trying
to drag an old man from the coach when we came up, and were threatening
him with what I took to be the most horrible of curses. I hit one of
them fair and square on the shoulder before he knew of my presence, and
he immediately turned and fled, howling like a beaten dog. The other
turned on me with a cruel-looking knife, but I knocked it out of his
hand with a blow that must have broken his wrist, and he too fled into
the woods with a fearful imprecation. Meanwhile, Pharaoh had beaten off
his men on the other side; one was limping along the highway howling
with pain, and the other lay on the ground senseless. We had carried the
fight with sharp and startling effect.

Inside the coach sat an old gentleman and a young girl, and both were so
frightened, that when we assisted them to alight they were nearly
speechless, and could only sigh and moan. Presently, however, the young
lady found her tongue, and began to pour out an astonishingly rapid flow
of words to me, none of which I understood, but which I took to be
expressions of gratitude.

"Say naught," whispered Pharaoh in my ear, "I will talk to them in their
own lingo. Do not let them see that we are English."

"Noble gentlemen," said the old man, presently recovering his speech, "I
know not how to thank you for this valuable assistance. Caramba! if you
had not appeared when you did we should certainly have had our throats
cut. Isabella mia, art thou safe? Did those knaves lay finger on thee?"

"They did but seize me by the wrist, father," answered the young lady.
"But yourself--you are not hurt?"

"Nay, child, I called too loudly for that. But certainly another moment
would have been our last. Senor, is yonder villain dead?"

"Nay," said Pharaoh in his best Spanish, "he breathes, Senor, and will
come to presently."

"I am beholden, deeply beholden to you both, gentlemen. Dios! to think
that I should be unable to travel on even so short a journey with
safety! And my own servants--where are they, rascals and poltroons that
they are. Ho! Pedro, Chispa, Antonio! I warrant me the knaves are hiding
in these woods."

This was exactly the truth, for at the old gentleman's call three
serving-men came forward from the trees and advanced tremblingly towards
the coach. At sight of them their master flew into a terrible rage, and
scolded them with a vigor which at any other time would have amused me
highly.

"Cowards and knaves that ye are!" quoth he. "A pretty body-guard,
indeed. What, ye pitiful rogues, did I not fit ye all out with pikes and
pistols before quitting Mexico in case we met with ventures of this
sort? Oh, ye poltroons, to fly me at the first glimpse of danger! And
thou, Pedro Gomez, my coachman these ten years, fie upon thee!"

"Most noble Senor," said the man, trembling and bowing, "I did but run
to find assistance."

"Thou liest, knave. Thou didst run to save thine own skin. But I will
remember ye when we are safe in Oaxaca. I will have a convoy of soldiers
over these mountains, and trust not to pitiful cowards like ye three.
Tie me up this robber who lies there in the road, and fasten him behind
the coach. We will see justice done on him at Oaxaca."

While the men were doing this the old gentleman once more talked to
Pharaoh, thanking us again, and asking how he could reward us. Were we
journeying to Oaxaca? If so, let us go along with him, and he would
reward us bounteously for our protection.

"We thank your honor," said Pharaoh, "but we are two poor shipwrecked
mariners, bound across country to Acapulco, where we hope to find ship.
But if you would give us food and drink we would thank you, for in good
sooth we are desperately hungered."

Now it luckily chanced that the coach was well supplied with both the
commodities which we desired so earnestly, and, therefore, the old
gentleman made haste to reward us according to Pharaoh's request, so
that presently we found ourselves with our arms full of meat and bread
and bottles of wine, our new-found friend pressing all upon us with
great hospitality. Also, he would have us to take a purse of money,
assuring us that we should find it useful, and as we had not a
penny-piece between us we accepted this offering with thankfulness.

"I am sorry that ye cannot accompany me to Oaxaca," said he. "I should
have been glad of the company of two such stalwart champions. But know,
caballeros, that I am devoutly thankful to you, and will aid you if ever
ye have need of me, and it lies in my power."

So we thanked him and said farewell for that time, and when the coach
had gone on, taking the wounded prisoner with it, we continued our way
up the mountains, first supping heartily of the food and wine, and
blessing God for it.

"'Tis always well to help them that need help," said Pharaoh. "Verily we
are rewarded for so doing. This meat and drink makes a new man of me,
master."

And so it did of me, and it was well, for previously we had been sorely
put to it to keep any heart or soul within our starving bodies.




CHAPTER X.

THE BLACK SHADOWS.


Our course that night being of more than usual roughness and difficulty,
we made little headway, and by morning we had done no more than reach
the height of the mountain range over which we were climbing, and which
at that point was some three or four thousand feet above sea-level.
Howbeit, we were not disappointed with our night's work, for when the
sun rose we found ourselves looking out upon the wide plain which
stretches from those mountains to the sea-coast of the Pacific. Half our
journey was over.

"God send that all may be as well with us during this next journey as it
has been during the last," said Pharaoh. "We have prospered exceeding
well so far--yea, much better than I expected. Only let us do as well
on our way over yonder plain and we shall reach Acapulco in safety."

"But what then?" I asked, not knowing what his plans might be.

"That," he answered, "is a difficult question, master. We shall
certainly meet with no more love at Acapulco than at Vera Cruz, for the
Spaniards have still some sore memories of the drubbings we have given
them. But there we may find an English ship, for 'tis a convenient port
for those vessels that come north. Maybe we shall have to wait awhile,
and lie hidden outside the city or on the coast. All that we must leave
till the time comes. 'Tis something that we have come thus far without
let or hindrance."

And truly he was right there and we felt thankful to God for it. In
truth we had so far been most mercifully protected, and our adventures
had abundantly proved to us that God is merciful to men who have no hope
of any mercy or consideration from their fellow-creatures.

We now sought out a convenient resting-place, and having found a quiet
corner amongst the rocks, we sat down there and ate another hearty meal
from the stores given to us by the old Spaniard, after which, feeling
much refreshed, we lay down to sleep in a hopeful state of mind. The
good food and drink had marvelously restored us, giving us new strength
in body and soul, so that we now hoped where we had previously been
inclined to despair. And so, being impelled to brighter thoughts than
had filled our hearts for some days, we slept more composedly, and had
none of those evil visions which had disturbed our sleep on former
occasions.

Nevertheless evil was drawing near to us while we slept.

It was about half-way through the afternoon, when I woke with a sudden
feeling that all was not well. It was not the feeling which I had
experienced the previous day, namely, that I was being watched, but a
curious sensation of coming ill. How it came into my mind I know not;
all I know is that I suddenly awoke and came into possession of all my
senses with startling swiftness, so that while I had been sound asleep
one moment I was wide awake the next, and looking and listening with
very eager and acute perception. Also, my heart was beating hard in my
breast, as a man's heart will when he suddenly fronts some great danger.
And then I knew that evil was at hand, and as I held up my head and
looked round I saw it draw near.

The place in which we lay was a corner amongst the rocks on the side of
the mountain. Before us lay a wide expanse of smooth stone, the top of a
great rock that had its base in the woods below. Behind us rose a high
wall of rock, and beyond that was the sun, now sinking towards the
western horizon. Where we lay everything was in deep shadow, but the
table-like piece of rock in front was bathed in brilliant sunlight, and
when I woke and looked round my eyes fell upon it, and on a sight which
was like to freeze my heart within me.

Some ridge of rock or mountain high above us was outlined on the bright
stretch of reflected sunlight at our feet, and on this as I looked
appeared two shadows--the shadows of human beings, standing motionless
on the ridge, and evidently looking out from that commanding position
across the wide plain that lay far below.

I recognized one of the shadows instantly. It was the figure of a man
cloaked in some long clinging garment, that enveloped him from head to
foot. As he turned his head I saw the peculiar cowl, with its peaked
top, which had confronted me the previous day.

The other shadow seemed to be that of a naked man, of slender, sinewy
limbs, who carried a bow, and whose head was ornamented with long,
waving feathers. Now he stood motionless against the sky, looking like a
figure cut out of stone or bronze; now he shaded his eyes with his hand,
evidently gazing across the plain below; now he stooped and seemed to
examine the ground at his feet. But the shadow of the cowled and cloaked
figure stood statue-like and never moved.

Now, if you can so exercise your imagination as to put yourself in my
place, you will not be slow to recognize the terror which came over me
at this unexpected sight. If I had seen a dozen armed men spring out
upon us from the rocks I should have cared not. But to see these
sinister-looking shadows, motionless or restless, on the bright patch of
sunlight, was an awful thing--yea, to this day I do often see it in my
dreams, and wake sweating with fear and horror.

I leaned over and touched Pharaoh lightly. He woke on the instant and
sat up.

"Hush!" I whispered, pointing to the shadows. "Look there!"

He lifted his hand to his brow and gazed at the shadows with a
wonder-struck air. Then he seemed to recognize their import, and turned
to me with a shake of the head.

"Lad," said he, "we are about to have trouble. 'Tis that accursed
Familiar. He hath tracked us. Said I not that these devils in man's
shape are like sleuth-hounds?"

"But the other, Pharaoh? What is the other?"

"An Indian, lad. See there, he is stooping to examine the ground. They
are like dogs--they will find a trace where we should see naught."

"What shall we do?"

"God help us!--I know not. Once on our track they will hunt us down. See
there!"

To the two shadows was suddenly added a third, a fourth, a fifth, then a
sixth and seventh, and presently others until we counted twelve.

"All Indians except the monk," said Pharaoh. "He is the huntsman and
they are his dogs. See, they are separating again. Lad, get thy cudgel
in readiness. 'Tis the best weapon we have."

We started to our feet and gripped our staves firmly. And at the
prospect of a fight my terror died away. There was no ghostly fear about
things of flesh and blood. You can strike a man, but who can strike a
shadow?

At that moment, over a rock to our left, appeared the face of an Indian,
scarred and painted, a very devil's face to look at. We were seen at
last!




CHAPTER XI.

CAPTIVE.


As soon as the Indian's face appeared above the rock Pharaoh and I
instinctively moved towards him, whereupon he disappeared again with a
sudden sharp cry, which was immediately answered from above.

"Now, we shall have the whole pack upon us," said my companion.

In this prediction he was right, for within a moment the whole body of
twelve Indians had surrounded us, and stood gazing at us with faces in
which I looked in vain for any sign of compassion at our forlorn state.
Behind them came the monk, still clad in his shroud-like cowl, and
moving with silent steps as if he were a ghost rather than a living man.
But as he drew near to where we stood he threw back the hood from his
head, and then we saw his face for the first time.

I will describe this man to you, because he was not only the most
remarkable but also the most relentlessly cruel man that I have ever
come across in my life. As for his name, which we learnt ere long, it
was Bartolomeo de los Rios, and his one aim and passion was the hunting,
torturing, and burning of heretics. He had the faculties of a
sleuth-hound and the instincts of a serpent, and when he had once set
his heart on hunting a man to his death, it was only by God's mercy that
that man escaped.

Nevertheless this man as he stood before us, looking steadily upon us
from under his cowl, did not seem so fearful a monster of cruelty as we
afterwards knew him to be. We saw simply a thin, dark-faced monk, whose
face was pale as parchment, and whose eyes were extraordinarily bright
and keen. The lines and furrows on his brow and cheeks seemed to tell
of pain or thought, and his tightly-pursed, thin lips betokened firmness
and resolution. I think he could have stood calmly by while his own
father was being tortured and have changed no muscle of his face. Thus
he was an object of much greater fear than the Indians, who were
certainly horrible enough to frighten anybody that had never seen them
before.

We stood gazing at the monk and his Indians for a moment ere either of
us spoke. The Indians seemed to wait instructions from the monk, and
looked toward him with eager eyes. As for Pharaoh and myself, we waited
to see what would happen. I think we both realized that fortune had
suddenly deserted us, but nevertheless we kept a firm grip on our
cudgels, and were both resolved to use them if necessary.

The monk spoke. His voice was low, sweet and gentle--there was naught of
cruelty in it.

"Greeting, my children," said he, addressing us. "Be not afraid. There
shall no harm come to you."

"It will be ill for the man who threatens us with any," answered Pharaoh
in Spanish. "We are travelers, and have no mind to be disturbed."

"You travel by strange paths," said the monk. "To what part of the
country are you going?"

"To Acapulco," answered Pharaoh, adding to me, in English, "there is no
harm in telling him that."

"There is a good road from Oaxaca to Acapulco," said the monk. "Why not
follow it?"

"We are minded to take our own way," said Pharaoh doggedly.

"You Englishmen are fond of that," observed the monk with a strange
smile.

"Who says we are English?" asked Pharaoh.

"Your Spanish is proof of that."

"I am from Catalonia," said Pharaoh. "We do not speak pure Castilian
there."

"And your companion? Is he, too, from Catalonia, or is he dumb?"

To that Pharaoh answered nothing. The monk turned his bright eyes on me.

"What is your business here?" he said, in very good English. "If you
cannot speak to me in my tongue, I must talk with you in yours."

"Answer him," said Pharaoh. "There is no use in further concealment."

"I see no reason why I should answer you, master," said I, feeling
somewhat nettled at the man's peremptory tone. "What right have you to
stop us in this fashion?"

He smiled again, if that could be called a smile which was simply a
sudden flash of the eyes and a tightening of the thin lips, and looked
round at his Indians.

"The right of force," said he quietly. "You are two--we are many."

"Two Englishmen are worth twenty Spanish devils," said I sulkily.

"If it is to come to fighting," said Pharaoh, gripping his cudgel.

The monk said a word in a low tone. The Indians on the instant raised
their bows and drew their arrows to the full extent of the string. The
tips pointed dead upon us.

"Englishmen," said the monk, "look at those arrows. Every one of them is
tipped with poison. If you move I give the word, and those arrows will
find a resting place in you. Let them but touch your arms, your
shoulders, inflicting but a scratch, in a few seconds you will be as one
that is paralyzed, in a few minutes you will lie dead."

The man's words were gentle enough, but somehow his low, sweet voice
made my blood run cold. Why did cruelty veil itself in such a honeyed
tone?

"What is it you want of us, master?" asked Pharaoh presently.

"Your names and business."

"That is easily answered. This gentleman is one Master Humphrey Salkeld,
of Yorkshire in England, who hath many powerful friends at court; as for
me, I am a sailor, and my name is Pharaoh Nanjulian, of Marazion in
Cornwall. As for our business, we are shipwrecked mariners, or as good,
and our hope is to find an English vessel at Acapulco and so return
home. If you be a Christian you will help us."

"Christians help only Christians. I fear ye are Lutherans, enemies of
God."

"That we are not," answered Pharaoh stoutly. "I will say my Paternoster
in English with anybody, and my Belief too, for that matter."

The monk sighed. Perhaps he was disappointed to find that Pharaoh had so
much knowledge.

"And you?" he said, turning to me.

"I am a Christian," I answered, surlily enough, for I did not like this
examination.

"We are both Christians, master," said Pharaoh. "Maybe we think not as
you do on some points, but 'tis naught. So help us of your charity, and
assist us to get out of this country to our own, and we will say a
Paternoster for you night and morning."

"Verily," answered the monk, "you speak fairly. I will help you. You
shall go with me to Mexico, and there we will see what ships there are
at Vera Cruz."

"We would rather push forward to Acapulco," answered Pharaoh. "There are
more likely to be English ships there."

"English ships have gone there little during recent years, and you will
find none now," said the monk.

"For all that we would rather take our chance there," said Pharaoh.

"It will be better for you to accompany me to Mexico. Vera Cruz is close
at hand. And now, as the day waxes late, we will proceed."

Now, there was no use in further argument, for the monk had every
advantage of us, and was clearly minded to have us accompany him at
whatever cost. Therefore we had to yield ourselves to his will but never
did men give in with worse grace or heavier hearts than we.

"God help us!" said Pharaoh. "We are going into the very jaws of death
in going to Mexico. We shall meet Nunez there, and even if we do not, we
shall be handed over to the Inquisitors. But God's will be done.
Moreover, while there is life there is hope. We may pull through yet."

So we set out, the monk going first and taking no further notice of us
for some time. He would walk for hours as if absorbed in his own
thoughts, and again for a long stretch of time he would read his book or
count his beads, but to us he said little. He walked in the midst of the
Indians, who for their part were kind and considerate to us, and
indulged in no cruelties. Indeed, during our journey to the City of
Mexico we had no reason to complain of discomfort or poor fare, for we
had all that men can require, and were well treated, save that at night
they guarded us more closely than we liked. But as to food and drink, we
were abundantly served, and so began to wax fat, in spite of our
anxiety.

There was no restriction placed upon our tongues at this time, and
therefore Pharaoh and I talked freely whenever we were out of hearing of
the monk. As for our conversation, it was all of one thing--the prospect
that awaited us in Mexico.

"What will come of this venture, Pharaoh?" I asked him one day as we
drew near our destination. "Shall we come off with whole skins, or
what?"

"It will be well if we come off with our lives, master. I have been
thinking things over to-day, and I make no doubt that this monk will
hand us over to the Inquisition. Put no trust in what he says about
finding us a ship at Vera Cruz. The only ship he will find us will be a
dungeon in some of their prisons. Well, now, what are our chances when
we fall into the hands of these fellows?"

"Nay, very small I should say. I am well-nigh resigned to anything.
Nevertheless, Pharaoh, I shall make a fight for it."

"It may not come to fighting. Can you say the Paternoster, the Ave
Maria, and the Creed?"

"I can say two of them, and I can learn the third. But what difference
does that make?"

"All the difference 'twixt burning at the stake and wearing a San-benito
in a monastery for a year or two. Now, if we are burnt there is an end
of us, but if they put us into a monastery with a San-benito on our
backs we shall still have a chance of life, and shall be poor Englishmen
if we do not take it."

Thus we talked, striving to comfort ourselves, until at the end of the
fourth day we were brought by our captors to the City of Mexico.




CHAPTER XII.

MORE CRUEL THAN WILD BEASTS.


There are times when, looking round these fair lands of Beechcot, and
thinking on the quiet and prosperous life which I have spent in their
midst these many years, I fall to wondering whether those dark days in
Mexico were real or only a dream. It seems to me, sometimes, that all
which then happened to me and to my companion, Pharaoh Nanjulian, must
have been but a dream and naught else, so horrible were the cruelties
and indignities practiced upon us. You could hardly bring yourselves to
believe, you who have lived quiet, stay-at-home lives, how merciless
were the men into whose hands we fell, and if I did but tell you
one-tenth of the malignity which they displayed towards us, you would
not wonder that I sometimes feel inclined to wonder if my memories of
that most unhappy time are not dreams rather than realities. But I know
well that there is nothing unreal about them, for I bear on my body
certain marks which came there from the rack and the pincers, and there
are moments when I seem to endure my agony over again, and the sweat
drops from my brow as I think of it.

We were led into the City of Mexico through the gate of St. Catherine,
and were thence marched forward to the Placa del Marquese, close by the
market-place. There we were soon surrounded by a throng of folks, who
seemed not unkindly disposed towards us. Some, indeed, brought us food
from their houses, and others drink; one man handed Pharaoh Nanjulian a
coat, a noble-looking lady, closely wrapped in her mantilla, gave me
money, hurrying away ere I could refuse the gift. I suppose we looked so
woe-begone and vagabondish in our rags and tatters, that the hearts of
these people melted towards us. Nevertheless it was plain to see that we
were prisoners, and that the monk had no notion of putting us in the way
of getting a ship.

Now, as we stood there in the Placa, closely guarded by the Indians, the
monk having disappeared for the moment, who should come up to us but
that polite gentleman, Captain Manuel Nunez, arrayed in very brave
fashion and smiling his cruel smile as usual. He pushed his way through
the throng, folded his arms, and stood smiling upon us.

"So, Master Salkeld," he said, "you have fallen into the tiger's den
after all. Certainly what was born to be burned will never be drowned. I
looked to see you again, Senor."

"We shall possibly meet yet once again," said I. "And it may be where
you and I are on level terms, Captain Nunez. If that time should ever
come, ask God to have mercy upon you, for rest assured that I shall
have none."

"Brave words, Senor, brave words! I wish it were possible that you might
have the chance to make them good. But that I am afraid you never will
have. You are safely caged."

Then he began to abuse us to the people, bidding them look upon us for
English dogs, Lutherans, enemies of God, sweepings of the English sink
of iniquity, for whom neither rack, thumb-screw, nor stake was
sufficient reward. Me he denounced to the people as a runaway criminal,
describing me in such terms as made my blood boil within me, and my
hands itch to take him by the neck and crush the life out of his wicked
heart.

"You are a liar and a knave," said I and then for the moment forgetting
my dignity as an English gentleman I spat full in his face. Bethink
you--my hands were tied behind me, and not free to use. Otherwise I had
not done it.

Now at this insult his face turned deathly white and then flushed a
bright red, and there came into his eyes a gleam which meant murder, and
plucking forth his rapier he would certainly have slain me there and
then, had not the monk returned at that instant and prevented his fury
from wreaking itself upon me. At this interference he grew still more
furious, and well-nigh foamed at the mouth, swearing by all the saints
in his calendar that he would slay me where I stood. But at a word from
the monk he smiled a grim, meaning smile, and thrusting back his rapier
into its sheath turned away from us with a face full of hate and
malignity.

We were now taken away to a hospital, where we found other
Englishmen--some sailors that had been captured by the Spaniards at sea,
and others merchants who had been taken while prosecuting their trade
in various ports in that part of the world. Some of these men had been
in captivity for many months, and they explained to us that they were
being kept for a new sitting of the Inquisition, at which, they said, we
should all be examined and possibly tortured, with a view to extracting
from us confessions that would doom us to the fire. So under this
prospect we sat down to wait, and for several weeks remained in strict
captivity, having enough to eat, but being terribly cast down by the
knowledge of what awaited us.

It appeared from such information as we could obtain that the
Inquisitors were at that time absent from the city, conducting
examinations in another part of the country, and that when they returned
our cases would be gone into. There had been no Auto-de-fe, or public
burning of heretics for a year or two, and it seemed only too probable
from what we now heard that one was meditated for the coming Good
Friday. Positive information on this point, however, we could not then
get; therefore we remained in our captivity, alternately hopeful and
despondent, praying God either to release us from our desperate
situation or to give us strength to endure whatever might be in store
for us.

About the beginning of Lent, in the year 1579, the Inquisitors returned
to the City of Mexico, and it immediately began to be whispered amongst
us that the examinations were shortly to begin. We soon found that this
was the truth, and the first intimation of it came to us in highly
unpleasant form. On Ash Wednesday we were removed from the hospital in
which we had been confined until then, and were taken through the city
to certain cells or dungeons, in which we were separately placed, so
that from that time forward we saw nothing of each other, and thus had
no companion to turn to for sympathy when our need was sorest. But as
God would have it, it befell to Pharaoh Nanjulian and to me, that as we
were being led across the market-square by our guards, there came up to
us the old gentleman whom we had saved from highwaymen on the road to
Oaxaca. He seemed vastly surprised to find us in that unhappy condition,
and insisted with some slight show of authority on our guards allowing
him to speak with us.

"Surely," said he, "ye are the two brave men who preserved me and my
daughter from those cut-throat villains as we traveled to Oaxaca. How
came ye in this company?"

"Sir," said Pharaoh, "that is what we do not know ourselves. We are two
inoffensive Englishmen, brought into this country against our wills, and
wishing or intending no harm to any man, but only anxious to find a ship
that will carry us back to our own land. Here we are treated like
malefactors and criminals, and yet we have broken no law that we know
of, nor are we brought before any judge to hear what our jailer hath
against us. If you indeed are grateful for what we did for you help us
to our liberty."

"I am grateful, friend," answered the old man, "and will do what I can
for you. But tell me your story."

So we told him all that had happened to us from the time of our leaving
England, and mentioning more particularly the treacheries practiced upon
us by Captain Nunez and Frey Bartolomeo, at the mention of whose names
he shook his head.

"I am sorry indeed for you," said he when we made an end, "and the more
so because ye are in a very grievous plight. But now, keep up your
hearts, for I have some influence with the Chief Inquisitor, and it
shall be exerted on your behalf. 'Tis truly a pity that ye are
Englishmen, but I hope ye are Christians."

"Christians we are," said Pharaoh, "and will say our Paternoster and
Credo with any man."

"'Tis well, and therefore keep up your hearts, I say. I will see to this
matter at once."

This meeting and the cheerful words spoken to us by the old man did
somewhat revive our hopes, more especially when we heard from our guards
that he was a person of some distinction in that city. So we parted,
Pharaoh and I, and were prisoned in solitary dungeons.

For the next three or four weeks I saw no man save my jailers, who fed
me chiefly on bread and water, or on maize, crushed and boiled, which
food did speedily bring me to a low and miserable condition. Indeed,
what the noisomeness of my cell and the loneliness of my state failed to
do the bad food speedily accomplished, so that within a month of my
imprisonment I became a weak and nerveless creature, and was ready to
weep at a rough word.

About three weeks before Easter I was taken before the Inquisitors and
put to the question. Now, I had expected and dreaded this ordeal, and
was not in over good a state to face it when at last it came upon me.
Nevertheless I made shift to summon my courage so that I might show a
bold front to my oppressors.

The Inquisitors sat in a small apartment hung round with black and
lighted by torches, and there was that in their appearance which was
calculated to strike terror into the stoutest heart. Behind a table, set
upon a dais, sat the Chief Inquisitor, with his assistant on one side of
him and his secretary on the other. They were all robed in black, and
their thin, ascetic faces looking out from the dark recesses of their
cowls, had in them neither mercy nor pity, nor indeed aught but
merciless resolution. There were other robed and cowled figures in the
room, but I noticed none of them particularly save the monk Bartolomeo,
who stood there ready to make accusation against me.

There was an interpreter in the apartment, a half-breed named Robert
Sweeting, whose name I desire to put on record, because he did me a
kindness at the risk of his own life. To this man the Inquisitors
addressed their questions, and through him I answered them to the best
of my ability.

They set out by asking me the full particulars of my presence in Mexico,
which questions I replied to with very great delight, as they afforded
me an opportunity of having my say as to Captain Manuel Nunez and his
fellow-villain Frey Bartolomeo, whom I did not spare, though he stood by
and heard me with an unmoved countenance. Indeed, I spake so plainly
concerning him that the Chief Inquisitor stopped me.

"It is not seemly," said he, "to speak in disrespectful terms of men
vowed to sacred offices."

To this I answered that I had been brought up from my birth to treat my
pastors and teachers with respect and reverence, but that I could feel
none for a man who had abused his sacred office by deceiving unfortunate
men.

Then they began to examine me as to my faith, and commanded me to say
the Paternoster, Ave Maria, and the Creed in Latin, which, rubbing up
such Latin as I remembered from Mr. Timotheus Herrick's instructions, I
made difficult shift to do, informing them at the same time that I could
say all these things much more readily in English. And this part of my
examination being over, and my judges seeming satisfied, I began to
breathe more freely, hoping that all might end well.

But now they began to examine me on more particular and nicer points,
and it was plain to me that if I did but make a slip they would visit it
upon my body. For they demanded first, whether I believed or not that
any bread or wine remained in the paten or in the chalice after the
consecration, and second, whether or not the bread and the wine were not
actually the very body and blood of our Lord. To have answered "No" to
these questions would have insured my death, therefore I cudgeled my
brains for a fitting reply to them, well knowing what depended upon it.
And bethinking me of the articles and teachings of my own church, I made
answer that I was no scholar or theologian, but a simple country
gentleman that had left subtle points to priests and schoolmen, and had
always held what they taught me, namely, that our blessed Lord is indeed
verily and truly present in the sacrament of His body and blood. This
answer seemed to satisfy them, but presently they asked me if I did not
follow the teachings of Doctor Martin Luther. I cheerfully replied to
that, that I knew naught about Doctor Luther, and had never heard his
name mentioned until I came into Mexico; which was plain truth, for we
were out of the world at Beechcot, and knew naught of controversies.
Then they would have me to tell them what I had been taught to believe
in England, to which I answered that I had never been taught any other
doctrine than that to which I had already testified, and in which I did
firmly and truly believe as a good Christian man, hoping for salvation
in the Christian faith.

"We must have a more satisfactory answer than that," said the Chief
Inquisitor, "otherwise we must try what a sterner method will do with
you."

"Sir," said I, "other answer I cannot give you, for I have already told
you the truth. As for my sins against God I heartily ask His
forgiveness, and also yours if I have offended your laws in any way; but
I beseech you to remember that I came into your country against my own
will, and have never done aught against its laws or against you
wittingly. Therefore, I beseech you to have Christian mercy upon my
defenseless condition."

But they had none, and that night I was put upon the rack, and cruelly
tortured by Frey Bartolomeo and his fellows, in the hope that I should
confess something against myself. However, God giving me strength, I
said naught, and was preserved through that awful torment, the memory of
which is strong in my mind even after all these years.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE AUTO-DA-FE.


About the beginning of Holy Week the Inquisitors caused to be erected a
great scaffold against the large church in the main square, and from it
they proclaimed, with much beating of drums and blaring of trumpets,
that whoever should come there upon Good Friday should have made known
to them the most just judgments of the Holy Inquisition upon the English
heretics, Lutherans, and should, moreover, see the same put into
immediate execution. And so now we were face to face with whatever final
cruelty these devils in human shape might devise upon us, who were
helpless and defenseless in their hands.

There was little rest for any of us on the night preceding the
judgments, for there came to each of us officers and Familiars of the
Inquisition, tormenting us with gibes and sneers, and bringing us the
San-benitos in which we were to appear in the great square next morning.
It was already turning gray in the east when two of these men entered my
dungeon, where I lay still stiff and bruised because of the racking
which I had undergone a few days before. They woke me rudely and without
consideration, caring naught for the woes I had already suffered or the
sorrow I was that day to undergo.

"Wake, English dog, Lutheran, enemy of God!" cried one. "Wake and robe
thyself to meet thy master the devil. Truly the saints will rejoice to
see the sight provided for them this day."

Then they hustled me from my straw pallet and bade me dress in the
San-benito, which was a garment of yellow cotton having divers devices
painted upon it. And this done they took me out into the courtyard of
the prison, and there for the first time for some weeks I met Pharaoh
Nanjulian. It was easy to see, even in the uncertain light of the early
morning, that he had undergone the same torments which they had applied
to me. His face was pinched and thin with suffering, and his great frame
seemed to have been crushed and bruised until it had shrunk in height
and girth. Yet he bore himself with composure and bravery, and I felt at
once that, however the rest of us behaved, he at least would not
disgrace the name of England.

"Heart up, master!" quoth he, as soon as we came within speaking
distance of each other. "Heart up! Let us show ourselves brave men this
day. I do not think they can torment us more than they have already
done. And what if they kill us? We must all die."

"Did they torture you badly, Pharaoh?" I asked, admiring his fortitude.

He shook his head and smiled grimly.

"So badly, master, that it seemed as if every bone in my body was
broken and every sinew cracked. But a man may undergo a deal of
suffering and yet live. So let us quit us like men and be strong. For
truly, though we be in the hands of these devils at present, God is near
us, and will maybe be nearer ere the day is done."

Then our custodians separated us again, and for a couple of hours they
exercised us in the prison yard, showing us in what order we should
proceed to the scaffold, and admonishing us as to our behavior when we
had come there. And after that was over, it being broad daylight, they
gave us breakfast, which was a cup of wine with a piece of bread fried
in honey, and so we were ready for the ordeal.

There were some sixty to seventy prisoners in all, of all nationalities,
a considerable number being Englishmen, and all of us were dressed in
those hideous San-benitos, which make the most shameful garb that a man
can wear. Being drawn up in single file, our guards fastened a halter
round the neck of each prisoner, and afterwards gave to each of us a
green wax candle, which we carried, unlighted, in the right hand. Two
Spaniards, well armed, guarded each of us, and so the procession being
arranged, the great doors were thrown open and we were led forth into
the square.

The crowd in the square was so thick that the guards had much ado to
free a passage through it; but ere long we came to the scaffold, and
were conducted upon it, seating ourselves on long rows of chairs placed
in full sight of the people. We had not long occupied this shameful
position when the Viceroy and his officers came upon the scaffold by
another flight of steps, closely followed by the Inquisitors, who took
the chief places and made much show of their authority. Then three
hundred friars, wearing the garb of their various orders, black, white,
gray, and brown, were marshaled to their places, and all was ready for
the judgments.

Now, we were so sorely exercised in our minds at that time because of
the agony of sitting there and wondering when our turn would come and
what our fate would be, that I have utterly forgotten many of the names
and sentences of my unfortunate companions. Some still come back to me,
because their sentences were heavier than those which have escaped my
memory.

The manner of judgment was after this fashion. The clerk to the
Inquisitors calling out our names in a loud voice, we were commanded to
stand up in our places and hear the judgment of the Holy Office upon us.

Thomas White, Cornelius Johnson, Peter Brown, Henry More, all Englishmen
shipwrecked on those inhospitable coasts or captured at sea, were
condemned to three hundred lashes on horseback, and to serve in the
galleys for ten years.

William Collier, Thomas Ford, John Page, two hundred lashes and eight
years in the galleys.

Stephen Brown and Nicholas Peterson, a Dutchman, one hundred lashes and
six years in the galleys.

Then came some forty or fifty men whose names I have forgotten, who were
condemned to a lesser number of lashes and less servitude in the
galleys, and after them some four or five who were adjudged to serve in
monasteries for various terms of years, wearing their San-benitos all
the time.

And then, after two or three hours of weary waiting, for they did
everything with exceeding tediousness and much ceremony, they called
upon Pharaoh Nanjulian and myself, and we stood up together to receive
sentence. And then we suddenly knew that God had not deserted us, for
the sentence was a lighter one than any that we had heard passed. We
were to serve two years in the galleys, submitting ourselves to the
chaplain for admonition and instruction. So that was over and we could
breathe freely again.

Nevertheless the horrible work of that day was far from over, for it was
hardly begun. The torments, the murders, were yet to come.

William Moor, John Wood, and Hans Schewitzer, a German Lutheran, were
brought up for sentence and condemned, being pestilent and naughty
heretics, to be burned to ashes.

They lost no time, these villainous Spaniards, in carrying out this
sentence. In front of the scaffold stood three stout iron posts, firmly
sunk in the ground, with fagots already piled about them, and to these
the unfortunate men were speedily bound, amidst the silence of the crowd
and the cries of the monks and Familiars, who pressed upon their
victims, bidding them repent and recant ere they were lost forever. But
to these murdering villains the three men answered naught, and presently
it was all over with them, and there was one more crime recorded against
Spain.

Then those of us who had been sentenced to so many lashes were led down
from the scaffold and placed upon horses, being stripped to the waist,
and having by them, every man, an executioner armed with a whip. Such of
us as had escaped this sentence were arranged in pairs behind, with our
halters still round our necks and our guards on either side of us.
Before the men who were to be whipped marched two criers, crying "Behold
these English dogs, Lutherans, enemies of God," and at intervals came
Familiars, such as Frey Bartolomeo, admonishing the executioners to lay
on and spare not. Then the procession started, and was conducted by the
criers through all the principal streets back to the great square, and
at every few steps the executioners laid on with their whips, fetching
blood at every stroke, so that to any man having aught of mercy and
compassion within him the spectacle was horrible and nauseating, though
to the Familiars and Inquisitors it seemed delightful enough.

Now, as we returned to the great square, this bloody work being over,
the throng pressed upon us so closely that for some few moments we were
unable to move, and while we stood there waiting for what would happen
next, there came to our side Captain Manuel Nunez, his evil eyes mocking
and sneering at us.

"So, Master Salkeld," said he, "it would seem that you have not
altogether escaped. Our Holy Office is merciful, Master Salkeld, yea,
sadly too merciful for my liking. But there are those of us, who know
not any mercy for Englishmen and heretics, as you shall find ere long,
both of you."

With that he vanished in the crowd, and presently Pharaoh and I were led
back to prison, wondering what his last words meant.




CHAPTER XIV.

ON BOARD THE GALLEY.


Being led back to the prison, Pharaoh and I found to our unspeakable joy
and astonishment that we were to be placed in one cell and not separated
as heretofore. This consideration on the part of our jailers was
exceedingly pleasant to us, because it afforded us the opportunity of
conversing one with the other. Therefore, in spite of our bruises and
strains, caused by the rack and not yet forgotten, and of the sad sights
which we had that day seen, we made an effort to pluck up our spirits,
and to be cheerful and even hopeful.

We were further assisted in this laudable desire by a visit from the old
gentleman whom we had rescued from highwaymen on the road to Oaxaca.
About seven o'clock that evening he was admitted to our cell, and left
alone with us. This latter fact at once assured us that our friend was a
man of rank and position, otherwise he would not have been permitted to
see and speak with us, save in the presence of witnesses.

"I trust all is well with you, friends," said he, as he entered our
presence, and set down a basket which the jailer had carried to the
door. "I come to see you at a sad time, doubtless, but 'tis indeed with
feelings of friendship."

"We have so few friends in this country, Senor," answered Pharaoh, "that
we are glad to see any of them. Nay, indeed, so far as we know, your
honor is the only friend we have. Therefore, Senor, you are something
more than welcome."

Now the jailer being gone, the old gentleman took our hands in his own,
and was like to weep over us, at which we marveled, for we did not know
that his gratitude was so hearty, seeing that we had done such a small
thing for him.

"Alas, friends," said he. "I grieve for you more than I can say, for I
hate and abominate these murderous Inquisitors, whose hearts are filled
with naught but torment and murder. Nevertheless I have saved you
somewhat, for it was through my efforts and bribes that you came off
with such light sentences."

"I thought we had your honor to thank for that," said Pharaoh. "Aye,
'tis well to have a friend at court when need arises."

"I labored hard," said the old gentleman, "to secure your freedom, but
these bloody-minded Inquisitors are without bowels of mercy, and ye are
fortunate to have escaped death or torture. But now I have brought you a
little matter of wine and fruit, so fall-to and refresh yourselves, and
after that we will talk of what is to come."

So he unpacked his basket and set food and wine and delightful fruit
before us, and we ate and drank and were vastly comforted thereby, for
our commons during the past week or two had been of the very shortest.
And when we had thus refreshed ourselves, we began to discuss our
situation anew.

"That you have escaped with your lives and without the torture of the
lash," said our friend, "is due to my continued exertions on your
behalf. But now, gentlemen, I am powerless to do more for you."

Then we once more thanked him for doing so much, saying that we should
always hold his kindness in remembrance, and should ever pray for his
happiness and prosperity.

"And if," continued I, "your honor can suggest any means by which we can
escape from these galleys and regain our own country, we shall be
further beholden to you. For, indeed, we have friends in England who
must be anxious about us, if they be not already in despair of ever
seeing us again."

"I fear there is small chance of your escape," said he, shaking his
head. "Men that are chained to the oar cannot well escape. I pray God
that you may survive your two years of that work--it is not all that
do."

"Sir," said Pharaoh, "do you know where we shall be taken?"

"Nay," answered he, "that I cannot say. Most men who lie under your
sentence are shipped to Spain, and are there placed in the galleys. The
same fate is probably in store for you."

"God help us if they take us to Spain!" said Pharaoh. "We shall have to
go through it all over again."

However, it seemed almost certain that this would be our fate, and as
nothing that we could say or do could alter it, there was naught for it
but to submit ourselves with such cheerfulness as we could muster. But
here the old Senor gave us some additional comfort, for it seemed that
his special purpose in coming to us that night was to give us the names
of friends of his in certain towns and ports of Spain, to whom we might
apply in case of our being in their neighborhood.

"You are something more than likely to be finally dismissed at Cadiz or
at Seville," said he, "and it will be none the worse if you know where
to turn for a friend;" and with that he gave us the names of certain
Spanish gentlemen of rank, his friends, assuring us that they would help
us to escape to England. And these names he made us learn by heart, and
then, having no more time to spend with us, he bade us farewell, and we
saw him no more. But in him we found one Spaniard at least who hated the
horrible practices of the Inquisitors, and had a heart within him which
was not insensible to the woes of others.

After we had remained in the prison five days longer, we were one
morning brought forth and stripped of our San-benitos and given rough
clothing suited to galley slaves. And that being done we were mounted on
stout horses, in company with the other prisoners who had been sentenced
to serve in the galleys, and being guarded by a great number of
soldiers, well armed, we were sent off across country to the port of
Acapulco. But ere we left Mexico every man of us had fastened to his
left wrist and ankle a heavily-weighted chain, which would have made it
impossible for us to attempt an escape even if we could have eluded the
vigilance of our escort.

We were somewhat surprised to find that our first destination was
Acapulco, for we had fancied that we should be sent to Vera Cruz, which
is much nearer to the city of Mexico, and from which we expected to be
sent across seas to Spain. We found, however, that at Acapulco there lay
at that time a great treasure-galleon, the Santa Filomena, which the
Spaniards were minded to take home by way of the Pacific islands and
Africa, it being their belief that by this route there would be less
chance of meeting Hawkins, or Drake, or Frobisher, or any of the great
English sea-captains, of whom they were mortally afraid. In this
galleon, then, we were to be shipped, with the prospect of a long and
tedious voyage, which, according to Pharaoh's calculations, might cover
the best part of a year even with fair winds.

Our overland journey to Acapulco was not wholly unpleasant, for our
guards being soldiers, and free from the encouragement of those
murderous fanatics the Inquisitors and Familiars, treated us with as
much consideration as was possible, and forbore to taunt us with our
misfortunes. Moreover, we were frequently lodged for the night in the
neighborhood of some convent or monastery, and then we did exceeding
well, the friars feeding us with their best, and compassionating us for
our many sorrows. And at that time it was plain to us that the
Inquisition was heartily hated by the friars--black, white, and
gray,--and met with no favor from any but such as had long since
forgotten all that they had ever known of mercy and compassion.

Having reached Acapulco, after many days' journeying over mountains and
plains, we were immediately conveyed on board the Santa Filomena, which
was a great galleon of full rig, having a high poop and a double bank of
oars, and there our chains were knocked off by the armorer. This relief,
however, did not long benefit us, for we were presently conducted below
to a great deck filled with long wooden benches, parallel with the
mighty oars which came through the ports. To one of these benches
Pharaoh and I were immediately chained and padlocked, our companions
suffering a like treatment. In another part of the deck the benches were
filled by negroes, stark naked, whose backs and shoulders were covered
by scars, and who yelled and grinned at us like fiends or madmen.

"God help us!" said Pharaoh; "they will not release us from these
benches till we make Seville or Cadiz."

And at that awful prospect I half-regretted that we had not died in
Mexico. For simply to think of being chained to the oar all those weary
months amidst that foul and unclean mass of humanity, sleeping where we
labored, and eating amidst dirt and filth, was more than I could
stomach, and at that moment black despair seemed to settle upon my
heart. But Pharaoh once more came to my aid and strove to cheer me.

"Heart up, master!" said he. "All is not yet over. We are going through
sore trials, but what then? Are we not Englishmen? At any rate let us
show a stern front to these villains. Cowards we will never be."




CHAPTER XV.

NUNEZ IN A NEW GUISE.


The second day after our arrival at Acapulco, we knew by the hurry and
scurry on board our vessel that preparations were being made for
sailing. Our deck was now full, and every oar was fully manned with its
complement of slaves or captives. Of these the majority were blacks,
whose misfortunes had transformed them into nothing better than wild
animals; but there were still a large number of whites, and amongst them
thirty to forty of our own countrymen. Every man was chained to his
bench, and it was evident that there was no intention of releasing us
until our voyage came to an end. Thus amongst our miserable company were
many who hung their heads in deep dejection, and envied the three men
who had met death by the flames in the great square of Mexico.

Towards the evening of that day, as I was sitting lost in sad thoughts,
I looked up and saw standing at my side two figures, which I had given
anything rather than set eyes upon. One was that of Captain Manuel
Nunez, the other the black-robed form of Frey Bartolomeo. They stood
regarding me steadfastly: the monk calm and quiet, the sailor with his
usual cold smile faintly curling about the eyes and mouth.

"So, Master Salkeld," said Nunez, "we meet again. You are doubtless on
your way home to England to take vengeance on your cousin, Master
Stapleton."

I looked at him steadfastly. I was not going to be cowed by him,
defenseless as I was.

"That may be, Senor," said I. "It is a long way to England by the road
we are taking, but I shall reach it if God wills that it should be so."

"You do well to make that proviso," said he. "For God gives His power to
men, and at this moment I, as master of this vessel, and Frey
Bartolomeo, as its chaplain, are his viceregents. Wherefore, Master
Salkeld, I think your chances are not good."

"We are in God's hands," said I; though indeed my heart turned faint and
sick to think that these wretches had us in their power.

"At present, good Master Salkeld, you are in mine," he answered, smiling
mockingly upon me. "But then you know what a kind and considerate host I
am. You did admit that, when I carried you across the Atlantic. Still,
Master Salkeld, things are somewhat altered between us. I am not now
paid to carry you to Mexico and get rid of you. Also, since then you
have spat in my face. Ah, you remember that, do you? Dog, you shall
remember it every day of your life! I will not kill you now, as I
might, but I will kill you by inches, and you shall die at last at your
bench and lie there to rot. That is the fate of the dog who spits in the
face of a Spanish gentleman."

So he turned away, but the man sitting next me put out his hand and
plucked the monk's cloak, bidding him remember that he had promised to
find him a ship for England, and begging him to keep his plighted word.
But Frey Bartolomeo shook him off.

"Thou art a heretic," he said. "With heretics we keep no faith. To thy
oar, Lutheran!"




CHAPTER XVI.

THE FLAG OF ENGLAND.


And now our cup of misery seemed full indeed. We were friendless and
captive, and we had for our jailers two of the most inhuman beings that
ever lived to disgrace the earth, and both of them hated us with an
exceeding bitter hatred; one because I had spat in his face, the other
because we had escaped the fire. Moreover, we were chained to an oar in
a vessel which was sailing over I know not how many thousands of miles
of water, in latitudes where it was not likely we should fall in with
any ship that could rescue us. Verily there seemed before us nothing but
horror and death!

And truly our lot was hard. Hour upon hour we tugged at the oar. Where
we toiled there we slept, amongst the shrieks, sobs, groans, and
heart-rending lamentations of our fellow-captives. Up and down the
gangways that divided us walked stalwart Spaniards, armed with heavy
whips, which they scarcely ever ceased from laying about our bare
shoulders. Our food was such as is given to pigs in England--coarse
maize or meal, soaked in cold water, with bread of the blackest and
hardest description. The heat burned us to madness; the cold night-winds
blew in upon us; the salt-spray dashing through the open ports found the
raw places in our wounds and stung us as if with fire. Verily, we were
in hell! Ere many days had gone by a man dropped and died at his post.
They let him hang there by his chains till another day had gone past,
then they knocked off his irons and flung him through the port-hole. And
there was scarcely a man of us that did not envy him.

Now that Captain Manuel Nunez had us in his power there was apparently
no limit to his cruelty. Scarcely a day passed on which he did not
descend the ladder to our deck and vex our souls with some new form of
torture. Sometimes he would take his station near us, and bid the
overseers lay on to us with their whips. Sometimes he would take the
whip himself and beat us about the head and face with it until we became
senseless. Now and then he would amuse himself by pricking us with his
sword or dagger; now and then he would spit in our faces and bespatter
us with filth, pouring out upon us every foul and evil name he could
think of. And when he had worked his will upon us, there would come to
us Frey Bartolomeo, cold and cruel, and he would admonish and instruct
us, and finding that he could get naught out of us, would depart cursing
us for Lutherans and dogs.

These two presently devised a new torture, and put it into operation
upon us. They caused the ship's armorer to make an iron brand, bearing
the word "Heretic", and this being heated red, they came down to us and
branded us on back and breast, so that all men, they said, should know
us for what we were. And after that they gave us more lashes, and then
deluged us with salt water, and so left us more dead than alive.

Now, after I had undergone some weeks of this treatment, I was like to
have lost my senses, for the strength of my body was giving out, and I
felt myself powerless to resist the continued cruelties and insults
which were put upon me. Yea, I should certainly have gone mad at that
time if it had not been for my faithful companion, Pharaoh Nanjulian,
who did his best to cheer and support me, and got no reward for it but
an increase of blows and stripes from Nunez, and venomous curses from
Frey Bartolomeo.

It was one of Nunez's chief delights at this period to come down upon
our deck and goad me into a rage that closely approached madness. Thus
after exposing me to numerous insults, he would ask me what I proposed
to do when I reached England again, and what fate I was keeping in store
for my cousin Stapleton.

"It must afford you the most exquisite delight of which the human mind
is capable, Master Salkeld," he said one day, when he had tormented and
plagued me beyond endurance, "to sit here in these pleasant quarters and
think of your cousin at home. He hath doubtless entered upon the family
estates and married the lady whose affections you stole from him, and
maybe he hath by this time told her of the trick he played upon you, and
they laugh at it together."

And at that I cursed him before God and man and wept bitter tears, for I
was thoroughly broken, and had no more heart in me than a child.

"So you are broken at last?" said he, and struck me across the mouth
and went away.

And then I wished to die, for I was indeed broken; but Pharaoh did his
best to console me and bade me be of good cheer, for we should triumph
yet.

Now the next day, our voyage having then lasted some nine or ten weeks,
we were aware of a sail bearing down upon us from the south-east, and
before long it became evident that this ship was chasing us, whereupon
there was much to-do on board the Santa Filomena, and our overseers
urged us to renewed exertions with continual lashing of their whips.
Nevertheless, within three hours the ship had overhauled us, and from
our post we saw flying from her mast-head the flag of England.




CHAPTER XVII.

FRANCIS DRAKE.


Now, if you can bring yourself to imagine what he feels like who, having
remained in dire and horrible distress for many weary days, suddenly
sees salvation coming to him, you will know what we felt as we gazed
through the port-hole and saw that noble English ship draw near with the
English flag flying at her mast-head. If you have ever been in like
peril yourself you will understand it better. A man condemned to die and
suddenly reprieved; another suddenly released from awful slavery; a
third suffering from heavy sorrow and suddenly overwhelmed with good
tidings--any of these will know what we felt.

"An English ship!" cried Pharaoh. "Thanks be to God--an English ship!"

And straightway there rose from the crowded benches on our deck a
strange and marvelous babble of sound. Some burst into tears of
thankfulness and relief, some howled like wild beasts because of their
chains, some cursed and blasphemed because there was small chance of the
English ship's folk knowing our condition. Others shouted and yelled for
help; the men sitting next the port-holes thrust forth their heads and
cried loudly across the waters, though the ship was yet a good mile
away. Every man betrayed his emotion and his misery in some way: here
they tugged at the chains which bound them, there they showed their
teeth at the Spaniards, snarling and snapping like dogs chained to a
staple in the wall. And then the overseers fell upon us once more, and
their great hide-whips descended mercilessly upon our shoulders, so that
we were forced to tug at the oars with redoubled force, and the galleon
shot forward again under a storm of yells and cries and loud groans.

"Yon is an English ship, as I live," said Pharaoh, as we tugged at our
oar. "And she will overhaul us. Pray God she does not slay a score of us
in this rat-trap by her first shot. If she only knew what we know.
Listen, master!"

Over the strip of sea that separated us came the dull, heavy roar of a
cannon-shot. They were firing at us in order to make the Spaniard
lay-to. But Captain Manuel Nunez had no intention of acceding to the
Englishman's wishes in that respect, and it was evident that he was
crowding on all sail, and making every possible effort to escape that
terrible ship which overhauled him hand over hand. On deck we heard the
Spaniards rushing hither and thither, the mates and boatswain shrieking
and yelling orders to the crew, the armorer and the soldiers making
ready the ordnance and small arms. Now and then we caught the voice of
Nunez, cool and collected as usual, but very fierce and determined; and
once the pale face of Frey Bartolomeo appeared, and we heard him
admonishing the overseers to lay on with their whips.

"We are like to be flayed alive if this goes on much longer," muttered
Pharaoh as the lash curled about his shoulders again. "Oh, if we were
but free and had some weapon in our hands! Lay on, ye murderous
villains, lay on! Your reign is well-nigh over. Master, hold up a while
longer. See there!"

Another puff of white smoke burst from the English ship's side, followed
by a dull roar, and, immediately after, by a loud crashing and
splintering of the deck above our heads. Then came shrieks, groans, and
loud cries of pain. The shot had swept the deck. Fathom by fathom the
English ship overhauled us. Through our port-hole we could see her deck
swarming with men armed to the teeth. On her poop stood a little knot
of men evidently in command, and one of these was directing the
boatswain with outstretched arm.

"I see their plan," said Pharaoh; "they have seen the oars, and they are
minded not to fire upon us again for fear of killing or wounding the
captives. They are going to lay their ship alongside ours and board us."

So the ship came nearer and nearer, sailing nearly twice as fast as our
great lumbering galleon, and at last we could make out the faces of the
men on deck. And suddenly Pharaoh set up a great cry that made every
Englishman on our deck turn to him with astonishment.

"'Tis Francis Drake!" he cried. "God be thanked, 'tis Francis Drake
himself! See yonder, lads, there he stands on the poop. Are there any
men here that ever served under Francis Drake? If so, let them look out
at yonder captain and speak."

"'Tis Francis Drake and no other!" cried one. "I know him by the gold
band round his scarlet cap. He always wears that at sea. Now may God be
praised for this deliverance."

But there was much to be done ere our deliverance could be accomplished.
Nay, indeed, it seemed as if our cruel jailers were minded to murder us
before ever help would come, for they proceeded to beat us so
unmercifully with their whips that many of us sank down faint and
bleeding, and lay like dead men. But the rest of us kept up because of
the fierce excitement.

Presently the English ship was within a boat's length of us, and then
she slowly crashed against our side, the brass muzzles of her guns, in
some cases, coming through our ports. Meanwhile the Spaniards had not
been idle, for their gunners were plying their cannon with all possible
speed, and the noise and confusion was horrible. But yet never a shot
did the Englishman fire, but their ship closed steadily upon us. At
last we heard the grappling-irons thrown out and made fast, and knew
that the two ships were locked together, like lions that fasten teeth
and claws in each other and will not loose their grip till death comes.

Then began a noise and confusion as if all the devils of hell had
suddenly been let loose. We heard the shouts of the Englishmen, hoarse
and deep, and the shriller cries of the Spaniards, above the roaring of
the guns. On deck there sounded the wild rush and hurry of feet as the
combatants were driven hither and thither. The overseers had thrown down
their whips and fled to the upper decks as soon as the English boarded,
and now we captives sat breathless and bleeding, listening to the noise
above us and longing for release, so that we too might join in the
fight.

Suddenly there leapt through one of the ports a brawny Englishman, armed
not with sword or pike, but with hammer and chisel, and he was speedily
followed by half-a-dozen more, armed in similar fashion.

"Are there Englishmen here?" roared the first as he tumbled in amongst
us. "Speak, lads, if ye be English!"

And at that there went up such a roar as was like to burst open the
deck above us. Men stretched out their hands and arms to these great
English sailors as if they were angels, and prayed them to knock off
their bonds. So they, staring stupidly at us for a moment,--as is
the manner of Englishmen when they see something which they do not
understand,--suddenly fell to and knocked away our chains and padlocks,
while we wept over them and blessed them as our saviors. And meanwhile
others had handed in pikes and swords and glaives through the ports, and
others were guarding the ladder against the Spaniards, in case any of
them should come below. But they were too busy on the upper decks to
have even a thought of us, and so we were uninterrupted, and ere long
every man of us was free of his chains.

"Now, lads!" cried the big man who had first leapt in upon us, "can ye
fight, or are ye too weak for a brush? If any man thinks he can hold
pike or sword, let him pick his weapon and follow me."

Some of us could fight and some could not. Here and there a man was only
released from his chains to fall upon the deck and die. Others, suddenly
made free, found on striving to rise from the benches that the use of
their legs was gone. Others again, whose minds had suffered under those
long months of fiendish torture, were no sooner released than they
became utterly mad, and fell to laughing and gibbering at their
preservers. But many of us, weak as we were, felt the strength of ten
men come into our arms, and we seized eagerly upon the weapons offered
to us, and followed the sailors up the gangway with a fierce resolve to
call our late oppressors to a final account.

On the upper deck the fight was raging furiously. The Spaniards, furious
and desperate, were massed together in a solid body, keeping back the
Englishmen by sheer skill. Already between the gangways and the bulwarks
lay a great heap of dead and dying. High above the combatants on the
poop stood Nunez, his pale face set and drawn, watching the progress of
the fight with gleaming eyes and compressed lips. From the tops the
sharp-shooters were pouring showers of arrows into the English ship, but
the guns had ceased, and the gunners lay dead beside them.

We dashed on deck with a great cry, and for an instant the whole body of
combatants turned and looked at us. A strange and awful sight we must
needs have presented at that moment. There was scarcely a rag upon us,
our hair was long and unkempt, our shoulders were torn and bleeding from
the effects of the lashes lately laid on them, and our entire aspect
must have resembled that of wild beasts rather than of men. I saw Nunez
turn paler as he caught sight of us, and heard the English storm of
execration burst forth over the noise and confusion of the fight. Then
we fell upon the Spaniards from behind, and after that all was red, and
I seemed to do naught but strike and strike again, unconscious of pain
or wounds or anything but a fierce desire to be avenged on the villains
who had wrought such cruelty upon me.

Howbeit, after a time I felt myself dragged by a friendly hand out of
the thick of the fight and led across the bulwarks to the English ship,
where I was presently conducted on to the poop, into the presence of a
man whom I at once knew to be some great captain. He was of middle
height, with a high forehead, crisp brown hair, very steady gray eyes,
and a hard, fierce mouth, slightly covered by a beard and moustache. He
wore a loose, dark, seaman's shirt, belted at the waist, and about his
neck was a plaited cord, having attached to it a ring, with which his
fingers played as he spoke to me. On his head was a scarlet cap with a
gold band, even as the man in the galleon had said.

Such was my first glimpse of the great captain, Francis Drake, then
thirty years of age, and making his first voyage round the world. I
stood staring at him for a moment, and he at me, and I know not which
was most interested in the other.

"Who art thou, friend?" he inquired, presently.

"An English gentleman, sir, kidnaped by the Spaniards and carried to
Mexico, where I have undergone torments at the hands of the Inquisitors.
I was a galley slave on board yonder vessel."

"How many Englishmen are there with you?"

"At least forty."

"Does the ship carry treasure?"

"Yes, sir," I answered; "and she also carries two of the most cruel
wretches that ever walked the earth."

"Who are they, friend?"

"Manuel Nunez, the captain, and Bartolomeo, the monk. In God's name,
sir, do justice upon them."

He turned and gave some orders to an officer who stood by. Then he gave
his attention to the Spanish ship again, so I caught up my weapon and
rushed back over the side, eager to find Pharaoh Nanjulian.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE FATE OF NUNEZ AND FREY BARTOLOMEO.


By that time the fight was well-nigh over. During its progress another
English ship had sailed up on the other side of the Spaniard, and her
men were now swarming over the side, eager to have some share in the
struggle. Thus it came about that in a few moments, the Spaniards were
completely worsted, and were forced to lay down their arms and beg for
mercy.

I found Pharaoh Nanjulian busily occupied in seeing to the removal of
several men, who were too weak to move of their own accord, from the
benches where we had lately been chained. These were being carried to
the English ships, where they were received with such indignation as is
felt by honest men who abhor cruelty. So strong, indeed, were the
feelings aroused amongst the English sailors at the sight of our
bleeding backs, that their officers had much ado to prevent them from
slaying the Spaniards without mercy.

"Where is the monk, Pharaoh?" I said. "He must not escape. Have you seen
aught of him during the fight?"

But Pharaoh had seen naught. He had been fighting hard himself, and that
being over he had turned his attention to such of our unfortunate
companions as were unable to help themselves.

"He cannot be far away, master," said he. "The rat will have found some
hole, no doubt."

At that moment one of Drake's officers came pressing on board, asking
for the friar.

"Bring him aboard the Golden Hinde unharmed," said he, "and the Spanish
captain too. 'Tis Captain Drake's special order. Harm neither of them,
but have them aboard."

But neither Nunez nor Frey Bartolomeo were to be seen. Their men, such
as survived--and they were but few,--stood bound on deck, glaring
sullenly at their captors, but neither monk nor captain were at hand.

"Try the cabin," said one, and we made our way to the cabin under the
poop, where Nunez was used to sit. But the door was fast, and we had to
break it down. As the first man rushed in he fell back dead, with a
sword-thrust through his heart from Nunez, while the second dropped with
a dagger-wound in his throat. But ere he could strike again Pharaoh
Nanjulian had seized him by the neck, and Captain Manuel Nunez was
dragged into the light, dispossessed of his weapons and bound securely.
I stood and looked at him, and suddenly the fierce scowl of hate and
rage cleared away from his features, and the old mocking, cold smile
began to play about the corners of his eyes and mouth again.

"The fortunes of war, Master Salkeld," said he. "Yesterday you were down
and I was up. To-day you are up and I am down. 'Tis fate."

But I had no time to talk with him then, for I was anxious to find Frey
Bartolomeo. Therefore Pharaoh and I left Nunez with the officer and
began searching the ship high and low. Because on first coming aboard
her we had been straightway conducted to the oars we knew next to
nothing of the Santa Filomena, and were accordingly some time in getting
our bearings. Nevertheless we could find no trace of the monk, who
seemed to have vanished into thin air, or to have gone overboard during
the fight. He was not to be found either in cockpit or cabin, forecastle
or lazaretto, and at last we stared blankly in each other's faces and
wondered what had become of him.

"There is one place we have not yet tried," said Pharaoh, "and that is
the powder magazine. Maybe he has retreated there."

We fetched a Spaniard from the upper deck and obliged him to conduct us
to the magazine, and there, sure enough, was Frey Bartolomeo, calm and
impassive as ever. He had stove in the head of one barrel of gunpowder,
and now stood over the powder holding a lighted candle in his hand. As
we burst in the door and confronted him, he raised his pale face and
regarded us with calmness and scorn.

"Lay but a finger on me, ye Lutheran dogs," he said, "and I will drop
this light into the powder and send your souls to perdition!"

The men with us started back, dismayed and affrighted by his grim looks
and determined words. But Pharaoh Nanjulian laughed.

"Your own soul will go with ours, friar," said he.

Frey Bartolomeo shot a fierce glance at him from under his cowl.

"Fool!" he said. "Thinkest thou that I value life? What hinders me from
destroying every one of you and myself as well?"

"This!" said Pharaoh, suddenly knocking the candle out of his hand. It
flew across the powder, and striking a bulkhead opposite, went out
harmlessly. So we seized Frey Bartolomeo, who now bitterly reproached
himself for not having blown up the ship before we reached him, and
conducted him to the upper deck, from whence he and Captain Nunez were
presently conveyed to the Golden Hinde, where they were safely stowed in
irons.

And now, the fight being over, Drake and his men made haste to see what
treasure the galleon contained. In this quest, however, those of us who
had been rescued from the oars took no part, for now that the excitement
was dying away our feverish strength went with it, so that we presently
began to exhibit signs of terrible distress and exhaustion, and many of
us swooned away. Here, however, our rescuers came to our further relief,
and the ship's doctor was soon busily engaged in seeing to us, dressing
our wounds, giving us oils and unguents for our bloody stripes, and
ordering wine and food for all of us. So we were much refreshed; but
none of these things, comforting as they were, seemed so good to us as
the words of kindness, which we heard with wonder and astonishment, our
ears having become accustomed to naught but threatenings and revilings.

While we were occupied in this pleasant fashion, Drake's men transferred
a vast amount of treasure from the Santa Filomena to the Golden Hinde.
There was a large quantity of jewels, fourteen chests of ryals of plate,
over a hundred pounds weight of gold, twenty tons of uncoined silver,
and pieces of wrought gold and silver plate of great value. The
discovery of all this treasure put our newly-found friends in high
good-humor, such ventures not having come in their way since they had
left the coast of Panama some months previous.

When all this treasure had been transferred to Drake's vessel, the
Golden Hinde, the admiral sent for the Englishmen who had been rescued
from the Santa Filomena, and gave audience to us on the quarterdeck. A
sad and sorry multitude we looked, spite of the surgeon's care, as we
stood gazing at the great sea-captain who had rescued us, and waiting
for him to speak.

"Friends and fellow-countrymen," said he, "every one of you shall go
back with me to England. We have strange tales to tell ourselves, and
so, it is somewhat evident, have ye. Be content now, I will charge
myself with your welfare. Where is he that spoke with me this morning?"

So I stepped forward, and he looked upon me keenly.

"Thy name, friend?"

"Humphrey Salkeld, sir, nephew of Sir Thurstan Salkeld of Beechcot, in
the East Riding of Yorkshire."

"Tell me thy tale, Master Salkeld."

So I gave him the history that I have here written down, and when it
came to our doings in Mexico I spoke for Pharaoh Nanjulian and for all
who stood behind me. When I had got to the period which we spent on
board the Santa Filomena, my companions in distress bared their
shoulders and backs, and showed him the scars and the wounds and the
stripes which we had received. Then his face grew stern and set and the
English sailors that stood by groaned in their wrath and indignation.

"I am beholden to you, Master Salkeld," he said, when I had done. "Are
there any of you that would say more?"

But none wished to speak save one old white-haired man, who lifted up
his hand and called God to witness that all I had said was true, and
that our torments under the Inquisition had been such as could only be
prompted by the devil.

Then Drake commanded his men to bring forward Manuel Nunez and Frey
Bartolomeo, and presently they stood before us, still bold and defiant,
and Drake looked upon them.

"I am thinking, Senors," said he, "that if I had wrought such misdeeds
upon your people as you have upon mine, and you had caught me red-handed
as I have caught you, there would have been something in the way of
torture for me before I came to my last end. But be not alarmed; we
Englishmen love justice, but we hate cruelty. And so we will be just to
you, and we will send you to your true place, where there is doubtless a
reward prepared for you. Hang them to the yard-arm of their own ship."

So they carried Nunez and the monk over the side, and presently their
bodies swung from the yard-arm of the Santa Filomena, and so they
passed to their reward. And as for Nunez, he mocked us till the end, but
the monk said never a word, but stared fixedly before him, seeming to
care no more for death than he had for the sufferings that he had heaped
upon his fellow-men.

After that Drake restored the Spaniards whom we had captured to their
own ship, and bade them go home, or back to Mexico, or wherever they
pleased, and to tell their masters what Francis Drake had done to them,
and that he would do the same to every Spaniard who crossed his path.




CHAPTER XIX.

HOME WITH DRAKE.


During our awful captivity on board the galleon we had well-nigh lost
all count or notion of time. To us one day was pretty much like another.
If we slept it was only to be awakened by the overseer's whip. Day or
night it was all one with us; never did our tormentors cease to afflict
us. We were reduced to the condition of animals, and had not even the
comfort which is allowed to them. Thus when the time of our rescue came,
we had no notion of where we were or what part of the year it was.

We now found that it was the middle of August, and that we were in the
North Pacific Ocean and bearing direct for the Moluccas, where Drake
intended to trade before continuing his voyage homeward by way of the
Cape. We also learnt that this great captain was now taking his first
voyage round the world, and that he had had many great and remarkable
adventures on the Spanish Main and on the coast of Peru, and had
enriched his vessels with the spoils of Spanish treasure-ships, so that
he now had with him a store of great and unusual value. For from some
ships he had taken bars of silver, and from others blocks of gold,
together with rich ladings, merchandise and silks, so rare and curious
as to be worth great sums of money. And all this treasure had been
chiefly won from the Spaniards in fair fight, and that without any
cruelty or lust of blood or revenge.

About the thirteenth day of September we came within view of some
islands, situated about eight degrees northward from the line. From
these the islanders came out to us in canoes hollowed out of solid
trunks of a tree, and raised very high out of the water at both ends, so
that they almost formed a semicircle. These canoes were polished so
highly that they shone like ebony, and were kept steady by pieces of
timber fixed on each side of them by strong canes, fastened at one end
to the canoe, and at the other to the timber.

The first company that came out to us brought fruits, potatoes, and
other commodities, none of any great value, and seemed anxious to trade
with us, making a great show of good-will and honesty. Soon after,
however, they sent out another fleet of canoes, the crews of which
showed themselves to be nothing better than thieves, for if we placed
anything in their hands they immediately considered it to belong to
them, and would neither restore nor pay for it. Upon this we were
obliged to get rid of them, which we did by discharging a gun. As they
had never seen ordnance discharged before they were vastly astonished by
this, and fled precipitately to the shore, having first pelted us with
showers of stones which they carried in their canoes.

On the fifth of November we cast anchor before Ternate, and had scarce
arrived when the viceroy of that place, attended by the chief nobles,
came out in three boats, rowed by forty men on each side. Soon
afterwards appeared the king himself, attended by a large and imposing
retinue. Him we received with discharges of cannon and musketry,
together with various kinds of music, with which he was so highly
delighted that he would have the musicians down into his own boat. At
this place we stayed some days, trafficking with the inhabitants, who
brought us large quantities of provisions, and behaved to us with
civility. After that we repaired to a neighboring island, and there
found a commodious harbor where we repaired the Golden Hinde, and did
ourselves enjoy a much-needed rest.

Leaving this place on the 12th day of December, we sailed southwards
towards the Celebes; but the wind being against us, we drifted about
among a multitude of islands mingled with shallows until the middle of
January. And now we met with an adventure which was like to have stayed
our further progress and put a summary end to all our hopes. For sailing
forward under a strong gale we were one night suddenly surprised by a
shock, caused by our being thrown upon a shoal, on which the speed of
our course served to fix us very fast. Upon examination we found that
the rock on which we had struck rose perpendicularly from the water, and
there was no anchorage, nor any bottom to be found for some distance. On
making this discovery we lightened the ship by throwing into the sea a
not inconsiderable portion of her lading. Even then the ship seemed
hopelessly fast, and we had almost given way to despair when we were on
a sudden relieved by a remission of the wind, which, having hitherto
blown strongly against that side of the ship which lay towards the sea,
holding it upright against the rock, now slackened, and blowing no
longer against our vessel allowed it to reel into deep water, to our
great comfort and relief. We had enjoyed so little hope of ever
extricating ourselves from this perilous position, that Drake had caused
the sacrament to be administered to us as if we had been on the point of
death, and now that we were mercifully set free we sang a Te Deum and
went forward very cautiously, hardly daring to set sails lest we should
chance upon some reef still more dangerous.

We now continued our voyage without any remarkable occurrence or
adventure, until about the middle of March we came to anchor off the
Island of Java. Having sent to the king a present of clothes and silks,
we received from him in return a quantity of provisions; and on the
following day Drake himself went on shore, and after entertaining the
king with music obtained leave from him to forage for fresh food. Here,
then, we remained some days, taking in provisions, and being visited by
the princes and head men of that country, and later by the king, all of
whom manifested great interest in us, and in our armaments and
instruments of navigation.

Leaving Java about the end of March we sailed for the Cape of Good Hope,
which we sighted about the middle of June. During all that time we met
with no very remarkable adventure; nevertheless, because we were sailing
through seas which no Englishman had ever previously traversed there was
not a day which did not present some feature of interest to us, or add
to our knowledge of those strange parts of the world. To me, and to such
of my companions as had suffered with me in the dungeons of the
Inquisition or on the deck of the galleon, this voyage was as a glimpse
of Paradise. For we were treated with the utmost kindness and
consideration by Drake and his men, and they would not suffer us to
undertake anything in the shape of work until our wounds were fairly
healed and our strength recruited. To those of us who had suffered so
bitterly that our strength was well-nigh departed, this welcome relief
was very grateful. As for me, on discovering my condition I was rated
with Drake and his officers, and with them did spend many exceeding
pleasant hours, listening to their marvelous adventures and stories of
fights with our old enemies, the Spaniards. But Pharaoh, hating to do
naught, applied for a rating, and so they made him boatswain's mate, and
thenceforth he was happy, and seemed quickly to forget the many
privations and discomforts which he and I had undergone.

So on the third week of September, 1580, we came to Plymouth Sound, and
once more looked upon English land and English faces. And this we did
with such thankfulness and rejoicing as you cannot conceive. As for
Drake and his men, they had been away two years and some ten months,
and in that time had taken their ships round the world. And because they
were the first Englishmen that had ever done this, there was such
ringing of bells, and lighting of bonfires, and setting up of feasts and
jollities as had never been known in England. From the queen to the
meanest hind there was nobody that did not join in the general
rejoicing. Wherefore, at Plymouth, where we landed, there were great
stirrings, and men clung around us to hear our marvelous tales and
adventures. And as for Drake himself, the queen soon afterwards made him
a knight on the deck of the Golden Hinde; and so he became Sir Francis,
and thereafter did many wonderful deeds which are set forth in the
chronicles of that time.

Now, I no sooner set foot upon English soil than I was immediately
consumed with impatience to go home to Beechcot, and therefore I sought
out Drake and begged him to let me begone.

"Why," quoth he, "knowing your story as I do, Master Salkeld, I make no
wonder that you should be in some haste to return to your own friends. I
pray God that you may find all well with them."

Then he generously pressed upon me a sum of money in gold, wherewith to
fit myself out for the journey and defray my expenses on the way; and
for this kindness I was deeply grateful, seeing that I was utterly
penniless, and owed the very garments I then wore to the charity of one
of his officers. So I said farewell to him and his company, and begged
them to remember me if we should meet no more, and then I went to find
Pharaoh Nanjulian.

"Pharaoh," said I, when I came upon him on the deck of the Golden Hinde,
"I am going home."

He pushed back his cap and scratched his head and looked at me.

"Aye," he said, "I supposed it would be so, master. As for me, I have no
home to go to. My mother is dead and buried in Marazion churchyard, and
I have neither kith nor kin in the wide world."

"Come with me to Beechcot," said I, "you shall abide there for the rest
of your days in peace and plenty."

But he shook his head.

"Nay, master," he answered, "that would never do. I am naught but a
rough sea-dog, and I should be too big and savage for a quiet life.
Besides, yon constable of yours would be forever at my heels, fearing
lest I should break the peace again."

"There shall no man harm you if you will come with me," said I. "Come
and be my man."

"Nay, master, not so. Born and bred to the sea I was, and to the sea I
will cleave. Besides, I am Francis Drake's man now, and with him I shall
see rare ventures. Already there is talk of an expedition against the
Spaniards. That is the life for me."

So there was no more to be said, and I gave him my hand sorrowfully, for
he had proved a true friend.

"Good-bye, then, Pharaoh Nanjulian."

"Good-bye, master. We have seen some rare ventures together. I thank God
for bringing us safely out of them."

"Amen! I shall not forget them or thee. And God grant we may meet
again."

So we pressed each other's hands with full hearts, and I went away and
left him gazing after me.




CHAPTER XX.

BEECHCOT ONCE MORE.


Because it was autumn, I found some slight difficulty in traveling
across country from Plymouth to Beechcot, and it accordingly was several
days before I reached York and entered upon the final stage of my
journey. At Plymouth I had bought a stout horse, and pushed forward,
mounted in creditable fashion, to Exeter, and from thence to Bristol,
where I struck into the Midlands and made for Derby and Sheffield. It
took me a fortnight to reach York, and there, my horse being well-nigh
spent, though I had used him with mercy, I exchanged him for a cob,
which was of stout build, and good enough to carry me over the thirty
miles which yet remained of my journey.

Now, as I drew near the old place, in the twilight of a dull October
afternoon, my heart beat within my breast as if it would suffocate me. I
had been away two years, and had gone under circumstances of the
strangest character. Those whom I had left behind had probably long
since given me up as dead. Worse than that--how did I know what
malicious story might not have been invented and set forth by my cousin
Jasper as to my disappearance? Well, the time was now at hand when all
should be explained. But yet--what changes might there not be? I dreaded
to think of them. I might find my good uncle dead, Jasper in possession,
my sweetheart married--but nay, that seemed hardly to be believed. And
yet if she thought me dead?

Thus I went forward, my heart torn by many conflicting emotions. Then I
began to think of the changes that had taken place in me. Two years ago
I had set out a light-hearted, careless lad, full of confidence and
ignorance, knowing naught of the world nor of its cruelties. Now I came
back a man, full of strange experiences, my mind charged with many
terrible memories, my body bearing witness of the sufferings and
privations which I had undergone. It was not the old Humphrey Salkeld
that rode down Beechcot village street. Nay, it was not even the old
Humphrey Salkeld in looks. Stopping a few hours at the inn in York I had
examined myself in a mirror, and had decided that it would be hard work
for my old friends to recognize me. I had grown an inch or two, my face
was seamed and wrinkled, and wore a strange, grim, wearied look, my
beard was a good three inches long, and my mouth covered by a moustache.
Changed I was indeed.

I rode up to the door of the inn at Beechcot, where I had first seen
Pharaoh Nanjulian, and called loudly for the host. There was no one
about the door of the inn, but presently Geoffrey Scales, looking no
different to what he did when I had last seen him, came bustling along
the sanded passage with his lantern, and turned the light full on my
face. I trembled, and could scarce control my voice as I spoke to him;
but I soon saw that he did not recognize me.

"How far is it to Scarborough, master?" I inquired.

"A good twenty miles, sir, and a bad road."

"What, are there thieves on it?"

"There are highwaymen, sir, and ruts, which is worse; and as for
mud--there, your honor would be lost in it."

"Then I had better stay here for the night, eh?"

"Much better, if your honor pleases."

So I dismounted and bade him take my cob round to his stable, and
followed him myself to hear more news.

"What place is this?" I inquired.

"Beechcot, sir--a village of the Wolds."

"And who owns it, landlord?"

"Sir Thurstan Salkeld, sir."

"Is he alive and well, landlord?"

Now, whether it was my voice or the unwonted agitation in it that
attracted his attention, I know not, but certain it is that when I asked
this question Geoffrey Scales held up his light to my face, and after
anxiously peering therein for a moment, cried out loudly:

"Marry, I knew it! 'Tis Master Humphrey, come home again, alive and
well!" and therewith he would have rushed away to rouse the whole
village if I had not stayed him.

"Hush! Geoffrey," I said. "It is I, true enough, and I am well enough,
but prithee keep quiet awhile, for I do not wish anyone to know that I
have returned for a season. Tell me first how is my uncle and Mistress
Rose. Are they well, Geoffrey? Quick!"

"Oh, Master Humphrey," quoth he, "what a turn you have given me! Yes,
sir, yes; your uncle, good man, is well, though he hath never been the
same man since you disappeared, Master Humphrey. And as for Mistress
Rose, 'tis just the same sweet maiden as ever, and hath grieved for you
mightily. But what a to-do there will be, Master Humphrey! Prithee, let
me go and tell all the folk."

"Not now, Geoffrey, on thy life. Let me first see my sweetheart and my
uncle, and then I will cause the great bell at the manor to be rung, and
you shall take it for a signal and shall tell who you like."

So he promised to obey me, and I left him and took my way towards the
vicarage, for my heart longed sore for the presence of my sweetheart.

Now, as I came up to the front of the house there was a light burning in
the parlor, and I stole up to the window and looked in, and saw Rose
busy with her needle. Fair and sweet she was, aye, sweeter, I think,
than ever; but it was easy to see that she had sorrowed, and that the
sorrow had left its mark upon her. I had always remembered her in my
trials and torments as the merry, laughing maiden, that had flown hither
and thither like a spirit of spring; now I saw her a woman, sweet and
lovely, but with a touch of sadness about her that I knew had come there
because of me.

I went round to the door and tapped softly upon it. Presently came Rose,
bearing a candle, and opened it to my knock, and looked out upon me. I
drew farther away into the darkness.

"Is this the abode of Master Timotheus Herrick?" I asked.

"Yes, sir," she answered, "but he is not in at this moment. You will
find him at the church, where he has gone to read the evening service."

"I had a message for his daughter," said I.

"I am his daughter, sir. What message have you for me?"

"I have come from sea," I answered. "It is a message from one you know."

"From one I know--at sea? But I know no one at sea. Oh, sir, what is it
you would tell me?"

"Let me come in," I said; and she turned and led the way into the
parlor, and set down the candle and looked steadily at me. And then she
suddenly knew me, and in another instant I had her in my arms, and her
face was upon my breast, and all the woes and sorrows of my captivity
were forgotten.

"Humphrey!" she cried. "O, thank God--thank God! My dear, my dear, it is
you, is it not? Am I dreaming--shall I wake presently to find you gone?"

"Never again, sweetheart, never again! I am come back indeed--somewhat
changed, it is true, but still your true and faithful lover."

"And I thought you were dead! O my poor Humphrey, where have you been
and what has been done to you? Yes, you are changed--you have suffered,
have you not?"

"More than I could wish my worst enemy to suffer," I answered. "But I
forget it all when I look at you, Rose. Oh, sweetheart, if you knew how
I have longed for this moment!"

And then, hand in hand, we kneeled down together and thanked God for all
his goodness, and for the marvelous mercy with which he had brought us
through this time of sore trouble. And on our knees we kissed each other
solemnly, and so sealed our reunion, and blotted out all the bitterness
of the past from our hearts, so that there was nothing left there but
memories, sad indeed, but no longer painful.

"And now," said Rose, "tell me, Humphrey, where you have been and how it
was you went away. Oh, if you knew how we have sorrowed for you."

"First tell me, Rose, how is my uncle?"

"He is well, Humphrey, but he has mourned for you ever since Jasper came
home and told us of your death."

"Ah! Jasper came home and told you of my death, did he? And by what
manner of death did I die, according to Master Jasper?"

"He said you were drowned at Scarborough, in coming from some vessel
where you and he had been paying a visit at night to the captain."

"And did no one doubt him, Rose? Were there no inquiries made?"

"I doubted him, Humphrey. I felt sure there was some strange mystery,
but how could I find it out? And what could be done--they could not drag
Scarborough Bay for your body. Humphrey, did Jasper play some trick upon
you--did he get you out of the way?"

"He did, Rose. Yea, he got me out of the way so well that I have been
right round the world since last I set foot in Beechcot. Think of that,
my dear. Right round the world! I have seen Mexico and the Pacific and
Java and the Celebes and Africa, and I know not what, and here I am
again."

"But you have suffered, Humphrey? Where--and how?"

So I told her very briefly of what had happened to me in the cells of
the Inquisition, and as I spoke, her sweet face was filled with
compassion and her eyes were bright with tears, and she held my hands
tightly clasped in her own as if she would never let them go again.

"Can such things be?" she asked. "Oh, why God does allow them I cannot
understand. My poor Humphrey!"

"Naught but God's help could have brought us through them, dear heart,"
I answered. "And, indeed, I think naught of them now, and would
cheerfully face them again if I thought they would cause you to love me
more."

But she answered that that was impossible, and scolded me very prettily
for thinking of such a thing.

And then came Master Timotheus back from reading prayers, and entered
the parlor, carrying a great folio in his hand and blinking at us
through his big spectacles. And when he saw me, he stopped and stared.

"Here is a visitor, father," said Rose. "Look closely at him--do you not
know him?"

But the good man, taking my hand in his own, did stare at me hard and
long ere he discovered me, and then he fell upon my neck and embraced me
heartily and wept with joy.

"Of a truth," said he, "I might have known that it was thee, Humphrey,
for two reasons. First, I have been of an uncommonly light-hearted
nature all this day, and did once detect myself in the act of singing a
merry song; and secondly, I saw on entering the parlor that Rose's face
was brighter than it hath been since last we saw thee."

Then he laid his hand on my head and blessed me, and thanked God for
sending me home again; and he shed more tears, and was fain to take off
his spectacles and polish them anew. And he would have had me sup with
them, but on hearing that I had not yet seen my uncle he bade me go to
him at once, so I said farewell for that time and took my way to the
manor.




CHAPTER XXI.

HOW THEY RANG THE BELLS AT BEECHCOT CHURCH.


As I walked across from the vicarage to the manor house, the moon came
out in the autumn evening sky and lighted the landscape with a
brightness that was little short of daylight. I stood for a few moments
at the vicarage gate admiring the prospect. Far away to the eastward
rose the Wolds, dark and unbroken, different indeed from the giant bulk
of Orizaba, but far more beautiful to me. Beneath them lay the village
of Beechcot, with its farmsteads and cottages casting black shadows upon
the moonlit meadow, and here and there a rushlight burning dimly in the
windows. I had kept that scene in my mind's eye many a time during my
recent tribulations, and had wondered if ever I should see it again.
Now that I did see it, it was far more beautiful than I had ever known
it or imagined it to be, for it meant home, and love, and peace after
much sorrow.

My path led me through the churchyard. There the moonlight fell bright
and clear on the silent mounds and ghostly tombstones. By the chancel I
paused for a moment to glance at the monument which Sir Thurstan had
long since erected to my father and mother's memory. It was light enough
to read the inscription, and also to see that a new one had been added
to it. Wondering what member of our family was dead, I went nearer and
examined the stone more carefully. Then I saw that the new inscription
was in memory of myself!

I have never heard of a man reading his own epitaph, and truly it gave
me many curious feelings to stand there and read of myself as a dead
man. And yet I had been dead to all of them for more than two years.

"And of Humphrey Salkeld, only son of the above Richard Salkeld and his
wife Barbara, who was drowned at Scarborough, October, 1578, to the
great grief and sorrow of his uncle, Thurstan Salkeld, Knight."

       *       *       *       *       *

"So I am dead and yet alive," I said, and laughed gayly at the notion.
"If that is so, there are some great surprises in store for more than
one in this parish. And no one will be more surprised than my worthy
cousin, but he will be the only person that is sorry to see me. Oh, for
half an hour with him alone!"

At that very moment Jasper was coming to meet me. I knew it not, nor did
he.

Between the churchyard and the manor-house of Beechcot there is a field
called the Duke's Garth, and across this runs a foot-path. As I turned
away from reading my own epitaph, I saw a figure advancing along this
path and making for the churchyard. It was the figure of a man, and he
was singing some catch or song softly to himself. I recognized the
voice at once. It was Jasper's. I drew back into the shadow cast by the
buttress of the chancel and waited his coming. We were going to settle
our account once and forever.

He came lightly over the stile which separates the garth from the
churchyard, and was making rapid strides towards the vicarage when I
stopped him.

"Jasper," I said, speaking in a deep voice and concealing myself in the
shadow. "Jasper Stapleton."

He stopped instantly, and stood looking intently towards where I stood.

"Who calls me?" he said.

"I, Jasper,--thy cousin, Humphrey Salkeld."

I could have sworn that he started and began to tremble. But suddenly he
laughed.

"Dead men call nobody," said he. "You are some fool that is trying to
frighten me. Come out, sirrah!"

And he drew near. I waited till he was close by, and then I stepped into
the moonlight, which fell full and clear on my face. He gave a great
cry, and lifting up his arm as if to ward off a blow fell back a pace or
two and stood staring at me.

"Humphrey!" he cried.

"None other, cousin. The dead, you see, sometimes come to life again.
And I am very much alive, Jasper."

He stood still staring at me, and clutching his heart as if his breath
came with difficulty.

"What have you to say, Jasper?" I asked at length.

"We--we thought you were drowned," he gasped out. "There is an
inscription on your father's tombstone."

"Liar!" I said. "You know I was not drowned. You know that you contrived
that I should be carried to Mexico. Tell me no more lies, cousin. Let us
for once have the plain truth. Why did you treat me as you did at
Scarborough?"

"Because you stood 'twixt me and the inheritance," he muttered sullenly.

"And so for the sake of a few acres of land and a goodly heritage you
would condemn one who had never harmed you to horrors such as you cannot
imagine?" I said. "Look at me, Jasper. Even in this light it is not
difficult to see how I am changed. I have gone through such woes and
torments as you would scarcely credit. I have been in the hands of
devils in human shape, and they have so worked their will upon me that
there is hardly an inch of my body that is not marked and scarred. That
was thy doing, Jasper,--thine and thy fellow-villain's. Dost know what
happened to him?"

"No," he whispered, "what of him?"

"I saw him hanged to his own yard-arm in the Pacific Ocean, Jasper, and
he went to his own place with the lives of many an innocent man upon his
black soul. Take care you do not follow him. Shame upon you, cousin,
for the trick you played me!"

"You came between me and the girl I loved," he said fiercely. "All is
fair in love and war."

"Coward!" I said. "And liar, too! I never came between her and thee, for
she had never a word to give such a black-hearted villain as thou hast
proved thyself. And now, what is to prevent me from taking my revenge
upon thee, Jasper?"

"This," he said, very suddenly, whipping out his rapier. "This, Master
Humphrey. Home you have come again, worse luck, and have no doubt done
your best to injure me in more quarters than one, but you shall not live
to enjoy either land, or title, or sweetheart, for you shall die here
and now."

And with that he came pressing upon me with a sudden fury that was full
of murderous intent.

Now I had no weapon by me save a stout cudgel which I had cut from a
coppice by the wayside that morning, and this you would think was
naught when set against a rapier. Nevertheless I made such play with it,
that presently I knocked Jasper's weapon clean out of his hand so that
he could not recover it. And after that I seized him by the throat and
beat with my cudgel until he roared and begged for mercy, beseeching me
not to kill him.

"Have no fear, cousin," said I, still laying on to him, "I will not kill
thee, for I would have thee repent of all thy misdeeds."

And with that I gave him two or three sound cuts and then flung him from
me against the wall, where he lay groaning and cursing me.

After that I saw Jasper Stapleton no more. He never showed his face in
Beechcot again, and in a few days his mother, Dame Barbara, disappeared
also; and so they vanished out of my life, and I was glad of it, for
they had worked me much mischief.

When I reached the manor-house I let myself in by a secret way that I
knew of and went straight to the great hall, where sat my uncle, Sir
Thurstan, wrapped in cloaks and rugs, before a great fire of wood. He
was all alone, and hearing my step he half turned his head.

"Is that Jasper?" he inquired.

"Nay, sir," said I. "It is I--Humphrey--and I am come home again."

And I went forward and kneeled down before him and put my hands on his
knees.

For a moment he stared at me as men stare at ghosts, then he gave a
great sob of delight, stretched out his arms, put them about my neck,
and wept over me like a woman.

"Oh lad, lad!" said he. "If thou didst but know how this old heart did
grieve for thy sake. And thou art here, well and strong, and I did cause
thy name to be graven on thy parents' tombstone!"

"Never mind, sir," said I, "we can cut it out again. Anyway I am not
dead, but I have seen some rare and terrible adventures."

"Sit thyself down at my side," quoth he, "and tell me all about them.
Alive and well--yes, and two inches taller, as I live! Well, I thank God
humbly. But thou art hungry, poor boy,--what ho! where are those
rascals? Call for them, Humphrey,--thou must be famished."

"All in good time, sir," said I, and went over to the rope which led to
the great bell and pulled it vigorously, so that the clangor filled the
park below with stirring sound. And Geoffrey Scales, waiting impatiently
at the inn, heard it and ran round with the news, and they rang the
church bells, and every soul in Beechcot that could walk came hurrying
to the manor and would have audience of me in the great hall.

Thus did I come home again. And having told my story to my uncle, Sir
Thurstan, and to Master Timotheus Herrick, we agreed that for the
present we would leave Jasper Stapleton's name out of it. But somehow,
most likely because Jasper and his evil-tongued mother disappeared, the
truth got out, and ere long everybody knew my story from beginning to
end.

Within a few weeks of my home-coming Rose and I were married in Beechcot
church, and again the bells rang out merrily. Never had bridegroom a
sweeter bride; never had husband a truer or nobler wife. I say it after
fifty years of blessed companionship, and in my heart I thank God for
the delights which he hath given me in her.

And now I have brought my history to a close. Yet there is one matter
which I must speak of before I say farewell to you.

It is about twenty years since one of my servants came to me one
summer evening and said that an old man stood at my door waiting to
see me. I followed him presently, and there saw a tall, white-haired,
white-bearded figure, dressed in a rough seaman's dress and leaning
upon a staff. He looked at me and smiled, and then I saw that it was
Pharaoh Nanjulian.

"You have not forgotten me, master?" he said.

"Forgotten thee! May God forget me if ever I forget thee, my old, true
friend!" I said, and I led him in and made him welcome as a king to my
house and to all that I had. And with me he lived, an honored guest and
friend, for ten years longer, when he died, being then a very old man of
near one hundred years. And him I still mourn with true sorrow and
affection, for his was a mighty heart, and it had been knit to mine by
those bonds of sorrow which are scarcely less strong than the bonds of
love.

                         THE END.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Minor changes have been made to correct typesetters' errors; otherwise,
every effort has been made to remain true to the author's words and
intent.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of In the Days of  Drake, by J. S. Fletcher

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE DAYS OF  DRAKE ***

***** This file should be named 29304.txt or 29304.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/0/29304/

Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
