The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ancient Monuments of North and South
America, 2nd ed., by C. S. Rafinesque

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Ancient Monuments of North and South America, 2nd ed.

Author: C. S. Rafinesque

Release Date: July 8, 2009 [EBook #29350]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCIENT MONUMENTS ***




Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain material produced by
Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)





Transcriber's Note

A number of typographical errors have been maintained in this version of
this book. They have been marked with a [TN-#], which refers to a
description in the complete list found at the end of the text.
Inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation have been maintained. A list
of inconsistently spelled and hyphenated words is found at the end of
the text.

Oe ligatures have been expanded.





THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS

OF

NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA.

SECOND EDITION,

Corrected, enlarged and with some additions,

BY C. S. RAFINESQUE, A. M.--Ph. D.


_Professor of Historical and Natural Sciences, Member of many Learned
Societies in Philadelphia, New York, Lexington, Cincinnatti,[TN-1]
Nashville, Paris, Bordeaux, Brussels, Bonn, Vienna, Zurich, Naples &c,
the American Antiquarian Society, the Northern Antiquarian Society of
Copenhagen &c._


    The massive ruins the arts and skill unfold
    Of busy workers, and their styles reveal,
    The objects and designs of such devisers:
    In silent voices they speak, to thinking minds
    They teach, who were the human throngs that left
    Uplifted marks for witness of past ages.


_PHILADELPHIA_

1838.

Printed for the Author.




NOTICE.


This Essay or Introduction to my Researches on the Antiquities and
Monuments of North and South America, was printed in September 1838 in
the first Number of the American Museum of Baltimore, a literary monthly
periodical undertaken by Messrs. Brooks and Snodgrass, as a new series
of the North American Quarterly Magazine. Being printed in a hurry and
at a distance several material errors occured,[TN-2] which are now
rectified, and this second edition will form thereby the Introduction to
my long contemplated Work on the Ancient Monuments of this continent: to
which I alluded in my work on the Ancient Nations of America published
in 1836. I will add some notes or additions thereto, and may
gradualy[TN-3] publish my original descriptions and views, plans, maps
&c, of such as I have surveyed, examined and studied between 1818 and
this time; comparing them with those observed by others in America or
elsewhere of the same character--such works are of a national importance
or interest, and ought to be patronized by the States or Learned
Societies, or wealthy patriots; but if there is little prospect of their
doing so, I must either delay or curtail the publication of the
interesting materials collected for 20 years past.




INTRODUCTION.


The feelings that lead some men to investigate remains of antiquity and
search into their origin, dates and purposes, are similar to those
actuating lofty minds, when not satisfied with the surface of things,
they inquire into the source and origin of every thing accessible to
human ken, and scrutinize or analize[TN-4] every tangible object. Such
feelings lead us to trace events and principles, to ascend rivers to
their sources, to climb the rugged sides of mountains and reach their
lofty summits, to plough the waves and dive into the sea, or even soar
into the air, to scan and measure the heavenly bodies, and at last to
lift our eyes and souls to the _Supreme Being_, the source of
all.--Applied to mankind the same feelings invite us to seek for the
origin of arts and sciences, the steps of civilization on earth, the
rise of nations, states and empires, tracing their cradles, dispersions
and migrations by the dim records of traditional tales, or the more
certain monumental evidence of human structures.

This last evidence is but a branch of the archeological science,
embracing besides the study of documents, records, medals, coins,
inscriptions, implements, &c., buried in the earth or hidden in
recesses: while the ruins of cities, palaces and temples, altars and
graves, pyramids and towers, walls and roads, sculptures and
idols--reveal to our inquiries not only the existence of their devisers
and framers at their locations, but give us a view of their
civilization, religions, manners and abilities.

If the annals of the Greeks and Romans had been lost, as have been those
of Egypt, of Assyria and many other early empires, we should still have
in the ruins and monuments of Italy, and Greece, complete evidence of
the existence of those nations, their location, power and skill; nay,
even of the extent of their dominion by their colonial monuments,
scattered from Syria to Spain, from Lybia to Britain. If the British
annals should ever be lost hereafter by neglect or revolutions, the
ruins of dwellings, churches, monuments &c., built in the British style,
will reveal the existence or preserve the memory of the wide extent of
British power by colonies sent from North America to Guyana, from
Hindustan to Ceylon, South Africa and Australia.

And thus it is in both Americas where many nations and empires have
dwelt and passed away, risen and fallen by turns, leaving few or no
records, except the traces of their existence, and widely spread
colonies by the ruins of their cities and monuments, standing yet as
silent witnesses of past dominion and great power. It is only of late
that they have begun to deserve the attention of learned men and
historians--what had been stated by Ulloa, Humboldt, Juarros, Delrio,
&c., of some of them, chiefly found in the Spanish part of America, as
well as the scattered accounts of the many fragments found in North
America, from the lakes of Canada to Louisiana, although confined to a
few places or widely remote localities, have begun to excite the
curiosity of all inquiring men, and are soon likely to deserve as much
interest as the famed ruins of Palmyra and Thebes, Babylon and
Persepolis; when the future historians of America shall make known the
wonderful and astonishing results that they have suggested, or will
soon unfold, particularly when accurately surveyed and explored, drawn
and engraved; instead of being hidden and veiled, or hardly noticed by
the detractors of the Americans, the false historians of the school of
Depaw and Robertson, who have perverted or omitted the most striking
features of American history.

The most erroneous conceptions prevail as yet concerning them, and the
most rude or absurd ideas are entertained in our country of their
objects and nature. As in modern Greece, every ruin is now a
_Paleo-castro_ or old castle for the vulgar peasant or herdsman, thus
all our ruins of the West are _Indian forts_ for the settlers of the
Western states; and every traveller gazing at random at a few, exclaims
that _nothing is known about them, nor their builders_. The more refined
writers can be very sentimental on their veiled origin, but scarcely any
one takes the trouble to compare them with others elsewhere, in or out
of America, which would be, however, the only means to attain the object
they seem desirous of, or to unravel their historical riddle. Some
writers speak of them as if they were only a few mounds and graves,
scarcely worthy of notice; yet they are such mounds as are found yet in
the Trojan plains, sung by Homer, dating at least three thousand years
ago, and even by many deemed earlier than the Trojan war, and still
existing to this day to baffle our inquiries: while similar monuments
existing by thousands in the plains of Scythia and Tartary, Persia and
Arabia, as well as the forests and prairies of North America, evince a
striking connexion of purpose and skill by remote ancient nations of
both hemispheres.

But our monuments do not merely consist in such mounds or tumuli, since
we find besides in North America, ruins of cities, some of which were
walled with earth or even stones, real forts or citadels, temples and
altars of all shapes, but chiefly circular, square or polygonal, some
elliptical, hexagonal, octagonal, _&_c., quite regularly pointing to the
cardinal points. We have also traces of buildings, foundations, roads,
avenues, causeways, canals, bridges, dromes, or racecourses, pillars and
pyramids, wells, pits, arenas, _&_c. And of these not a few, but
hundreds of them, many of which are unsurveyed and undescribed as yet.
These, it must be recollected, are all north of Mexico, or the region of
the more perfect monuments of Mexican and Central America, although
often in the same style. There, as in South America, structures are met
of the most elaborate workmanship, of cut and carved stones, with hard
cement, vaulted arches, fine sculptures and even inscriptions. The
materials of our Northern monuments are often ruder, chiefly of earth,
clay, gravel, small stones, or even _shells_ near the sea-shores,
sometimes of _pize_ or beaten and rammed clay, (as in Peru,) unbaked
bricks and rough stones. These facts may confirm the Mexican traditions,
stating that the nations of Anahuac (now Mexico) once dwelt further
north, in our fruitful Western plains, where wood abounded and stones
were scarce, wherefore they built their cities and _t_emples[TN-5] of
wood, raising altars, platforms, walls and entrenchments of earth or
clay.

The dreams and false hypotheses upon America have amused the learned for
ages: in attempting to account for the origin of the Americans and
their monuments, they have generally neglected to compare them with the
monuments and languages of all the other nations scattered over the
whole earth, or else only taking a partial view of them, comparing a few
fragments of two or three nations or regions, a few words of a
centesimal part of the actual languages, the writers or historians have
fallen into egregious mistakes; more fond of systematic errors than
hidden truth, they have indulged, without due consideration, in mere
dreams or systems, based on a few facts, that are overruled by hundreds
of other facts, unknown to them, or neglected when known. It would be
useless and tedious to refute again such false systems, that have been
refuted and upset by each other. It may, however, be needful, perhaps,
to mention three of the most absurd, in order to warn against them, or
show their improbability and impossibility. They may be called for
distinction sake, the _Jewish_ system, the _Mongolic_ system, and the
_American_ system.

Among these the first named is one of the oldest, and at the same time,
has yet a powerful hold upon many minds; it ascribes the whole American
population with one hundred languages and one thousand dialects, myriads
of ruins and monuments, _to the Jews_! either of the ten dispersed
tribes, who were not Jews but Israelites--or of Solomon's time and
voyages, while the Jews only began to exist as such after his death--or
of patriarchal times antecedent to their existence, when they were only
OBRIM, whom we miscall _Hebrews_, or going still further back to the
times of Noah and Peleg, when not even the Obrim had any existence. It
has been proved that the American nations did not possess the use of
the plough, iron, alphabets, or week of seven days, which no Jewish nor
Hebrew descendants could have forgotten. The American languages have as
much, or more affinities with the Sanscrit, Greek, Latin, Celtic,
Persian, Berber, Turkish, &c., languages, than with the old and modern
Hebrew and Arabic. The Jews or IEUDI, who only began two thousand four
hundred years ago were not navigators; therefore it is evident that they
cannot have come to America and produced here the two thousand nations
and tribes of this vast continent: nay, not even a single one of them
perhaps.

The Mongolic opinion, lately revived by Ranking, is the most extravagant
of all, since it ventures to assert seriously, and derive all these
nations and languages from late colonies of Mongols within less than one
thousand years ago, who came to America over the ice, bringing with them
tame elephants for sport, that are since become the fossil elephants and
mammoths buried in our diluvial or alluvial soil--to state these
absurdities is a sufficient refutation, every man of any reading and
scientific knowledge will perceive the impossibility.

Galindo and Josiah Priest have quite lately revived also the opinion of
some dreaming philosophers who had asserted that America was the _cradle
of mankind_ or one of them, instead of Central Asia. Galindo allows,
however, the Caucasian race of men to be distinct; but he says--"_The
hum_a_n[TN-6] race of America I must assert to be the most ancient on
the globe_;[TN-7]"[8-*]

He goes on to state that to the primaeval civilization of America must be
assigned a great and indefinite antiquity, leaving however no palpable
monuments; but sending colonies to civilize China and Japan! is not this
preposterous? where are the proofs either from traditions, languages,
monuments or other sources?

Meantime Josiah Priest, in his compilation on American antiquities, has
boldly asserted that Noah's ark rested in America, (whereabout?) and
that he had three sons, one white, one red and one black! (what was the
color of their wives?) from whom are descended the three races of
mankind, who colonized the whole earth, leaving, however, neither white
nor black in America[TN-8] The glaring incongruity, of these bold
assertions, or of the indefinite origin of Galindo are equally palpable;
but nevertheless it is not improbable that they will find now and
hereafter other advocates, since the absurd Jewish origin of all the
Americans has still many believers, and even Ranking has perhaps some
supporters.

To admit that America was the only cradle of mankind, is based on no
evidence whatever, either historical or philological or monumental:
while on the contrary all the monuments and records of the eastern
oontinent[TN-9] trace this cradle to Central Asia. To suppose that
America was one of the human cradles, is certainly worthy of inquiry;
but such a cradle must be sought for and located somewhere, and neither
the volcanic mountains, nor swampy plains of South America, nor the
frigid wilds of North America, appear calculated to offer it. Others
have been thought of in Africa and Australia; but seldom in the spirit
of seeking truth, rather in that of supporting some favorite doctrine.
Such speculations ought at least to be based on better foundations than
mere assertions, evident philological proofs are required before they
can be listened to, and no total and complete diversity of mankind in
every aspect has been found any where to support the theory of a
plurality of human species and Cradles. Europe and Africa have been
repeatedly invaded by migrations from Asia. In America such migrations
can be traced north and east by the Atlantic ocean, or north west from
Berhring's[TN-10] strait, while we have not the faintest indication of
invasions of Asia from America. The only traditional account of the
invasion of Europe, and North Africa by the _Atlantes_ (probably
Americans, for the great _Atlantis_ was this continent) is involved in
doubt, and besides these very Atlantes were deemed Neptunian colonies;
although it must be confessed that in almost every instance the
colonists to America appear to have found previous inhabitants, who must
have been still earlier and remote colonies, if they were not
indigenous. But the sea-shores of North America from Labrador to
Carolina were desert at a very late period comparatively, when the
Western tribes came there.

The actual purpose does not extend to all the details of these deep
inquiries, but is chiefly confined to ascertain and prove the similarity
of the oldest primitive monuments of both hemispheres, and whereby a
connection of coeval and similar civilization is evinced in the earliest
times before the records of history. This evidence, which may be called
_monumental_, dives into the gloom of past ages, and hence descends to
ours, reaching our understanding by gradual links: while the
_philological_ evidence of spoken modern languages, fragments or
children of older primitive languages, ascends by their means to equal
antiquity; both combining, therefore, to complete the history of
mankind, where annals and traditions cease to lead us or are quite
obscure: these combined bring more certainty to the scrutinising mind
than the mere physical features of men, and their complexions, so
fluctuating and mingled. But neither of them solve the question of the
actual original Cradle or Cradles of mankind. If indeed monuments and
languages of various parts of the earth were quite different, and the
features or colors of men likewise distinct there, we might suppose
there could have been several species and cradles of men: but it is not
so, features and languages are so variable and mingling in our own
times, and so diversified every where, as to baffle and preclude
complete insulation. Monuments are also after all so much alike in many
remote parts, that although divisible into styles of various ages and
stages of improvement, they do evince a great similarity in coeval ages
or stages of civilization.

To prove this great fact and the important results, might be the subject
of a large work, and we have heard that Mr. Warden has been engaged in
Paris in something of this kind. His work has not yet reached us; but
whenever it will be completed, it shall be only one step towards the
elucidation of this deep theme. Many facts are yearly evolved in
America, new researches undertaken and discoveries made: while in
Africa, Lybia, Arabia, Persia, India and even the Oceanic world of
Australia and Polynesia, similar discoveries are progressing and new
facts made known, that will unfold many new and unexpected analogies
with American inquiries. Of the early Monuments of China, Tartary and
Thibet, we know little or nothing, and in the very heart of Asia, the
real Cradle of Arts and Sciences, if not mankind itself, our learned
travellers have not yet penetrated, and the most interesting region of
the globe is thus almost unknown to us. This subject is therefore in a
progressive state of inquiries, and future ages will yet add thereto:
although a number of Ruins and Monuments crumble or disappear under the
plough or the leveling energy of men, little respecting these structures
of antiquity, enough of unexplored sites will be discovered and
surveyed: some of our rudest monuments appear indestructible, the lofty
mounds of earth have withstood like the heavy pyramids of Egypt, the
lapse of countless ages, some even appear now covered with a dress of
new soil, or even diluvial coat, as if they were antediluvian!

Meantime we may endeavor to collect and compare the facts already known,
and deduce therefrom some useful instruction to satisfy curiosity or
gratify the greedy wish to ascend to the origin of every thing, and of
mankind above all. The most proper and obvious way to elucidate American
Antiquities and Monuments, would be by classifying them, which has
however never been attempted, having always been noticed or elucidated
loosely at random, or in a kind of geographical arrangement of the
regions where found. Such classification might be based either on their
styles, forms and materials, or ultimately their ascertained scopes of
purposes which are even now often doubtful or doubted. They might thus
be divided into classes or series easily distinguished between
themselves, but all finding their equivalents or similar structures in
the Eastern Continent, _an important fact_ to be kept in mind. There are
out of America some structures not found in it, but there are none in it
that cannot be detected somewhere else, either in Europe, North Africa
or Asia, Polynesia, &c, among the earliest Monuments or Ruins, or the
rudest structures. None of the latest styles and improved Architecture,
such as Colonnades, roofed temples, Budhist and Mahometan temples,
Gothic or Modern Churches, fortifications with large towers or
bastions--are met in America, being a convincing proof that all the
American structures were of a previous date, or of an earlier style,
than these later.

But even some very ancient Eastern structures are lacking in America, or
only found in a modified form. Thus although the Cyclopian structures
had been denied to America, they are not quite lacking; although their
Tyrinthian style, the rudest of huge unshapen blocks of stone put
together, has not yet been met with, the other Cyclopian styles are
found of rough polygones or irregular squared stones: the most common
however is of rough flat stones put together pretty much as our dry
walls are to this day by us.

If we do not exactly find in this Continent, the Celtic style of
Stonehenge and circles of stones scattered from Persia to Scotland, we
meet several other branches of the Celtic style, standing rough pillars,
massive altars, circles of earth, fortified villages similar to those of
Britain, miscalled _Roman Camps_, although no such camps are found
where the Romans went out of Celtica, and the American camps or forts
are certainly not Roman! Whether the Celtic race ever came to America
has been doubted, and maybe deemed doubtful yet: there are two strong
arguments against it at least, the lack of Monuments like the Stonehenge
temples, and the Celtic structure of Language, or regular series of
interposed ideas not being widely spread in America, and chiefly found
in Brazil and Florida, where nations of another lineage dwelt. Yet it is
pretty certain, notwithstanding that nearly all the writers, omit it or
deny it, that the old Celts had an intercourse of trade in America once,
even from Gaul. It has lately been discovered by Sir A. Brooke, that
there are Celtic monuments in Morocco, he describes a large mound with a
circle of stones around. The N. W. of Africa must in very early time
have been one of the regions whence the _Atlantes_ went or came; this is
an historical fact, and their posterity yet live in Africa from Mount
Atlas to Nubia, their language[TN-11] have the Celtic and Semetic
structure.

They gave name to the Atlantic Ocean, and this name is one of the few
that have reached our times, Africa and Spain once joined, even the
Berbers have a tradition of it. The same Nations filled Lybia and Spain,
the _Bas-Tules_, _As-Tures_ of Spain were _Tulas_, _Turas_, as in
Central Asia and Central America; so were also the _Tur-tules_ or
_Tur-detani_, &c. while the _Cantes_ of Spain were akin to the _Antes_
of Lybia, _Hyantes_ of Greece. The Greeks have stated that their
Atlantes or _Atalantoi_ were formed of the united nations of Atlas and
Antoi or Anteus.

Pyramids exactly similar to those of Egypt, and pillared temples similar
to those of Thebes, are not met with in America; but we have their
equivalent in the pyramidal Teocalis of Anahuac, and the temples of
Peru, similar to the pyramidal temples of Assyria and India, towers in
stages like those of Lybia, Syria and China. In all cases the materials
depend pretty much on the localities, and the kind of stones or proper
materials at hand, although often carried from a distance, and requiring
the joint labors of many thousand men during several years.

But it has been ascertained that there were older inhabitants in the west
of Europe, than these very Celts, Cantes and Atlantes. The _Creons_ a
superior race that erected the annual monumental pillars of Carnac in
Brittany, the Cunis or Cynetes, that dwelt at the S. W. of Spain and
Portugal, the degraded Vassals or outcasts of the Celts called _Cacoux_,
_Cahets_, _Cunigos_, whose posterity is not yet quite extinct. The
Eskuaras now called Basks and Gascons, but formerly Cantabrians were the
Cantas of the river Ebro, they had great affinities of Language with
many American nations. The Atlantic monuments may be distinctly traced
from Syria and Greece to Lybia, Morocco, _&_c. Immense mounds have been
found as far South as the river Nun. Of these Atlantes their countries,
deeds of yore, &c. much has been written, and much more remains to be
elucidated: they can be traced Eastward as far as the very Centre of
Asia, once called Turan, through Scythia, in the North and Persia in
the South, to the utmost verge of Africa and Europe Westwards. Next to
the famed Island Atlantis, or rather _Megatlantides_ which was America!
the smaller Atlantis seated midway between the two continents, has been
supposed to have sunk when the Volcanos of the Azores, Canaries and
other African Islands did explode.

The American Nations connected with these were widely scattered in
America, and chiefly wherever the earliest monuments were spread, even
as far as Chili to the South, in Guyana to the East under the name of
_Atures_ or _Atules_, and Northwards as far as Ohio and Illinois. It is
easy to trace surprising analogies of Languages between the early
languages of South Europe and North Africa, with the Chilians,
Peruvians, Muyzcas, Haytians, Tulans or Tol-tecas, &c., and many other
pre-eminent Nations of this Continent.

By the useful process of generalization we may collect the following
important results concerning our monuments: 1. They are scattered all
over Amer. from lat. 45d. N. to 45d. S. of the Equator, thus occupying
90d. of latitude, which is no where else the case.--2. They chiefly
occupy a flexuose belt from our great Lakes to Mexico, Guatemala,
Panama, Quito, Peru and Chili.--3. There are few or none in Boreal
America, the Eastern Shores of it as far as Virginia, the Western as far
as California, nor in the Antilles, Guyana, Orinoco, Maragnon, Brazil,
Paraguay and Patagonia; although some of these regions not having yet
been properly explored may hereafter offer some likewise.--4. Those
known from our Eastern Shores, the Antilles and Brazil are few, and of a
peculiar character, distinct from the general style of the others. In
New Hampshire concentric castramations have been found as in Peru, but
not of stone nor shaped like stars. In Massachusetts inscribed rocks are
met with, those of Pennsylvania East of the mountains are rude and
small, and such they are as far as Virginia and Carolina. In the
Antilles or West Indies, they are chiefly caves, temples and tombs. In
Brazil we know of but few, but they are of stone and peculiar style.--5.
Therefore the main monuments and structures occupy only one half of
America or even less, they are mostly thickly scattered in the fertile
regions near rivers, from Ohio to Florida, from Missouri to Texas, from
Sonora to Honduras, from Bogota to Chili, &c. being often on high
grounds and mountains, table lands and valleys, seldom in the low
plains.

Such are the most interesting by number and extensive spreading
locations. Yet there are among them various ages and styles, the
Floridan or North American, the Mexican or Anahuac, the Guatimalan or
Tulan, the Peruvian or Inca--Series, are all somewhat different, mingled
with others of earlier or various ages--in Peru the _Pucaras_ or oldest
fortified cities in a stellate form are of earliest ages, the ruins of
Tiahuanaco with sculptures of a remote period, the ruins of Chimu of
another style yet, all different from the style of the Incas. In central
America, the Cave-temples--the fortified cities and Palaces--and the
_Teocalis_ or Pyramids and Towers, offer as many eras and styles.

In North America we have also at least three great Eras and styles of
monuments, the first or most rude, somewhat similar to that of the
Antilles; excavations, small houses &c. and this, although so rude, is
found to have lasted till very lately, as our log-house style is lasting
with us along with large stone buildings. 2. A primitive style using
earth and wood or rough stones for large and fine structures, temples,
_&_c. 3. The most refined employing cut stones and ornaments, &c., rare in
the North, but becoming more common towards Mexico.

We may assert in ultimate result that America had no Monuments of
Grecian or Roman structures, except such as belong to primitive Italy
and Greece, ascribed to their ancestors as a different race the Pelagic,
Curetes, Hyantes, Taulantes, Aones, and other similar old tribes or
nations, long previous to Roman power and Grecian refinement, above all
no colonnades and no baked bricks. None of our monuments were like the
best Celtic structures, but rather similar to the earliest or ruder
Celtic style, if not perhaps previous, such as standing or rocking
stones, rough pillars and pilasters, tumuli and mounds, circular and
angular areas and temples. None were like the Egyptian temples and
pyramids, our American pyramids being rather in stages, as iu[TN-12]
Ethiopia, Assyria, India, &c., or in huge platforms bearing temples and
palaces, as in Balbec and Persepolis, but by no means so ornamented, nor
with such huge stones. None were like the Tyrinthian or Titanic style,
but rather a modification of it. None like the slender pillars and round
towers of India, Persia, Ireland. None like the modern structure of the
Christians, Mahometans, Budhists, Chinese &c., no Gothic or Arabic
style, nor domes were found. The inference cannot trace any of these
religions to America by their peculiar structures.

While on the other side, we can assert and prove that the American
monuments were more or less alike to. 1. The oldest monuments, square
and circular platforms of all shapes and sizes, some as large as hills
or even natural hills cut to shapes for altars, or support of temples
and staged pyramids, _&_c., as are found from Celtica and Ireland to
France, Spain, Italy, Greece, Russia, &c., from Morocco to Senegal,
Lybia and Abyssinia; in Asia, from Natolia and the Trojan plain, to
Syria and Arabia, Persia, Media around the Caspian, and even in India,
Tartary and China; also, the _Morais_ of Polynesia. All of which were
the primitive altars of early men or their imitation, in later times as
in China.--2. Or like the Cave temples, scattered also from Ireland to
India, found in Greece, Syria, Egypt, Persia, &c., sometimes like the
excavated cities of the Troglodyte nations, found in Sicily, Crete,
Cyprus, Syria, Arabia, Cabul at Bamiyan, &c.--3d. Or like the massive
structures of stones of earliest ages, the _Norajes_ or Conical towers
of Sardinia and the Balearic Islands, the angular towers of Lybia, &c.
imitated in Peru, Brazil, Guatimala, Chiapa &c.--4th. Or like the
fortified cities of oldest ages in Persia, India, Arabia, Turan, _&_c.
imitated in Peru, and Central America, often with concentric inclosures
or curious shapes, sometimes with arks or citadels or acropolis, as in
Persia, Greece, Etruria &c.--5th. Or like the vast inclosures and sacred
areas of temples, with peculiar cells or holy recesses, shrines,
oracles, &c., as in India, China, Thibet, formerly in Syria, Egypt,
Assyria, even like the old temples of Mecca and Solomon; such are found
in Peru Tunca, Mexico, North America as far as Missouri, where most
were of wood as were the first temples of Solomon, Tyre, Delphos, and
are yet in China very often.

Then it is evident that the American Monuments are similar to the oldest
and earliest of the Eastern Continent, or the modern ones that are yet
built there on the primitive models. We have some late instances of it
even in Europe, when the huge mound of Waterloo was erected after the
battle of that name. Grecian buildings are often built now in Europe and
America, the Gothic style has travelled from Arabia to Europe and is not
yet quite out of use. The national altars of the Celestial Empire at
Pekin in China are yet exactly similar to those of earliest times, and
found in America.

Architecture and the various styles it has employed for monuments,
temples, cities &c. have undergone several changes and improvements,
from the rude imitations of a tent, or cottage, or hill, to that of
pyramids, towers, pillars, colonnades, caves, _norajes_, _teocalis_,
&c., from irregular inclosures to square, circular, octagon forms, from
heaps of earth forming ditches, canals, to regular walled excavations.
Styles of building are fluctuating with the Nations and times, taste and
religion: some are occasionally revived or improved; yet they have a
certain duration, location, or age, and origin somewhere. Nevertheless
they may happen to be blended by the same people; our own modern
civilization admits yet of the tents in camps, the loghouse, the shed,
the hut, the cottage, the houses of wood, brick or stone, palaces and
temples, theatres, Capitols, and negro huts! We must not be surprised to
see the same incongruity and admixture in various parts of America in
former times. Many tribes followed 300 years ago the style of 3000 years
before, as yet partly done in China.

Every thing on earth follows the universal law of terrestrial mutations,
monuments and arts, as well as languages and human features! they rise
and fall like the nations, mingle or blend as our modern English nation
and language formed out of many others. What diversity in any one of our
cities in complexions, statures and features of men! there are more
differences between some men of our own race, than between negroes, red
or white men. White, black and bay horses, are not peculiar species, nor
are men of different hues, hairs, eyes, noses, &c.

Inscriptions are monuments also, and of the highest value, even when we
cannot read them. Some of these will be hereafter, since those of Egypt
so long deemed inexplicable, have at last found interpreters. So it will
be at a future day, with those of America. Few have been made known as
yet, but there are many all over the range of the monumental regions.
Those sculptured in the temples and palaces of _Otolum_ near Palenque,
are not the only ones. Several in caves, or upon rocks, involve in rude
painting, a symbolic meaning, to which we are obtaining a clue. Several
nations of North America had a language of signs made or written;
although known sometimes to but few, these signs or symbols prevailed
from Origon[TN-13] to Chili--or else _Quipos_ as in China, were used as
records, in coloured strings or knots, wampums, belts, collars. All
these however, appear to belong to the first attempt of mankind to
perpetuate ideas, they seem to have preceded the alphabets of India,
Persia and Europe, or the vocal signs of China, although some of these
date of the earliest ages. Tula, Oaxaca, Otolum, &c., had glyphs or a
kind of combined alphabet, where the letters or syllables were blended
into words, as in our anagrams, and not in serial order. A few traces of
Alphabets have, however, been found in South America on the R. Cauca and
elsewhere, which have not yet obtained sufficient atteution:[TN-14] that
of Cauca given by Humboldt, is nearly Pelagic or Etruscan; traces of
Runic signs were found in Carolina--other signs have occasionally been
met in North America, but neglected.

Painted symbols or hieroglyphies,[TN-15] or sometimes abridged outlines
of them, were used chiefly in Anahuac, from Panuco to Panama; in North
America, from Florida to New Mexico, also in Cuba, Hayti, Yucatan,
Bogota, Peru, by the Panos, Muyzcas and other nations. Those without any
means to convey ideas could even in America, as in Scythia and Africa,
use emblems or objects to which a peculiar meaning was applied, and
trace rude pictures of them on trees or rocks.

The monuments connected with pictures, emblems, hieroglyphics, scattered
in caves, on rocks, on cliffs above human reach--are very curious, and
ought to be collected, sought for, and explained; they will all impart
historical events. The rock of Taunton and a few others, have alone
exercised the ingenuity of antiquarians, and perhaps to little purpose
at yet, since the inscription has been ascribed by turns to the
Phenicians, the Jews, the Atlantes, Norwegians or even to our modern
tribes. It may not be properly understood until all the graphic systems
of America are studied and explained. The late successful attempt of the
Cherokis to obtain a syllabic alphabet for their language, proves that
the Americans were not devoid of graphic ingenuity.

But the contents of mounds, graves, caves, &c., are also very
interesting, affording us a clue to their purpose, and the arts of times
when raised or inhabited. Many kinds of implements, ornaments, tools,
weapons, vases, &c., have been found every where, displaying skill and
taste. Idols and sculptures have given us the features and religious
ideas of some nations. Astronomical stones and calendars have been
found, recovered, and lost again, revealing peculiar systems of
astronomy and chronology. We possess the oomplex[TN-16] calendars of the
Tulans, Mexicans, Chiapans, Muyzcas, Peruvians, &c, that of the Talegas
of North America, a dodecagone with one hundred and forty-four parts and
hieroglyphics, was found on the banks of the Ohio, and has since been
lost or hidden.

Humboldt's labors on American astronomy and his results coincide with
those on antiquity to make the American systems quite different from the
oriental, Hindu, Jewish, Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Celtic systems of
days, months, zodiac, and cycles; while they are more like those of
Thibet, China, Japan, Lybia, Etruria, &c. At any rate the American
systems were anterior to the admission of the week of seven days, being
the fourth of a lunation, each day dedicated to a planet, and the
Sabatical[TN-17] observance of the Jews based thereon. The American weeks
were of three, five, nine, and even thirteen days, as in some parts of
Asia and Africa, in Java, Thibet, China, Guinea. The week of five days
appears the most ancient of all and the most natural, including exactly
seventy-three weeks in the solar year, and sixty-nine in the lunar year;
that of the three days is only the decimal part of a month; in China the
long week of fifteen days prevails as yet being half a lunation or
month.

Accounts of monuments with dry descriptions and measures, are often
uninteresting, unless with figures and explanations to illustrate their
nature and designs. The writer having himself surveyed many American
sites of ancient cities, may hereafter describe and explain some of
them, with or without figures. He has also collected accounts of similar
monuments all over the earth, and will be able to elucidate thereby our
own monuments. Meantime whoever wishes to become acquainted with such as
have been made known in the United States alone, must consult a host of
writers who have described a few, such as Soto, Charlevoix, Barton,
Belknap, Lewis, Crevecoeur,[TN-18] Clinton, Atwater, Brekenridge,
Nuttal, McCulloh, Bartram, Priest, Beck, Madison, James, Schoolcraft,
Keating, &c.; and in the appendix to the Ancient History of Kentucky
will be found my catalogue made in 1824. Such study in[TN-19] then a task,
and requires the amending hand of a careful compiler at least, before we
can even obtain the complete knowledge of what has been done with us
already on this historical subject.

  _Philadelphia, September, 1838._


FOOTNOTES:

[8-*] Letter to Col. Winthrop, in 2d vol. Archeologia Americana.




ADDITIONS.


1. The Mexican Antiquities have lately been illustrated in many splendid
works, by Aglio, Kingsborough, Dupaix, Baraden, St. Priest, Nebel,
Icaza, Gondra, Waldeck &c. In a clever review of these works (in the
foreign review) it is distinctly asserted that the _Tul-tecas_ (people
of Tul,) or American Atlantes, were quite a different people from the
Later Mexican tribes, that their monuments are equal in interest to
those of Egypt and Syria, with colossal and even Cyclopian
structures--which agrees with my former statements, and I have traced
them in America from Missouri to Chili, but their central seats and
empires were from Mexico to Quito. Their great temple at Otolum near
Palenque was equal to Solomon's temple. Their mythology was quite
peculiar and Asiatic, their maindeity[TN-20] was _Hun-aku_ (first cause)
comparable to _Anuki_ the Syrian Cybele, their Astronomy was
antediluvian, the year of 360 days or 18 months of 20 days.

2. The first monuments of the United States may be ascribed to the
_Talegas_, a northern branch of these Atlantes. The oldest monuments of
Peru long before the Incas with those of Brazil and Oronoco are related
thereto, and were erected by their Southern tribes, the _Atules_ and
_Talahets_.

3. In a late work of Harcourt (1838) all these ancient monuments of
America, Africa, Europe and Asia, are ascribed to the _Arkites_ saved at
the flood of Noah; which was also the previous opinion of M'culloh in
his American researches. But some Antiquaries are yet seeking in America
traces of the _Adamites_.

4. The _Tulawas_ and _Telingas_ nations and languages of Decan of
Southern India, are probably of Atlantic or Tulanic (Syn. of Turan or
Tartary) descent; and these nations sent colonies furher[TN-21] east in
early times to Polynesia and perhaps as far as America! yet the bulk of
Oceanic population from Madagascar to Japan and Australia is of Hamite
descent, by the regular structure of all the languages; while this
seldom happens in America as in China and Tartary.

5. The late attempts of tracing analogies of origin and descent between
the Chinese and Polynesian Nations, are quite vain. The Chinese Nations
are evidently Asiatic and primitive akin to the Tartars and Turks (the
modern Turans,) their language have the same inverse position, and
monosylabic[TN-22] structure. The idea of Harcourt to deem the Chinese
the real Semetic stock of Languages, is worthy of enquiry. He has proved
that the _Obri_ (Hebrew) was in reality a Hamite language, the posterity
of Abraham having adopted a dialect of the _Acuri_ (Assyrian) and
_Xnoni_ (Canaanit;)[TN-23] but the Arabic languages and nations, so akin
thereto must then also be Hamites! and the old Arabians alone were
Semites.

5.[TN-24] Meantime the Turanic or Japhetic nations and languages (IFH
meaning _widely spread_ is our Japhet) should be the real Turans and
Atlantes, including the Medians, Caucasians, Hindus, Pelagians,
Thracians, Slavonians, Goths, and nearly two thirds of the American
Nations, the most civilized and powerful of them. But it appears to me
that the Celts and Cantabrians were like the Etruscans and Phenicians of
Hamite Origin. It is strange that all the brown or black nations of
Africa, Asia and Oceania are also of similar descent.

7. In my work on the Ancient American Nations, may be seen which were
the oldest or earliest in America, and to which other nations elsewhere
they are most intimately connected. I have proved that two great nations
of America the _Aruac_ including the Haytians and tribes from Florida to
Patagonia, with the _Sekeh_ or old Chilians, having branches from Chili
to Brazil; were certainly very akin in language with the ancient Greeks
and Italians and Spaniards, or rather their ancestors the Pelagic, Oscan
and Cantabrian Nations.

8. The American Atlantes of North America (Talegas)[TN-25] the Tols and
Chontals of Anahuac and Central America, the Muyzcas of Tunca and Peru;
with the ancient Peruvians of mixt origin, were certainly the most
civilized nations of this continent, as their monuments prove it, and
their languages are of Japhetic or Turanic structure, having their major
affinities in Central Asia, the Caucasus, the Illyrians, Slavonians &c;
but some also with the African Atlantes or ancient and modern Lybians,
Getulians, Shellus _&_c.

9. The Guarani group of languages and nations in South America was most
widely spread from Guyana to Paraguay, and all over Brazil. It is quite
monosyllabic, with the Hamite or African structure, having its
affinities all over Africa, where hardly any except the _Qua_ or
Hottentot nation are of Chinese? or Turanic descent by structure of
speech.

10. In North America, 4 widely different stocks of nations had the
Hamite structure, the Floridian including _Chactas_, the _Wakons_ or
Missourians, the _Ongwis_ or Iroquois, and the Uskimas or Esquimaux
spread across the whole or[TN-26] Boreal America. This last stock is
evidently akin to the Northern Asiatic Hamites such as the Fins, Slaves,
Chudis, Ostiaks _&_c. The Wakons and Ongwis appear also Asiatic, akin to
the Tonguz and other Northern Tartars; but the Chactas with the Natchez,
Seminoles and akin tribes appear of Eastern descent, and find their
parents in North Africa.

11. In my work on Historical Palingenesy or the restoration of ancient
nations and languages presumed lost, I have been able to restore many of
all the parts of the world (but chiefly America and Europe) in the same
manner as I once did for the Haytian nation and language, whereby many
historical links will be evolved and traced. My process is similar to
that of Cuvier and the modern Paleontologists, who restore extinct
animals by fragments of their bones. I do the same with extinct
languages by fragments of their words and elements, discovered and put
together.

12. In result the monumental evidences combine with the philological to
descry and ascertain whatever is obscure in Ancient History. By their
mutual help and accordance, with the use of acurate[TN-27] comparisons in
both Hemispheres, we shall certainly be enabled to advance the
Archeological and Historical knowledge of Yore, beyond our most sanguine
expectation. The path is open and becoming easy to pursue; much
therefore will be achieved by following the comparative process and
discarding all the conjectural systems.


THE END.



Transcriber's Note


The following typographical errors were maintained in this version of
the book.

       Page Error
  TN-1   1   Cincinnatti should read Cincinnati
  TN-2   2   occured should read occurred
  TN-3   2   gradualy should read gradually
  TN-4   3   analize should read analyze
  TN-5   6   _t_emples should read temples
  TN-6   8   _hum_a_n_ should read human
  TN-7   8   globe; should read globe.
  TN-8   9   America should read America.
  TN-9   9   oontinent should read continent
  TN-10 10   Berhring's should read Behring's
  TN-11 14   language should read languages
  TN-12 18   iu should read in
  TN-13 21   Origon should read Oregon
  TN-14 22   atteution should read attention
  TN-15 22   hieroglyphies should read hieroglyphics
  TN-16 23   oomplex should read complex
  TN-17 23   Sabatical should read Sabbatical
  TN-18 24   CrevecOEur should read Crevecoeur
  TN-19 24   study in should read study is
  TN-20 25   maindeity should read main deity
  TN-21 26   furher should read further
  TN-22 26   monosylabic should read monosyllabic
  TN-23 26   Canaanit should read Canaanite
  TN-24 26   5. should read 6.
  TN-25 27   (Talegas) should read (Talegas),
  TN-26 28   or should read of
  TN-27 28   acurate should read accurate

The following words were inconsistently spelled or hyphenated.

  Guatemala / Guatimala
  log-house / loghouse
  Tol-tecas / Tul-tecas
  &c / &c. / _&_c.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ancient Monuments of North and
South America, 2nd ed., by C. S. Rafinesque

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCIENT MONUMENTS ***

***** This file should be named 29350.txt or 29350.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/5/29350/

Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain material produced by
Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
