Project Gutenberg's A Day with Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy, by George Sampson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Day with Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy

Author: George Sampson

Release Date: July 9, 2009 [EBook #29361]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH FELIX MENDELSSOHN ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 [Illustration]

 [Illustration: _Painting by N. M. Price._  FIRST WALPURGIS NIGHT.
   "Through the night-gloom lead and follow
         In and out each rocky hollow."]




A DAY WITH FELIX
MENDELSSOHN
BARTHOLDY

BY GEORGE SAMPSON


HODDER & STOUGHTON


 _In the same Series._
 _Beethoven._
 _Schubert._




A DAY WITH MENDELSSOHN.


During the year 1840 I visited Leipzig with letters of introduction from
Herr Klingemann of the Hanoverian Legation in London. I was a singer,
young, enthusiastic, and eager--as some singers unfortunately are
not--to be a musician as well. Klingemann had many friends among the
famous German composers, because of his personal charm, and because his
simple verses had provided them with excellent material for the sweet
little songs the Germans love so well. I need scarcely say that the man
I most desired to meet in Leipzig was Mendelssohn; and so, armed
with Klingemann's letter, I eagerly went to his residence--a quiet,
well-appointed house near the Promenade. I was admitted without delay,
and shown into the composer's room. It was plainly a musician's
work-room, yet it had a note of elegance that surprised me. Musicians
are not a tidy race; but here there was none of the admired disorder
that one instinctively associates with an artist's sanctum. There was no
litter. The well-used pianoforte could be approached without circuitous
negotiation of a rampart of books and papers, and the chairs were free
from encumbrances. On a table stood some large sketch-books, one open
at a page containing an excellent landscape drawing; and other spirited
sketches hung framed upon the walls. The abundant music paper was perhaps
the most strangely tidy feature of the room, for the exquisitely neat
notation that covered it suggested the work of a careful copyist rather
than the original hand of a composer. I could not refrain from looking
at one piece. It was a very short and very simple Adagio cantabile in
the Key of F for a solo pianoforte. It appealed at once to me as a
singer, for its quiet, unaffected melody seemed made to be sung rather
than to be played. The "cantabile" of its heading was superfluous--it
was a Song without Words, evidently one of a new set, for I knew it was
none of the old. But the sound of a footstep startled me and I guiltily
replaced the sheet. The door opened, and I was warmly greeted in
excellent English by the man who entered. I had no need to be told that
it was Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy himself.

Nature is strangely freakish in her choice of instruments for noble
purposes. Sometimes the delicate spirit of creative genius is housed in
a veritable tenement of clay, so that what is within seems ever at war
with what is without. At times the antagonism is more dreadful still,
and the artist-soul is sent to dwell in the body of a beast, coarse
in speech and habit, ignorant and dull in mind, vile and unclean in
thought. But sometimes Nature is generous, and makes the body itself an
expression of the informing spirit. Mendelssohn was one of these almost
rare instances. In him, artist and man were like a beautiful picture
appropriately framed. He was then thirty-one. In figure he was slim and
rather below the middle height, and he moved with the easy grace of
an accomplished dancer. Masses of long dark hair crowned his finely
chiselled face; but what I noticed first and last was the pair of
lustrous, dark brown eyes that glowed and dilated with every deep
emotion. He had the quiet, assured manner of a master; yet I was not so
instantly conscious of that, as of an air of reverence and benignity,
which, combined with the somewhat Oriental tendency of feature and
colour, made his whole personality suggest that of a young poet-prophet
of Israel.

"So," he said, his English gaining piquancy from his slight lisp, "you
come from England--from dear England. I love your country greatly. It
has fog, and it is dark, too, for the sun forgets to shine at times;
but it is beautiful--like a picture, and when it smiles, what land is
sweeter?"

"You have many admirers in England, sir," I replied; "perhaps I may
rather say you have many friends there."

"Yes," he said, with a bright smile, "call them friends, for I am a
friend to all England. Even in the glowing sun of Italy I have thought
with pleasure of your dear, smoky London, which seems to wrap itself
round one like a friendly cloak. It was England that gave me my first
recognition as a serious musician, when Berlin was merely inclined to
think that I was an interesting young prodigy with musical gifts that
were very amusing in a young person of means."

"You have seen much of England, have you not, sir?" I asked.

"A great deal," he replied, "and of Scotland and Wales, too. I have
heard the Highland pipers in Edinburgh, and I have stood in Queen Mary's
tragic palace of Holyrood. Yes, and I have been among the beautiful
hills that the great Sir Walter has described so wonderfully."

"And," I added, "music-lovers do not need to be told that you have also
penetrated

 'The silence of the seas
  Among the farthest Hebrides.'"

"Ah!" he said, smiling, "you like my Overture, then?"

I hastened to assure him that I admired it greatly; and he continued,
with glowing eyes: "What a wonder is the Fingal's Cave--that vast
cathedral of the seas, with its dark, lapping waters within, and the
brightness of the gleaming waves outside!"

Almost instinctively he sat down at the piano, and began to play, as
if his feelings must express themselves in tones rather than words. His
playing was most remarkable for its orchestral quality. Unsuspected
power lay in those delicate hands, for at will they seemed able to draw
from the piano a full orchestral volume, and to suggest, if desired, the
peculiar tones of solo instruments.

This Overture of his is made of the sounds of the sea. There is first a
theme that suggests the monotonous wash of the waters and the crying of
sea-birds within the vast spaces of the cavern. Then follows a noble
rising passage, as if the spirit of the place were ascending from the
depths of the sea and pervading with his presence the immensity of his
ocean fane. This, in its turn, is succeeded by a movement that seems to
carry us into the brightness outside, though still the plaint of crying
birds pursues us in haunting monotony. It is a wonderful piece, this
Hebrides Overture, with all the magic and the mystery of the Islands
about it.

"That is but one of my Scottish impressions," said Mendelssohn; "I have
many more, and I am trying to weave them into a Scottish Symphony to
match the Italian."

"You believe in a programme then?" I asked.

 [Illustration: _Painting by N. M. Price._ SPRING SONG (Lied Ohne Worte)
   "To think of it is to be happy with the innocence of pure joy."]

"Oh, yes!" he answered; "moreover I believe that most composers have a
programme implicit in their minds, even though they may not recognise
it. But always one must keep within the limits of the principle
inscribed by Beethoven at the head of his Pastoral Symphony, 'More an
expression of the feelings than a painting.' Music cannot paint. It is
on a different plane of time. A painting must leap to the eye, but a
musical piece unfolds itself slowly. If music tries to paint it loses
its greatest glory--the power of infinite, immeasurable suggestion.
Beethoven, quite allowably, and in a purely humorous fashion, used a
few touches of realism; but his Pastoral Symphony is not a painting,
it is not even descriptive; it is a musical outpouring of emotion, and
enshrines within its notes all the sweet peaceful brightness of an early
summer day. To think of it," he added, rising in his enthusiasm, "is to
be happy with the innocence of pure joy."

I was relieved of the necessity of replying by a diversion without the
door. Two male voices were heard declaiming in a sort of
mock-melodramatic duet, "Are you at home, are you at home? May we enter,
may we enter?"

"Come in, you noisy fellows," exclaimed Mendelssohn gaily; and two men
entered. The elder, who was of Mendelssohn's age, carried a violin case,
and saluted the composer with a flourish of the music held in his other
hand. "Hail you second Beethoven!" he exclaimed. Suddenly he observed
my presence and hushed his demonstrations, giving me a courteous, and
humorously penitent salutation. Mendelssohn introduced us.

"This," he said to me "is Mr. Ferdinand David, the great violinist and
leader of our orchestra; and this," indicating the younger visitor, "is
a countryman of yours, Mr. Sterndale Bennett. We think a great deal of
Mr. Bennett in Leipzig."

"Ah, ha!" said David to me; "you've come to the right house in Leipzig
if you're an Englishman. Mendelssohn dotes on you all, doesn't he,
Bennett?"

"Yes," said Bennett, "and we dote on him. I left all the young ladies in
England singing 'Ist es wahr.'"

"Ist es wahr? ist es wahr?" carolled David, in lady-like falsetto, with
comic exaggeration of anguish sentiment.

Bennett put his hands to his ears with an expression of anguish, saying,
"Spare us, David; you play like an angel, but you sing like--well, I
leave it to you?"

"And I forgot to mention," said Mendelssohn with a gay laugh, "that our
young English visitor is a singer bringing ecstatic recommendations from
Klingemann."

"Ah! a rival!" said David, with a dramatic gesture; "but since we're all
of a trade, perhaps our friend will show he doesn't mind my nonsense by
singing this song to us."

"Yes," said Mendelssohn, with a graceful gesture, "I shall be greatly
pleased if you will."

I could not refuse. Mendelssohn sat down at the piano and I began the
simple song that has helped so many English people to appreciate the
beauties of the German _lied_.

  "Can it be? Can it be?
   Dost thou wander through the bower,
   Wishing I was there with thee?
   Lonely, midst the moonlight's splendour,
   Dost thou seek for me?
   Can it be? Say!
   But the secret rapturous feeling
   Ne'er in words must be betrayed;
   True eyes will tell what love conceals!"

"Thank you very much," said Mendelssohn with a smile.

"Bravo!" exclaimed David; "but our Mendelssohn can do more than make
pretty songs. This," he continued, indicating the music he had brought,
"is going to be something great!"

"Do you think so?" asked Mendelssohn quietly, yet with eyes that gleamed
intensely.

"I'm sure of it," said David emphatically. "There is plenty of music for
violin and orchestra--oceans of it; but there has been hitherto only one
real great big Concerto,"--he spread his arms wide as he spoke. "Now
there will be two."

"No, no!" exclaimed Mendelssohn quickly; "if I finish this Concerto it
will be with no impious intention of competing with Beethoven. You see,
for one thing, I have begun it quite differently."

"Yes," nodded David, and he began to drum on the table in the rhythm of
Beethoven's fateful knocking at the door; "yes, Beethoven was before all
a symphonist--his Concerto is a Symphony in D major with violin
obbligato."

"Observe," murmured Bennett, "the blessing of a musical temperament. A
drunken man thumps monotonously at his door in the depths of night. To
an Englishman it suggests calling the police; to Beethoven it suggests a
symphony."

"Well, David," said Mendelssohn, "it's to be your Concerto, so I want
you to discuss it with me in all details. I am the most devoted admirer
of your playing, but I have, as well, the sincerest respect for your
musicianship."

"Thank you," said David with a smile of deep pleasure; and turning to me
he added, "I really called to play this over with the master. Shall you
mind if I scratch it through?"

I tried to assure him of the abiding pleasure that I, a young stranger,
would receive from being honoured by permission to remain.

"Oh, that's all right," he said unaffectedly; "we are all in the trade,
you know; you sing, I play."

Mendelssohn sat at the piano and David tuned his instrument. Mendelssohn
used no copy. His memory was prodigious. The violin gave out a
beautiful melody that soared passionately, yet gracefully, above an
accompaniment, simple at first, but growing gradually more intense and
insistent till a great climax was reached, after which the solo voice
sank slowly to a low, whispering murmur, while the piano played above it
a succession of sweetly delicate and graceful phrases. The movement was
worked out with the utmost complexity and brilliance, but came suddenly
to an end. The playing of the two masters was beyond description.

"The cadenza is subject to infinite alteration," remarked Mendelssohn;
and turning to me, he continued, "the movement is unfinished, you see;
and even what is written may be greatly changed. I fear I am a
fastidious corrector. I am rarely satisfied with my first thoughts."

"Well, I don't think much change is wanted here," said David. "I'm
longing to have the rest of it. When will it be ready?"

Mendelssohn shook his head with a smile. "Ask me for it in five years,
David."

"What do you think of it, Bennett?" asked the violinist.

"I was thinking that we are in the garden of Eden," said Bennett,
oracularly.

"What do you mean?" asked Mendelssohn.

"This," explained Bennett: "there seems to me something essentially and
exquisitely feminine about this movement, just as in Beethoven's
Concerto there is something essentially and heroically masculine. In
other words, he has made the Adam of Concertos, and you have mated it
with the Eve. Henceforth," he continued, waving his hands in
benediction, "the tribe of Violin Concertos shall increase and multiply
and become as the stars of heaven in multitude."

"The more the merrier," cried David, "at least for fiddlers--I don't
know what the audiences will think."

"Audiences don't think--at least, not in England," said Bennett.

"Come, come!" interposed Mendelssohn; and turning to me with a smile he
said, "Will you allow Mr. Bennett to slander your countrymen like this?"

"But Mr. Bennett doesn't mean it," I replied; "he knows that English
audiences love, and are always faithful to, what stirs them deeply."

"Yes; but what does stir them deeply?" he asked; "look at the enormous
popularity of senseless sentimental songs."

"On the other hand," I retorted, "look at our old affection for Handel
and our new affection for Mr. Mendelssohn himself."

"Thank you," said Mendelssohn, with a smile; "Handel is certainly yours
by adoption. You English love the Bible, and Handel knew well how to wed
its beautiful words to noble music. He was happy in having at his
command the magnificent prose of the Bible and the magnificent verses of
Milton. I, too, am fascinated by the noble language of the Scriptures,
and I have used it both in the vernacular and in the sounding Latin of
the Vulgate. And I am haunted even now by the words of one of the Psalms
which seem to call for an appropriate setting. You recall the verses?

  "Hear my prayer; O God;
   and hide not thyself from my petition.

   Take heed unto me, and hear me,
   how I mourn in my prayer and am vexed.

   The enemy crieth so,
   and the ungodly cometh on so fast;
   for they are minded to do me some mischief,
   so maliciously are they set against me.

   My heart is disquieted within me;
   and the fear of death is fallen upon me.

   Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me;
   and a horrible dread hath overwhelmed me.

   And I said, O that I had wings like a dove;
   for then would I flee away, and be at rest.

   Lo, then would I get me away far off;
   and remain in the wilderness.

   I would make haste to escape;
   because of the stormy wind and tempest."

"Yes," said David, nodding emphatically; "they are wonderful words; you
must certainly set them."

"The Bible is an inexhaustible mine of song and story for musical
setting," continued Mendelssohn; "I have one of its stories in my mind
now; but only one man, a greater even than Handel, was worthy to touch
the supreme tragedy of all."

The last words were murmured as if to himself rather than to us, and he
accompanied them abstractedly with tentative, prelusive chords, which
gradually grew into the most strangely moving music I have ever heard.

Its complex, swelling phrases presently drew together and rose up in
one great major chord. No one spoke. I felt as if some mighty spirit
had been evoked and that its unseen presence overshadowed us.

"What was it?" I presently whispered to Bennett; but he shook his head
and said, "Wait; he will tell you."

At length I turned to Mendelssohn and said, "Is that part of the new
work of yours you mentioned just now?"

"Of mine!" he exclaimed; "of mine! I could never write such music. No,
no! That was Bach, John Sebastian Bach--part of his St. Matthew Passion.
I was playing not so much the actual notes of any chorus, but rather the
effect of certain passages as I could feel them in my mind."

"So that was by Bach!" I said in wonder.

"Yes," said Mendelssohn; "and people know so little of him. They either
think of him as the composer of mathematical exercises in music, or else
they confuse him with others of his family. He was Cantor of the St.
Thomas School here in Leipzig, the perfect type of a true servant of
our glorious art. He wrote incessantly, but the greatest of his works
lay forgotten after his death; and it was I, I, who disinterred this
marvellous music-drama of the Passion, and gave it in Berlin ten years
ago--its first performance since Bach's death almost a century before.
But there," he added, with an apologetic smile, "I talk too much! Let us
speak of something else."

"Yes," said David, "you will talk of Bach for ever if no one stops you.
Not that I mind. I am a disciple, too."

"And I, too," added Bennett. "I mean to emulate Mendelssohn. He was the
first to give the 'Passion' in Germany, I will be the first to give it
in England."

"Then I'll be recording angel," said David, "and register your vow.
You'll show him up, if he breaks his word, won't you?" he added, turning
to me.

"Now this will really change the subject," said Mendelssohn, producing a
sheet of manuscript. "Here is a little song I wrote last year to some
old verses. Perhaps our new friend will let us hear it."

In great trepidation I took the sheet. It was headed simply "Volkslied."
I saw at once that there would be no difficulty in reading it, for the
music was both graceful and simple.

"Shall we try?" asked Mendelssohn, with his quiet, reassuring smile.

"If you are willing to let me," I answered.

   _Parting._

  "It is decreed by heaven's behest
   That man from all he loves the best
         Must sever.
   That soon or late with breaking heart
   With all his dear ones he must part
         For ever.

   How oft we cull a budding flower,
   To see it bloom a transient hour;
         'Tis gathered.
   The bud becomes a lovely rose,
   Its morning blush at evening goes;
         'Tis withered.

   And has it pleased our God to lend
   His cheering smile in child or friend?
         To-morrow--
   To-morrow if reclaimed again
   The parting hour will prove how vain
         Is sorrow.

   Oft hope beguiles the friends who part;
   With happy smiles, and heart to heart,
   'To meet,' they cry, 'we sever.'
   It proves good-bye for ever.
         For ever!"

 [Illustration: _Painting by N. M. Price._   PARTING.
  "It is decreed by heaven's behest
   That man from all he loves the best
          Must sever."]

"Bravo!" cried Bennett.

"Say rather, 'Bravi,'" said David, "for the song was as sweet as the
singer."

"Yes," said Bennett; "the simple repetition of the closing words of each
verse is like a sigh of regret."

"And the whole thing," added David, "has the genuine simplicity of the
true folk-melody."

Further discussion was prevented by a characteristic knock at the door.

The visitor who entered in response to Mendelssohn's call was a sturdily
built man of thirty, or thereabouts, with an air of mingled courage,
resolution, and good humour. His long straight hair was brushed back
from a broad, intellectual brow, and his thoughtful, far-looking eyes
intensified the impression he gave of force and original power. He
smiled humorously. "All the youth, beauty and intellect of Leipzig in
one room. I leave you to apportion the qualities. Making much noise,
too! And did I hear the strains of a vocal recital?"

"You did," replied Bennett; "that was my young countryman here, who has
just been singing a new song of Mendelssohn's."

"Pardon me," said the new-comer to me; "you see Mendelssohn so fills the
stage everywhere, that even David gets overlooked sometimes, don't
you, my inspired fiddler?" he added, slapping the violinist on the back.

"Yes I do," said David, "and so do the manners of all of you, for no one
introduces our singer;" and turning to me he added, "this is Mr. Robert
Schumann who divides the musical firmament of Leipzig with Mendelssohn."

"You forget to add," said Mendelssohn, "that Schumann conquers in
literature as well as in music. No one has written better musical
critiques."

"Yes, yes," grumbled David; "I wish he wouldn't do so much of it. If he
scribbled less he'd compose more. The cobbler should stick to his last,
and the musician shouldn't relinquish the music-pen for the goose
quill."

"But what of Mendelssohn himself," urged Schumann; "he, in a special
sense, is a man of letters; for if there's one thing as good as being
with him, it is being away from him, and receiving his delightful
epistles."

"Not the same thing," said David, shaking his head.

"And then," said Schumann, waving his hand comprehensively around the
room, "observe his works of art."

I was about to express my astonishment at finding that Mendelssohn
himself had produced these admirable pictures; but David suddenly
addressed me: "By the way, don't let Mendelssohn decoy you into playing
billiards with him; or if you do weakly yield, insist on fifty in the
hundred--unless, of course, you have misspent your time, too, in gaining
disreputable proficiency;" and he shook his head at the thought of many
defeats.

"Certainly," exclaimed Schumann, "Mendelssohn does all things well."

"That's a handsome admission from a rival," said David.

"A rival!" answered Schumann with spirit. "There can be no talk of
rivalry between us. I know my place. Mendelssohn and I differ about
things, sometimes; but who could quarrel with him?"

"I could!" exclaimed David, jumping up, and striking an heroic attitude.

"You!" laughed Schumann; "You quarrel, you dear old scraper of
unmentionable strings!"

"Ah, ha! my boy," chuckled David, "you can't write for them."

"You mean I don't write for them," said Schumann; "I admit that I don't
provide much for you to do. I leave that to my betters."

"Never mind," said David, giving his shoulder a friendly pat; "at least
you can write for the piano. I believe in you, and your queer music."

"That's nice of you, David," replied Schumann, "but as to Mendelssohn
and me, who shall decide which of us is right? He believes in making
music as pellucid to the hearers as clear water. Now I like to baffle
them--to leave them something to struggle with. Music is never the worse
for being obscure at first."

Mendelssohn shook his head and smiled. "You state your case eloquently,
Schumann," he said, "but my feelings revolt against darkness and
indefiniteness."

"Yes, yes," assented Schumann; "you are the Fairies' Laureate."

"Hear, hear!" cried David. "Now could anything be finer in its way than
the Midsummer Night's Dream music? And the wondrous brat wrote it at
seventeen!"

Mendelssohn laughingly acknowledged the compliments.

"That is a beautiful fairy song of yours," I said, "the one to Heine's
verses about the fairies riding their tiny steeds through the wood."

"Oh, yes," said Schumann; "will you sing it to us?"

"I am afraid it requires much lighter singing than I can give it," I
replied; "but I will try, if you wish."

"We shall all be glad if you will," said Mendelssohn, as he turned once
more to the key-board. The bright staccato rhythm flashed out from his
fingers so gaily that I was swept into the song without time for
hesitation:

   _The Fairy Love._

   "Through the woods the moon was glancing;
   There I saw the Fays advancing;
   On they bounded, gaily singing,
   Horns resounded, bells were ringing.
   Tiny steeds with antlers growing
   On their foreheads brightly glowing,
   Bore them swift as falcons speeding
   Fly to strike the game receding.
   Passing, Queen Titania sweetly
   Deigned with nods and smiles to greet me.
   Means this, love will be requited?
   Or, will hope by death be blighted?"

"You have greatly obliged us," said Schumann courteously.

"It reminds me, though I don't know why," said David, "of that
fairy-like duet about Jack Frost and the dancing flowers."

"Come along and play it with me," said Mendelssohn to Bennett; "you've
been hiding your talents all day."

Bennett joined him at the piano, and the two began to romp like
schoolboys.

The simple duet was woven into a brilliant fantasia, but always in the
gay spring-like spirit of the poem.

 [Illustration: _Painting by N. M. Price._    THE FAIRY LOVE.
 "Through the woods the moon was glancing
       There I saw the fays advancing.
         *     *     *     *     *
   Tiny steeds with antlers growing
       on their foreheads brightly glowing."]


   _The Maybells and the Flowers._

  "Young Maybells ring throughout the vale
     And sound so sweet and clear,
   The dance begins, ye flowers all,
     Come with a merry cheer!
   The flowers red and white and blue,
     Merrily flock around,
   Forget-me-nots of heavenly hue,
     And violets, too, abound.

   Young Maybells play a sprightly tune,
     And all begin to dance,
   While o'er them smiles the gentle moon,
     With her soft silvery glance.
   This Master Frost offended sore;
     He in the vale appeared:
   Young Maybells ring the dance no more--
     Gone are the flowers seared!

   But Frost has scarcely taken flight,
     When well-known sounds we hear:
   The Maybells with renewed delight,
     Are ringing doubly clear!
   Now I no more can stay at home,
     The Maybells call me so:
   The flowers to the dance all roam,
     Then why should I not go?"

"Really," said David; "it's quite infectious"; and jumping up he began
to pirouette, exclaiming, "Then why should I not go!"

"David, this is unseemly," exclaimed Schumann, with mock severity.
"There's another pretty fairy-like piece of yours, Mendelssohn, the
Capriccio in E minor."

"Yes," said Bennett, beginning to touch its opening fanfare of tiny
trumpet-notes; "someone told me a pretty story of this piece, to the
effect that a young lady gave you some flowers, and you undertook,
gallantly, to write the music the Fairies played on the little
trumpet-like blooms."

"Yes," said Mendelssohn, with a smile, "it was in Wales, and I wrote the
piece for Miss Taylor."

"By-the-by," said Schumann, "David's antics remind me that Mendelssohn
can make Witches and other queer creatures, dance, as well as Fairies."

"Villain," exclaimed David, and he began to recite dramatically the
invocation from the "First Walpurgis Night," while Mendelssohn played
the flashing accompaniment.

  "Come with flappers,
   Fire and clappers;
   Hop with hopsticks,
   Brooms and mopsticks;
   Through the night-gloom lead and follow
   In and out each rocky hollow.
   Owls and ravens
   Howl with us and scare the cravens."

"Ah," said Mendelssohn, "I don't think the old poet would really have
cared for my setting, though he admired my playing, and was always most
friendly to me."

"Yes," said Schumann, warmly; "Goethe liked you because you were
successful, and prosperous. Now Beethoven was poor: therefore Beethoven
must first be loftily patronised and then contemptuously snubbed. I can
never forgive Goethe for that. And as for poor Schubert, well, Goethe
ignored him, and actually thought he had misinterpreted the Erl-king! It
would be comic if it were not painful."

"Poor Schubert!" said Mendelssohn with a sigh; "he met always Fortune's
frown, never her smile."

"Don't you think," said Bennett, "that his genius was the better for his
poverty--that he learned in suffering what he taught in song?"

"No, I do not!" replied Mendelssohn warmly. "That is a vile doctrine
invented by a callous world to excuse its cruelty."

"I believe there's something in it, though," said Bennett.

"There is some truth in it, but not much," answered Mendelssohn, his
eyes flashing as he spoke. "It is true that the artist learns by
suffering, because the artist is more sensitive and feels more deeply
than others. But enough of suffering comes to all of us, even the most
fortunate, without the sordid, gratuitous misery engendered by poverty."

"I agree with Mendelssohn," said Schumann. "To say that poverty is the
proper stimulus of genius is to talk pernicious nonsense. Poverty slays,
it does not nourish; poverty narrows the vision, it does not ennoble;
poverty lowers the moral standard and makes a man sordid. You can't get
good art out of that."

 [Illustration: _Painting by N. M. Price._  THE MAYBELLS AND THE FLOWERS.
   "Now I no more can stay at home.
     The Maybells call me so.
   The flowers to the dance all roam,
     Then, why should I not go?"]

"Perhaps I have been more fortunate than most artists," said
Mendelssohn softly. "When I think of all that my dear father and mother
did for us, I can scarcely restrain tears of gratitude. Almost more
valuable than their careful encouragement was their noble, serious
common-sense. My mother, whom Heaven long preserve to me, was not the
woman to let me, or any of us, live in a fool's paradise, and my dear
dead father was too good a man of business to set me walking in a blind
alley. Ah!" he continued, with glistening eyes, "the great musical times
we had in the dear old Berlin house!"

"Yes," said David; "Your house was on the Leipzig Road. You see, even
then, the finger of fate pointed the way to this place."

"Indeed," said Schumann, with a sigh, "You certainly had extraordinary
opportunities. Not that I've been badly used, though."

"Your father was genuinely proud of you," said David. "I remember his
epigram: 'Once I was the son of my father; now I am the father of my
son.'"

Mendelssohn nodded with a smile, and, turning to me, said in
explanation, "You must know that my father's father was a famous
philosopher."

"Well!" said Schumann, rising, "I must be going."

Bennett and David also prepared to leave, and I rose with them.

"Wait a moment," said Mendelssohn; and going to the door he called
softly, "Cecile, are you there?"

He went out for a moment, and returned with a beautiful and charming
girl, who greeted the three visitors warmly.

Mendelssohn then presented me, saying, gently and almost proudly, "This
is my wife."

I bowed deeply.

"You are from England?" said the lady, with the sweetest of smiles; "I
declare I am quite jealous of your country, my husband loves it so
much."

"We are very proud of his affection," I replied.

She turned to Schumann and said softly, "And how is Clara?"

"Oh, she is well;" he replied with a glad smile.

"And the father?" she added.

"We have been much worried," he said gravely; "but we shall marry this
year in spite of all he may do."

"She is worth all your struggles," said Mendelssohn warmly; "she is a
charming lady, and an excellent musician. You will be very happy."

"Thanks, thanks," replied Schumann, with evident pleasure.

Mendelssohn turned to me and shook my hand warmly. "I have been glad to
meet you, and to hear you; for you sing like a musician. I shall not say
good-bye. You will call again, I hope, before you leave Leipzig. Perhaps
we may meet, too, in England. I am now writing something that I hope my
English friends will like."

"What is it, sir?" I asked.

"It is an oratorio on the subject of Elijah," he replied.

"It is bound to be good," said Schumann enthusiastically. "Posterity
will call you the man who never failed."

"Ah!" said Mendelssohn almost sadly, "you are all good and kind, but you
praise me too much. Perhaps posterity will remember me for my little
pieces rather than for my greater efforts. Perhaps it will remember me
best, not as the master, but as the servant; for in my way I have tried
very hard to glorify the great men who went before me--Bach, Mozart,
Beethoven, Schubert--Bach most of all. Even if every note of my writing
should perish, perhaps future generations will think kindly of me,
remembering that it was I, the Jew by birth, who gave back to
Christianity that imperishable setting of its tragedy and glory."

With these words in my ears I passed out into the pleasant streets of
Mendelssohn's chosen city.


 _Printed by The Bushey Colour Press (Andre & Sleigh, Ltd.)._
 _Bushey, Herts._




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

Contemporary spellings have been retained even when inconsistent. In a
small number of cases, missing punctuation has been silently added.

The following additional changes have been made:

 Lied ohne Woerte              Lied ohne _Worte_

 grateful and simple  	    _graceful_ and simple





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Day with Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy, by
George Sampson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH FELIX MENDELSSOHN ***

***** This file should be named 29361.txt or 29361.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/6/29361/

Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
