The Project Gutenberg EBook of Educational Work of the Girl Scouts, by 
Louise Stevens Bryant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Educational Work of the Girl Scouts

Author: Louise Stevens Bryant

Release Date: July 11, 2009 [EBook #29373]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDUCATIONAL WORK--GIRL SCOUTS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Marcia Brooks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was made using scans of public domain works put online
by Harvard University Library's Open Collections Program,
Women Working 1800 - 1930)









             DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
                 BUREAU OF EDUCATION


              BULLETIN, 1921, No. 46


              EDUCATIONAL WORK OF THE
                    GIRL SCOUTS


               LOUISE STEVENS BRYANT
          EDUCATIONAL SECRETARY GIRL SCOUTS


 [Advance sheets from the Biennial Survey of Education in
            the United States, 1918-1920]


      [Illustration: DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR]


                      WASHINGTON
              GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                        1921


                  ADDITIONAL COPIES
       OF THIS PUBLICATION MAY BE PROCURED FROM
           THE SUPERINTENDENT OF DOCUMENTS
              GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                  WASHINGTON, D. C.
                          AT
                   5 CENTS PER COPY




EDUCATIONAL WORK OF THE GIRL SCOUTS.

By LOUISE STEVENS BRYANT,

_Educational Secretary, Girl Scouts._


CONTENTS.--History and growth--Activities--Methods--Organization.


Do you believe that girls should like to work at home, to cook and clean
house and mind the baby? Do you believe that a girl should like to take
care of her clothes and be able to make them; that she should know how
to be thrifty and to conserve the family money in buying and using food
and clothing; that she should play a fair game and put the group above
her personal interests? Do you believe that she should value a strong
healthy body above clothes and cosmetics, and rejoice in the hope of
being some day the healthy mother of healthy children?

If you do, you believe in the Girl Scouts, for in this organization the
girls learn all these things in such a happy way that they _like_ to do
them, which means that they keep on doing them.

The Girl Scouts, a national organization, is open to any girl who
expresses her desire to join, and voluntarily accepts the promise and
the laws. The object of the Girl Scouts is to bring to all girls the
opportunity for group experience, outdoor life, and to learn through
work, but more by play, to serve their community. Patterned after the
Girl Guides of England, the sister organization of the Boy Scouts, the
Girl Scouts have developed a method of self-government and a variety of
activities that appear to be well suited to the desires of the girls, as
the 89,864 scouts and the 2,500 new applicants each month testify.




HISTORY AND GROWTH.


Girl Scouts and their leaders, to the number of 89,864, were in 1920
organized in every State, and in Hawaii, Porto Rico, and Alaska. There
are troops in 1,400 cities, and local councils in 162 places. This
represents a tremendous growth since the founding by Mrs. Juliette Low
in March, 1912, of a handful of enthusiastic "Girl Guides" in Savannah,
Ga. In 1915 the growth of the movement warranted its national
incorporation; so headquarters were established in Washington, D. C.,
and the name changed to Girl Scouts, Incorporated. In 1916 the
headquarters were removed to New York, and are now located at 189
Lexington Avenue.

From the start the organization has been nonsectarian and open to all
races and nationalities. Through the International Council the Girl
Scouts are affiliated with the Girl Guides of England and all parts of
the British Empire, and similar organizations in other parts of the
world.

At the 1920 meeting of the international conference at London, reports
were received from Italy, France, Belgium, Switzerland, Poland, Norway,
Sweden, Denmark, Holland, Portugal, Russia, Czechoslovakia, Brazil,
Argentina, Japan, China, and Siberia, as well as from all parts of the
British Empire, and the United States.

From a membership of 9,769 in January, 1918, the girl scouts grew to
89,864 in 1921, at the rate of nearly 10 to 1 in three years. The
greatest relative growth was in 1918, when the membership grew fourfold.
During 1919 the increase over the preceding year was more than
two-thirds, while in 1920 the relative increase was one-third. The
details are as shown in the accompanying table.

This growth is due to a spontaneous demand of community after community
for scouting for girls, and not to deliberate propaganda on the part of
the national headquarters. The reasons for it are therefore to be sought
in the activities and methods themselves, which make such widespread
appeal.




ACTIVITIES.


A glance through the handbook, Scouting for Girls, will show that the
activities of the girl scouts center about the three interests--Home,
Health, and Citizenship.

_Home._--The program provides incentives for practicing woman's
world-old arts by requiring an elementary proficiency in cooking,
housekeeping, first aid, and the rules of healthful living for any girl
scout passing beyond the Tenderfoot stage. Of the forty-odd subjects for
which Proficiency Badges are given, more than one-fourth are in subjects
directly related to the services of woman in the home, as mother, nurse,
or home-keeper.

_Growth of Girl Scout membership, Jan. 1, 1918, to Jan. 1, 1921--Active
registrations._

 January 1.  Officers.  Increase.  Scouts.  Increase.  Total.  Increase.

 1918          1,314     ......     8,455    ......     9,769   ......
 1919          3,823      2,509    36,847    28,392    40,670   30,901
 1920          5,357      1,534    61,754    24,907    67,111   26,441
 1921          6,839      1,482    83,025    21,271    89,864   22,753

Into this work, so often distasteful because solitary, is brought the
sense of comradeship. This is effected partly by having much of the
actual training done in groups. Another element is the public
recognition and rewarding of skill in this, woman's most elementary
service to the world, usually taken for granted and ignored.

The spirit of play infused into the simplest and most repetitious of
household tasks banishes drudgery. "Give us, oh, give us," says Carlyle,
"the man who sings at his work. He will do more in the same time, he
will do it better, he will persevere longer. Wondrous is the strength of
cheerfulness; altogether past comprehension its power of endurance."

While the place of most production is to-day outside the home, much of
the final preparation of goods, particularly food and clothing, is still
done there. So that, while the homecrafts are far from being the vital
necessities they once were, they are still needed.

Handicrafts of many sorts enter into the program of the girl scouts. In
camping, girls must know how to set up tents, build lean-to's, and
construct fireplaces. They must also know how to make knots of various
sorts to use for bandages, tying parcels, hitching, etc. Among the
productive occupations in which Proficiency Badges are awarded are
cooking, house planning, beekeeping, dairying and general farming,
gardening, millinery, weaving, and needlework.

While production has left the home, consumption is increasingly the
business of the home-keeping woman. There are few purchases, even for
men's own use, which women do not have a hand in selecting. Practically
the entire burden of household buying in all departments falls on the
woman, who is thus in a position to learn how to spend wisely and make
the most of each dollar. In France this has long been recognized, and
the women of the middle classes are the buying partners and bookkeepers
in their husbands' business.

The girl-scout organization encourages thrifty habits and economy in
buying in all of its activities. The scout troops are self-supporting,
and are expected to earn most of their equipment by means of rallies,
pageants, plays, as well as by individual effort. One of the 10 scout
laws is that "A girl scout is thrifty."

_Health._--The girl scout learns that "a cheerful scout, a clean scout,
a helpful scout is a well scout. She is the only scout that really _is
prepared_." So that health, physical and mental, is the keynote to the
scout activities, which are calculated to develop the habit of health,
rather than simply to give information about anatomy or physiology.
Personal health is recognized by the badge of "Health Winner," given to
the girl who for three months follows certain rules of living, such as
eating only wholesome food, drinking plenty of water, going to bed
early, exercising in the open air, and keeping clean, and who shows the
result by improved posture, and by the absence of constipation and
colds. Outdoor sports, swimming, boating, and dancing are other
health-producing activities.

Of all health-promoting activities, camping is the best, and this means
all stages of life in the open, from the day's hike, with one meal out
of doors, to the overnight or week-end hike, and finally the real, big
camp, open all summer. Girl scouts learn how to dress for outdoor
living, how to walk without fatigue, and how to provide themselves with
food, warmth, and shelter, so that "roughing it" does not mean being
uncomfortable.

During 1920, 50 large girl-scout camps were maintained in 16 States.
These are self-supporting, and as they are open for 10 weeks as a rule
and accommodate about 50 girls at a time, they give an opportunity to
several thousand for the best sort of holiday.

The idea is to have enough camps to give every scout the experience. To
promote this work national headquarters maintains a camping section and
has published a book, "Campward Ho!" which gives full directions for
organizing and running large, self-supporting camps for girls.

Community health habits are quite as important as the purely personal,
and the older girl scout is expected to become a "health guardian,"
which means that she takes an intelligent interest in the things
pertaining to public health, such as playgrounds, swimming pools, school
lunches, the water and milk supplies, clean streets, the disposition of
waste and garbage, the registration of births, and the prevention of
infant mortality. She also learns how to help in times of emergency as
first aid, in sickness as home nurse, and at any time as child nurse.

A scout whose mind is filled with interesting facts about birds and
animals and trees, and who is busy playing games with her companions or
in making useful and beautiful things and in rendering active service to
her home and community, is apt to have a healthy mind without thinking
much about it. And she has a little rule for the blue times, which is
"to smile and sing under all difficulties."

_Citizenship._--The basic organization of the girl scouts into the
self-governing unit of a patrol is in itself an excellent means of
political training. Patrols and troops conduct their own meetings, and
the scouts learn the elements of parliamentary law. Working together in
groups, they realize the necessity for democratic decisions. They also
come to have community interests of an impersonal sort. This is perhaps
the greatest single contribution of the scouts toward the training of
girls for citizenship. Little boys play not only together but with men
and boys of all ages. The interest of baseball is not confined to any
one age. The rules of the game are the same for all, and the smallest
boy's judgment on the skill of the players may be as valid as that of
the oldest "fan." Girls have had in the past no such common interests.
Their games have been either solitary or in very small groups, in
activities largely of a personal character. If women are to be effective
in modern political society, they must have from earliest youth
gregarious interests and occupations.

Among the scout activities that tend to develop this larger community
sense are games, athletic sports of all kinds, including team work and
competition between small, well-knit groups. Folk dancing and other
forms of amusement, such as dramatics, pageants, and story-telling,
serve a similar purpose because they all mean the possession of a
resource not only for the right use of the girl's own leisure time, but
for serving this need in the community.




METHODS.


The activities of the girl scouts are, of course, not peculiar to this
organization. Every one of them is provided for elsewhere, in schools,
clubs, and societies. But the way in which they are combined and
coordinated about certain basic principles is peculiar to the girl
scouts.

In the first place all these activities have a common motive, which is
preparation for a fuller life for the individual, not only in her
personal but in her social relations. It is believed that both the
habits formed and the concrete information acquired contribute to the
girls being ready to meet intelligently most of the situations that are
likely to arise in their later life. This concept is expressed in the
girl scout's motto, "Be prepared."

The method of preparation followed is that found in nature, whereby
young animals and birds _play_ at doing all the things they will need to
do well when they are grown and must feed and fend for themselves and
their babies.

The heart of the girl scouts' laws is helpfulness, and so the scouts
have a slogan: "Do a good turn daily." By following this in letter and
spirit, helpfulness becomes second nature.

Because the girl scouts are citizens they know and respect the meaning
of the flag, and one of the first things they learn is the pledge:

"I pledge allegiance to my flag, and to the Republic for which it
stands; one Nation indivisible, with liberty and justice for all."

Some observers have criticized the girl-scout organization because of
its apparently military character. It is true that the girls wear a
uniform of khaki and are grouped in patrols corresponding to the "fours"
in the Army; that they salute and learn simple forms of drill and
signaling. But the reason they do these is because the military
organization happens to be the oldest form of organization in the world,
and it works. It is the best way men have found of getting a number of
persons to work together. Following directions given to a group is quite
a different matter from doing something alone, and most of us need
special training in this. A group of eight has been found to work the
best, because it is the largest number that can be handled by a person
just beginning to be a leader, and, moreover, elementary qualities of
leadership seem to exist in just about the proportion of one in eight.
It is probably on this account that children take so kindly to the form,
rather than because of any glamor of the army, though this must be
admitted as a factor. In actual practice the drill and signaling take up
a very small portion of the program and are nowhere followed as ends in
themselves, but only as a means to an end.

_Uniform._--The uniform is simple, durable, and allows freedom of
action. It is of khaki because this has been found to be the best
wearing fabric and color. It is not easily torn and does not readily
soil. Wearing it gives the girls a sense of belonging to a larger group,
such as it is hard to get in any other way. It keeps constantly before
them the fact that they represent a community to whose laws they have
voluntarily subscribed, and whose honor they uphold. It is well, too, to
have an impersonal costume, if for no other reason than to counteract
the tendency of girls to concentrate upon their personal appearance. To
have a neat, simple, useful garb is a novel experience to many an
overdressed doll who has been taught to measure all worth by
extravagance of appearance.




ORGANIZATION.


The outstanding feature of the girl-scout organization is its voluntary
character. Among some 7,400 officers and leaders of girl scouts
throughout the country in the fall of 1920, just 211 were "paid
workers." This is about 3 per cent. The organization is actually a great
volunteer school of citizenship in which the women of the country share
with their younger sisters the results of their own experience in ideals
and practical working knowledge of community living. Scout troops are
organized either independently or in connection with public and private
schools, churches, settlements, and other associations.

_Scouts of different ages._--The original girl-scout program was
designed mainly with the needs of the young adolescent in mind, and the
age was fixed from 10 to 18 years. But the little girls wanted to come
in, and so a separate division was made for them called the Brownies or
Junior Scouts. Then the older girls and women wanted to join, and as
time went on the original girl scouts grew up but not out of the scout
movement, and programs are being made for Citizen Scouts who are 18 and
over.

The three age groups seem to be natural ones, and each has its own
methods and activities. The Brownies are formed into packs, under the
leadership of a "Brown Owl," and play games and learn self-help and how
to "lend a hand" to their families. The Citizen Scouts are expected to
be self-directing and to take actual part in the life of the community
and, either as wage earners or service givers, to pay their way.

But the large majority of all girl scouts belong to the middle group.
More girls register at 13 than at any other age. This is interesting, as
it marks the age of susceptibility to social ideas, shown also by the
fact that it is the most common age of religious conversion. It is also
the age of first crime. The distribution of ages at first registration
is shown by the accompanying table.

The organization of the regular girl scouts is as follows:

_Ages of Girl Scouts at first registration._

  ------------+--------+-----------
  Ages.       | Number.| Per 1,000.
  ------------+--------+-----------
              |        |
  6-9         |    440 |         5
  10          |  6,059 |        73
  11          |  9,130 |       110
  12          | 14,857 |       179
  13          | 16,434 |       198
  14          | 14,276 |       172
  15          | 10,707 |       129
  16          |  5,810 |        70
  17          |  3,486 |        42
              +--------+-----------
  Total 10-17 | 80,759 |       978
  18 and over |  1,826 |        22
              +--------+-----------
  Grand total | 83,025 |     1,000
  ------------+--------+-----------

_Patrol._--Eight girls form a Patrol, which is the working unit. One of
them is elected patrol leader and has charge of the activities for as
long as the patrol wishes. It is desirable to have each girl of a patrol
serve as a leader at some time or other.

_Troop._--One or more patrols constitute a Troop, which is the
administrative unit recognized by the national organization. The Troop
meets weekly and wherever possible at a place which "belongs" to it.
When possible troops should meet outdoors. The troops are
self-supporting and earn money for all equipment as well as for camps
and hikes or special activities. Troops are registered with national
headquarters and pay annual dues of 50 cents for each member. They also
have their own local dues, generally 5 or 10 cents weekly.

_Captain._--The troop is under the direction of a Captain, who must be
at least 21 years of age and whose qualification as a leader of young
girls is passed upon by national headquarters before she is
commissioned.

_Lieutenant._--A captain may have one or more Lieutenants, who must be
at least 18 years of age, and whose commissions are likewise subject to
control by national headquarters. Captains and lieutenants may be
organized into associations in any given locality.

_Scout classes._--There are three classes of girl scouts, the youngest
being the "Tenderfoot," the name given by frontiersmen to the man from
the city who is not hardened to the rough life out of doors. Even the
Tenderfoot, however, has to know some things, including the promise,
laws, slogan, and motto; how to salute and the respect due to the flag;
how to make an American flag; and how to tie at least four kinds of
useful knots. She must also have earned enough money to buy some part of
her scout equipment.

The "Second-class" scout has been a tenderfoot for at least one month
and can pass a test of distinctly greater difficulty. This includes,
under home interests, the ability to make fires in stoves and out of
doors, to cook a simple dish so that it will be palatable, to set a
table for two courses, to make an ordinary and a hospital bed, and to
sew.

Under health interests, she must know the main rules of healthful
living, her own height and weight, and their relation to the standard;
some simple first-aid points such as stopping bleeding, removing speck
from eye, and bandaging a sprained ankle. She must also have a variety
of facts at her command that will keep her alert and interested when out
of doors, such as an acquaintance with animals, birds, and plants, the
use of a compass, the alphabet of a signal code; and must demonstrate
her ability to observe her surroundings accurately and quickly so as to
report upon them.

Under topics preparing for citizenship she must know the history of the
American flag, how to prevent fire, and what to do in case of fire, and
must have served her troop, church, or community in some way and earned
or saved money for some personal or troop equipment.

The highest rank is that of "First-class" scout, and is to be attained
only by a young person of considerable accomplishment. She must be able
to find her way about city or country without any of the usual aids,
using only the compass and her developed judgment of distance and
direction. She must also be able to communicate and receive messages by
signaling. She must have shown proficiency in home nursing, first aid,
and housekeeping, and, in addition, in either child care, personal
health, laundering, cooking, needlework, or gardening. She must also be
an all-round outdoors person, familiar with camping and able to lead in
this, or be a good skater or a naturalist or be able to swim. Not only
must she know all these different things, but she must have trained a
tenderfoot, started a savings account, and served her community in some
tangible way.

_Proficiency badges._--After a girl scout has attained to first class
there are still other worlds to conquer, as the badges she has earned on
the way are only a few of the many to be worked toward. There are no
less than 47 subjects in which a scout may achieve, and more are being
added. Just to mention a few: A girl scout may be an artist, a
beekeeper, a business woman, a craftsman, or a dancer; an electrician, a
farmer, a flower finder, a horsewoman, an interpreter, a motorist; or a
musician, a scribe, a swimmer, or a star gazer. The highest award given
is the Golden Eaglet, which means the earning of 21 Merit Badges, of
which 15 are in required subjects.

About 2,000 Merit Badges are earned a month. An analysis of the subjects
shows that home nursing is the most popular, with 126 of each 1,000
earned. Laundress comes next with 97. First aid is next with 67.
Needlewoman, child nurse, cook, pathfinder, health guardian, flower
finder or zoologist, and home maker complete the first 10 most popular
badges, with between 61 and 38 in each 1,000. The details are shown in
the accompanying table.

_Local councils._--Where troops are numerous it is usual to form a
council composed of women and men representing all the best interests of
the community: Parents, schools, religious denominations of all sorts,
business, producers, women's clubs, and other social and philanthropic
organizations. The council acts as the link between the girl scouts and
the community. It has the same relation to the separate troops that the
school board has to the schools--that is, it guides and decides upon
policies and standards, interprets the scouts to the community and the
community to the scouts. It does not do the executive or teaching work;
that belongs to the directors, captains, lieutenants, and patrol
leaders.

One function of the council is to interest public-spirited women and
men, particularly artists and scientists, in girl-scout work and to get
them to act as referees in awarding proficiency badges.

But wisdom is to be sought not only in large cities, where there are
schools and museums, laboratories and studios. It is a poor community
that does not have at least one wise old person--a farmer learned in
nature's ways, a retired sailor stocked with sea lore, or a mother of
men who knows life as perhaps no one else can. The wise council will
know where to find these natural teachers and see that the scouts go to
their schools.

Another prime function of the council is to raise funds and to make
available such material equipment as camp sites, meeting places for the
troops, etc. The captain should turn to the council for help in
arranging and directing rallies, dances, fairs, pageants, and other
devices for entertainment or securing money.

_National organization._--The central governing body of the girl scouts
is the national council, holding an annual convention of elected
delegates from all local groups. The national council works through an
executive board, which meets monthly and conducts national headquarters
in New York. The national director is in charge of headquarters and his
direct responsibility for the administration of the whole organization,
with the general divisions of field, business, publication, and
education, each in charge of a secretary.

The field work is administered through 14 regions, each covering several
States, and in charge of a regional director, who helps in the formation
of local councils, the training of captains, and acts as general
supervisor and consultant for all work in the district.

Under business comes the handling of mails, all the work of the shop
where uniforms, insignia, books, badges, flags, and other equipment are
sold, and the distribution of material ordered by mail.

There are three classes of publications: First, a monthly journal, The
American Girl. Second, pamphlets and articles for general propaganda and
publicity; these are handled by the editorial and publicity staffs,
respectively. Third come publications of a technical nature, like the
official handbooks for scouts and officers and outlines for training
courses. These form part of the work of the education department, which
has general oversight of all that pertains to training for leaders and
the development of standards of work, including the important feature of
coordinating the girl scouts with the other educational and social
organizations. Camping also forms a part of the work of the education
department.

During 1919 and 1920 the following publications were issued:

     _Scouting for Girls:_ The official handbook, 576 pages.

     _Campward Ho:_ A manual for girl-scout camps, 192 pages.
     Designed to cover the needs of those undertaking to organize
     and direct large, self-supporting camps for girls.

     _The Blue Book of Rules for Girl Scout Captains:_ All
     official rules and regulations, 32 pages.

     _Training Courses:_ (1) Outline for 32-period course, 17
     pages. (2) Introductory course, 10 periods, 16 pages.

     _Girl Scout Health Record:_ Booklet form for recording points
     for health winner's badge.

     _Miscellaneous Pamphlets:_ Averaging 8 pages; 128,325 copies.

_Need for leaders._--The growth in membership has been twice as rapid
among the scouts as it has among the officers, as may be seen in the
table already given. For every scout in 1918 we have 10 in 1921. For
every officer in 1918 we have but 5 in 1921. For some time to come,
therefore, the energy of the national officers must be directed toward
the securing of properly trained leaders.

Colleges and higher schools are responding to a gratifying extent with
the introduction of training courses in scouting for girls. Within two
years courses have been given at the following colleges or
universities: Adelphi, Boston, Bryn Mawr, Carnegie Institute,
Cincinnati, Converse, Elmira, Hunter, Johns Hopkins, Missouri, New
Rochelle, Northwestern, Pittsburg, Rochester Mechanics' Institute,
Rochester University, Rockford, Simmons, Smith, Syracuse, Teachers'
College, and Vassar. Also at the following higher schools: Battle Creek
Normal School of Physical Education, Brooklyn Training School for
Teachers, Chautauqua Institute, Chicago Normal School of Physical
Education, Community Service Council of Marquette County, Mich.,
Manhattan Trade School for Girls, Milwaukee Normal, State Normal at
Pittsburgh, Pa., Washington State Normal, and Western State Normal,
Mich. The following schools and colleges are asking for courses:
Chicago, Cornell, Detroit Normal, Kalamazoo, Michigan State Normal,
Pennsylvania State, and Temple University.

Through cooperation with the deans of women in all parts of the country,
and with the Intercollegiate Community Service Association, the college
women are being influenced to take up scouting as an extra academic
activity before graduation, and as a form of community service in their
home towns later.

In addition to this work through existing educational bodies, many
special courses are conducted in connection with the organizations of
local councils.

The First National Training School for Girl Scout Officers has been
conducted for four years, the last two years at Long Pond Camp in
Plymouth, Mass. During the summer of 1920 special training camps were
also held in connection with the councils of Greater New York,
Cincinnati, and Harrisburg, with instruction given under the auspices of
national headquarters. Five such camps are planned for 1921, located in
Plymouth, Central Valley, in the Catskills, Lake Mohegan, N. Y.,
Philadelphia, and Cincinnati.

_Scouting in the public schools._--Only that organization for young
people can succeed which contributes directly to their chief business,
which is getting an education. One reason the girl scout organization is
received so cheerfully by school people is that it works into the
school's own plans to a remarkable degree. Local councils have a larger
representation from the public schools than from any other single
agency. Scout leaders are drawn largely from the teaching force because
teachers naturally have a better insight into the needs of young people
than any other single group.

In a few places this interest has resulted in the gradual assimilation
of scouting into the school system. At Fort Scott, Kans., this work has
progressed furthest, with 90 per cent of all pupils of scout age, either
boy or girl scouts. Supt. Ramsey made a most favorable report on this
situation at the Cleveland meeting of the Department of Superintendence
of the National Education Association in 1920. Among essential features
he mentioned the following:

The boy scout executive and girl scout commissioner act as recreational
directors and have charge of all the health education and vocational
guidance.

A room is set aside in the Junior High School for all scout work which,
however, is passed upon by a council, including persons outside of the
school force.

Through glee clubs and choruses great interest in community singing and
other music has been developed. The scout organization is helping to
solve the dress problem for both boys and girls.

"To give the modern ideals of education would be to state the ideals of
scouting." The modern teacher is increasingly well fitted to become a
good scout leader.

Scouting may best be promoted through the public school, because that is
the only organization that includes all the boys and girls. Moreover,
because of close daily association, leaders of school troops can insure
each scout being an active scout.

The school also benefits by scouting in a number of ways. Older pupils
stay in school longer because of their interest in scouting than because
of any other influence. "A year of work in scouting will do as much
toward acquainting a teacher with the ideals of teaching as a year spent
in any college or university of the country." Finally, scouting secures
the interest, attention, and good will of the parents to the public
schools.

        _Girl Scout badges earned in 1919-20._

  -------------------------------+---------+-----------
            Subject.             | Number. | Per 1,000.
  -------------------------------+---------+-----------
                                 |         |
   1. Home nurse                 |   2,852 |       126
   2. Laundress                  |   2,192 |        97
   3. First aid                  |   1,523 |        67
   4. Needlewoman                |   1,389 |        61
   5. Child nurse                |   1,267 |        56
   6. Cook                       |     991 |        44
   7. Pathfinder                 |     990 |        44
   8. Health guardian            |     923 |        41
   9. Flower finder or zoologist |     878 |        39
  10. Home maker                 |     861 |        38
  11. Citizen                    |     732 |        32
  12. Signaler                   |     647 |        28
  13. Bird hunter                |     636 |        28
  14. Health winner              |     600 |        26
  15. Pioneer                    |     595 |        26
  16. Artist                     |     592 |        26
  17. Musician                   |     580 |        26
  18. Interpreter                |     578 |        25
  19. Swimmer                    |     557 |        25
  20. Business                   |     424 |        19
  21. Cyclist                    |     422 |        19
  22. Gardener                   |     393 |        17
  23. Athlete                    |     345 |        15
  24. Horsewoman                 |     266 |        12
  25. Bugler                     |     254 |        11
  26. Scribe                     |     216 |        10
  27. Telegrapher                |     192 |         8
  28. Motorist                   |     190 |         8
  29. Dairy maid                 |     190 |         8
  30. Farmer                     |     187 |         8
  31. Sailor                     |     130 |         6
  32. Electrician                |     101 |         4
                                 |         |
      Total                      |  22,693 |     1,000
  -------------------------------+---------+-----------


TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

On the second table, first column, the totals look a little confusing,
but properly read they are correct. The sub-total does not take into
account the first line (440) making the total 80,759. Adding it back in
gives the total of 81,199 plus 1,826 (18+) gives the correct grand
total. It has been left as in the original.

There is a variation between girl-scout and girl scout; girl-scout
denotes the organization, and girl scout pertains to an individual.
They have been left as in the original.

Only one typo found and corrected; susceptibility was misspelled as
"susceptibilty".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Educational Work of the Girl Scouts, by 
Louise Stevens Bryant

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDUCATIONAL WORK--GIRL SCOUTS ***

***** This file should be named 29373.txt or 29373.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/7/29373/

Produced by David Edwards, Marcia Brooks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was made using scans of public domain works put online
by Harvard University Library's Open Collections Program,
Women Working 1800 - 1930)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
