The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Golden Fountain, by Lilian Staveley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Golden Fountain
       or, The Soul's Love for God. Being some Thoughts and
       Confessions of One of His Lovers

Author: Lilian Staveley

Release Date: July 18, 2009 [EBook #29449]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN FOUNTAIN ***




Produced by Ruth Hart




THE GOLDEN FOUNTAIN
or,
The Soul's Love for God
Being some Thoughts and Confessions of One of His Lovers

By

Lilian Staveley


London
John M. Watkins
21 Cecil Court, Charing Cross Road, W.C.2
1919




How many of us inwardly feel a secret longing to find God; and this
usually accompanied by the perception that we are confronted by an
impenetrable barrier--we cannot find Him--we can neither go
through this barrier nor climb over it! We have faith. We are able to
admit that He exists, for we cannot help but perceive a Will
dominating the laws of the Universe; but something deep within us
that we cannot put a name to, something subtle, secret, and strange,
cries aloud, "But I need more than this, it is not enough; I need to
personally find and know Him. Why does He not permit me to do
so?"

We might easily answer ourselves by remembering that if, in
everyday life, we greatly desire to see a friend, our best way of
doing so is by going in the direction in which he is to be found: we
should consider this as obvious. Then let us apply this, which we say
is so obvious, to God. We waste too much time looking for Him in
impossible directions and by impossible means. He is not to be
found by merely studying lengthy arguments, brilliant explanations
of theological statements, or controversies upon the meanings of
obscure dogmas. He is not even to be found through organising
charity concerts and social reforms however useful. We shall find
Him through a self stripped bare of all other interests and
pretensions--stripped bare of everything but a humble and
passionately seeking _heart._

He says to the soul, "Long for Me, and I will show Myself. Desire
Me with a great desire, and I will be found."

* * *

Scattered all through history are innumerable persons, both great
and insignificant, who looked for the Pearl of Great Price: and not
too many would seem to have found it. Some sought by study, by
intelligence; some by strict and pious attention to outward
ceremonial service; some by a "religious" life; some even by
penance and fasting. Those who found sought with the heart. Those
who sought with careful piety, or with intelligence, found perhaps
faith and submission, but no joy. The Pearl is that which cannot be
described in words. It is the _touch of God Himself upon the soul,_
the Joy of Love.

* * *

The entrance to the land of happiness and peace is through union of
the will to Christ, by love. How can this sense of love be reached?
By centring the wheel of the mind, with its daily spinning thoughts,
upon the Man Jesus, and learning to inwardly see and hold on to the
perfect simplicity and love of Jesus Christ. We can form the habit of
taking Jesus as our heart and mind companion. We are all aware of
the unceasing necessity of the mind to fill itself: we cannot have
_no_ thoughts until we have advanced in the spiritual life to a long
distance. We may well see, in this, one of the provisions made by
God for His own habitation in the mind of man--a habitation too
often hideously usurped by every kind of unworthy substitute. Petty
social interests and occupations, personal animosities, ambitions,
worries, a revolving endless chaos of futilities, known and praised
by too many of us as "a busy life"!--the mind being given
opportunity only at long intervals, and usually at stated and set times,
to dwell upon the thought of God, and the marvellous future of the
human spirit. We are like travellers who, about to start out upon a
great journey, pack their portmanteaus with everything that will be
_perfectly useless to them!_

Now, it is possible to put out and obliterate this chaotic and useless
state of mind, which would appear to be the "natural mind," and to
open ourselves to receive the might and force and the joys and
delights of Christ's Mind. These joys are the Heart of Christ
speaking to the heart of His lover. They are incomparable: beyond
all imagination until we know them; and we receive them and
perceive them and enjoy them as we have largeness and capacity to
contain them. For there is no end. He has ever more to give if we
will be but large enough to receive.

We are too absorbed in the puerile interests and occupations of daily
life. We make of these endless occupations a virtue. They are no
virtue, but a deadly hindrance, for they keep us too busy to look for
the one thing needful--the Kingdom of God. What is this world? It is
a schoolhouse for lovers, and we are lovers in the making.

Is baptism of itself sufficient to get us into this Kingdom? No. Is the
leading of an orderly social life sufficient to find it? No. Is the hope,
even the earnest expectation, that we shall, by some means or other
(we do not know by what!), be brought to it, sufficient to find it? No;
not without the _personal laying hold_ can we ever achieve it. Shall
we find it in much outward study? No; and our aim is, not to be the
student but the possessor; and the key to this possession is not in
books, but, for us, in Jesus. He it is who must be invited and
admitted into the heart with great tenderness--with all those virtues
for which He stands--and made the centre point of thought. Out of
constant thought grows tenderness; out of tenderness, affection; out
of affection, love. Love once firmly fixed in the heart for Jesus, we
get a perception (by contrast) of our own faults--very painful, and
known as repentance. This should be succeeded at once by change
of mind, _i.e._ we try to push out the old way of thinking and acting
and take on a new way. We try, in fact, strenuously to please the
Beloved, to be in harmony with Him; and now we have established a
personal relationship between ourselves and Christ.

With the perception of our own failings comes the necessary
humility and the drastic elimination of all prides. We remember, too,
that although Jesus is so near to us, and our own Beloved, He is also
the mighty Son of God.

He is also the mystical Christ, who, when we are ready, leads us to
the Father: which is to say, that we are suddenly stricken with the
consciousness of and the love for God; and here we enter that most
wonderful of all earthly experiences--the Soul's great Garden of
Happiness.

To be a student of theories, dogmas, laws, and writings of men is to
be involved in endless controversy; and we may study books till we
are sick, and embrace nothing but vapour for all our pains. To be a
pupil and possessor we must first establish the personal relationship
between ourselves and Jesus. To do this we must realise more fully
than we now do that He _still lives._ The mind is inclined to dwell
on Him mostly as _having lived._ When we have taught ourselves to
realise that Jesus is as intensely alive to everything that we do as He
was when He visibly walked with men--that Jesus is as easily aware
of our inmost thoughts and endeavours now as He was of the secret
thoughts of His disciples,--then we shall have brought Him much
closer into our own life.

As the possessor of life is not the student of schools, but is the pupil
of Christ, let us prepare ourselves to be pupils; and this again we do
solely by the help of the Man-Jesus, who is in Christ, and Christ in
Jesus. For the Christ-God is at first too strong a meat for us: we
cannot with fullness understand that He is God, but He Himself will
teach us this when we are ready to know it. To know this truth in its
fullness is already to possess eternal life.

As no man is able to give us eternal life, so no man is able to give us
the knowledge that Christ is God, as He willed to reveal Himself to
man. If we have doubts which hurt, let us drop them out, changing
the thought quickly to the sweetness, simplicity, and gentleness of
the Man-Jesus. If we have questionings, let us cease to question, and
say with the man of old, "Lord, I believe; help Thou mine unbelief."

We do well to avoid these questionings, pryings, and curiosities, for
when we indulge in such things we are like that common servant
who does not disdain to peep through the keyhole of his master's
chamber! Let us put such spiritual vulgarities upon one side, and,
opening our heart to lovely Love, take Him as our only guide. Love
draws us very rapidly to His own abiding-place, for we are made of
love, and because of love, and for love, and to Love we must return,
for He awaits us with longing.

* * *

We often think, Where am I at fault? I am unable to _see_ myself as
a sinner, though publicly I confess myself to be one. For I keep the
commandments; I am friendly to my neighbours; I am just to my
fellow-men; I can think of no particular harm that I do. Why, then,
am I a sinner? And our very modesty and reverence may forbid us to
compare ourselves with God. Yet here lies our mistake; for if we
would enter the Garden of Happiness and Peace, which is the
Kingdom of God, this is the commencement of our advance--that we
should compare ourselves in all things with God, in whose likeness
we are made, and, making such full observation as we are able of the
terrible gulfs between ourselves and Him, should with tears and
humility and constant endeavour be at great pains and stress to make
good to Him our deficiencies.

     "Be ye perfect as I am perfect."
     "Be ye holy as I am holy."

If this were not attainable, He would not have set so high a goal. In
this, then, we are sinners--that we are not pure and lovely as God
Himself! This is a prodigious, an almost unthinkable height; yet He
wills us to attempt it, and all the powers of Heaven are with us as we
climb.

* * *

Fear curiosity. Fear it more than sin. Curiosity is the root, and sin
the flower. This is one of the reasons why we should never seek God
merely with the intelligence: to do so is to seek Him, in part at least,
with curiosity. God will not be peeped upon by a curious humanity.
The indulgence in curiosity would of itself explain the whole
downfall, so called, of man.

The Soul is the Prodigal. Curiosity _to know_ led her away from the
high heavens. Love is her only way of return.

Curiosity is the mother of all infidelity, whether of the spirit or of
the body.

* * *

Though on reading the Gospels carefully we may be unable to come
to any other conclusion than that Jesus Christ neither prayed for nor
died for all mankind, but only for the elect, yet we see equally
clearly that all mankind is _invited to be the elect._ We are, then,
not individually sure of heaven because Jesus died upon a cross for
men; but sure of heaven for ourselves, only if we individually will to
live and think and act in such a manner that _we become of the
elect._

"Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out," says the Voice
of the Beloved.

* * *

In our early stages, how we shrink from the mere word, or idea, of
perfection; and later, what we would give to be able to achieve it!
Yet though we shrink so from the thought of it, we know
instinctively that we must try to approach it; if we would stay near
Him, we must be wholly pleasing to Him. We think of saints--we
know nothing of saints, but think of them as most unusual persons
midway between men and angels, and know ourselves not fashioned
for any such position: and how change ourselves, how alter our
character, as grown men and women?

It is Christ who can show us the way.

The Water of Life is the Mind of Christ, and the true object of life is
to learn how to receive this Mind of Christ: for by it and with it we
enter the Kingdom of God. And how shall we receive the Mind of
Christ? Here is our difficulty. Firstly, we may do it through
sympathy with, and a drawing near to, the Man-Jesus, accompanied
by such drastic changes of mind as we are able to accomplish _to
show our goodwill._ We may learn to become more unselfish, more
patient, more sympathetic to others, and to curb the tongue, so that
words which are untrue or unkind shall not slip off it. We can learn
to govern the animal that is in us, instead of being governed by it.
No one could have a better guide in how to improve the condition of
his mind than Aaron Crane's book, _Right and Wrong Thinking._

And next, having become well knitted to the Man-Jesus, the Christ
will draw us forward step by step through all the next inward stages,
we giving to Him our attention; and He will bring us finally to that
marvellous condition of God-consciousness by which He is able to
perpetually refresh and renew us. There is one great first rule to hold
to, which is _to think lovingly of Jesus_: in this way we eventually
and automatically _come into a state of love._ In which state He will
teach us to put out our own little light, that we may learn to live by
the lovely light of God. And we have entered the Kingdom!

For myself, I experienced three conversions: the first two of terrible
suffering, and the third of great and marvellous joy, in which it is no
exaggeration to say that for a few moments I seemed to receive God
and all the freedom of the Heavens into my soul. I am not able to
say exactly how long this experience lasted, for I was dead to time
and place, but I should judge it to have been from fifteen to twenty
minutes.

The first conversion came upon me one afternoon in my room, as I
came in from walking. I had been thinking of Jesus while I walked,
as I was often in the habit of doing. Without any intention or
premeditation on my part, I was now suddenly overwhelmed by a
most horrible, unbearable, inexplicable pain of remorse for my
vileness: for I seemed suddenly to be aware of Him standing there in
His marvellous purity and looking at me--not with any reproach, but
with the sweetness of a wonderful Invitation upon His face. And
immediately I saw myself utterly unworthy to come near Him: and I
writhed in the agony of this fearful perception of my unworthiness
till I could bear no more. I was sick and ill with remorse and regret, I
was utterly broken up by it. I did not know then that this awful pain
is what is known as repentance, and wondered secretly what could
have come to me. After this I found myself far more constantly
thinking of Jesus--exchanging, as it were, sweet confidences with
Him, telling Him what I thought, and endeavouring in every
possible way to follow His manner of thought. I am ashamed to say
I was very remiss and lazy in prayers; upon my knees I prayed very
little indeed. But I was very faithful and warm and tender to Him in
my heart, and this had an effect upon my mind and actions, and
continued for two years.

I would be assailed by many questionings during this time. For
instance, how could my sweet Jesus, whom I was always so near to,
be the mighty Christ and God? But I dropped these out as they came,
feeling myself altogether too small to understand these things, and
very much frightened by such greatnesses.

When I was alone with Jesus, all was so simple and so lovely; so I
put away all other thoughts and held closely to Jesus.

This having continued almost exactly the two years, upon Easter
morning, at the close of the service, the horrible anguish came on
me again as I knelt in the church. I was not able to move or to show
my face for more than an hour; and to this day I am not able to dwell
upon the memory of that awful pain, for I think I should go mad if I
had to enter again into so great a torture of the spirit. I endured to
the utmost limit of my capacity for suffering--for this I will say of
myself, I did not draw back, but went on to the bitter end. And the
suffering was caused by the sight of that most terrible of all sights:
the vision of myself as over against the vision of Jesus Christ, and I
died a death for every fault. Whoever has felt the true wailing of the
soul, such an one knows the heights of all spiritual pain. The heart
and mind, or creature, suffers in depths; but the soul in heights, and
this at one and the same time, so that the pain of repentance is
everywhere. And the depth of the suffering of the creature is coequal
with the height of the suffering of the soul, and the joint suffering of
both would seem to be of coequal promise and merit for their after
joy and glory; so that it would seem that the more horrible our pain,
the quicker is our deliverance and the greater our later joys.

After this, Jesus, without my knowing how it came about, passed out
from the Perfect Man into the Christ of God. I walked and talked
with Him no longer just as sweet Jesus, but as the Marvellous and
Mighty Risen Lord! And now I became far more changed. The
world and all earthly loves began to fade; they no longer satisfied or
filled me in the least. How could I contemplate His exquisite
perfections, the ineffable beauties of His mind and heart, and,
turning from these to the sight of the world and of the men and
women that I knew, not feel the difference? Where among my
friends could I find perfect love? Amongst husbands and wives? No.
Amongst mothers and children? No. For everywhere I saw discord,
secret selfishness, separate and divided desires, and many deceits. I
found no love anywhere like His for us. I was always an epicure in
the matter of love, and knew the best when I found it. I continued
with my social and home life exactly as before: the change was an
inward change.

Almost immediately after this the war came, and, with it, torments
of anxiety over my earthly loves.

The fearful anxieties I was in drove me to prayer. I began to pray
more regularly; but though I prayed, I remained as miserable as
before. A painful illness came, and lasted four months. I had no
home because of the war, and nowhere to be ill in peace: and I drank
and ate wretchedness as my daily bread and wine, and wondered
why I ever was born.

I cannot recall I was ever rebellious. No, I never was. I walked in a
maze of trouble, and endured like a poor dumb thing, _and did not
throw out my heart to God enough_ in prayer. If I had done this I
think I should have been through my pains in half the time.

Two years went by, and, being in greater anxiety than ever because
of a great battle that was going on and my love at the front of it, I
went up on the hill where I often went, and standing there I
contended with God, crying out, "It is too much--the pain of this war
is too great and too long; I cannot bear it. I am at an end of
everything. Help me! Help me!" And in my anguish I seemed at last
to be melted and running like water before Him, and I came before
Him as it were immediately before a mighty and living Presence,
though I saw nothing.

But though I was so near Him and appealed to Him with the whole
of my strength, there was no answer, no reply, but the great silence
of heaven.

At last, my agony over, I walked for a little, very quiet and very sad,
and all at once a marvellous thing happened to me. I will not here
describe how it was done to me, but He filled me with love for
Himself, an amazing, all-absorbing, and tremendous love--from the
crown of my head to the soles of my feet I was filled with love. And
this was His answer--and all my sorrows fled away in a great joy.

This third conversion produced a fundamental alteration of my
whole outlook and grasp on life. It brought me into direct contact
with God, and was the commencement of a total change of heart and
mind and consciousness; the centre of my consciousness, without
any effort of my own, suddenly moving bodily from a concentration
upon the visible or earthly to a loving and absorbed concentration
upon, and a fixed attention to, the Invisible God--a most
amazing, undreamed-of change, which remained permanent, though
fluctuating through innumerable degrees of intensity before coming
to a state of equilibrium. And now Christ went away from me, so
that I adored Him in God. After this for some weeks I went through
extraordinary spiritual experiences, the like of which had never
previously so much as entered into my heart to imagine; again I will
say nothing here of these. I came to all these experiences with great
innocence and ignorance, never having read any religious or
psychological book, and I think now that it is perhaps easier to have
it so.

Knowing that nothing is done without a purpose, I would question
myself what I could possibly be intended to learn out of these things;
and though I have never yet found a reason for any one given
experience, yet I see this: the whole (which lasted for some
weeks and was gone through at night and always in a state of
semi-wakefulness, though not in a normal wakefulness, for the body
would be stiff and set like a board)--the whole was the most
convincing proof that He could have given me (without destroying
my flesh) of the reality of the life unseen. For how otherwise could
we be made to know of the reality of spiritual things if we were
never _taken into_ them? And having been taken into them, and
they being a thousand times more poignant than any earthly
experience, how could we forget them? Whenever doubts upon
anything presented themselves, I had nothing more to do than to
Remember! Nothing He could have devised to do for me could have
been of greater or more direct assistance to me. These experiences
were to my creature what the centre-board is to the racing yacht.
With these memories I could keep an even keel, and without them I
must have capsized many a time.

By these spiritual experiences He gives us an immense courage, and
personal knowledge of a mysterious and hitherto unknown life of
joys so great and so intense that all sufferings endured by us here
appear to us in their true light as being a melting and cleansing
agency infinitely worth while, that we may gain in permanence such
exquisite felicity.

Our means of reaching a personal experience, whilst still in the body,
of such a life of joys is to harmonise the spirit of our human creature
to the degree of purity required by the soul to enable her in
unfettered freedom to perform her divine functions.

We confuse in our minds the two separate essences--that of the soul
and that of the human spirit (heart, intelligence, and will), which are
widely different; the soul acting for us as the wings of the creature.
And above and superior to the soul, and yet within it, is the divine
and incorruptible Spirit or Sparkle of God, which in its turn acts as
the wings of the soul. So we have the worm (or creature-spirit), the
soul; and the Celestial Spark, or Divine Intelligence of the soul,
which is the organ of God, and with which we are able to come in
_sensible contact_ with the divine world and God Himself. What are
our enemies? Selfishness, impatience, covetousness, pride,
ill-temper, bodily indulgences, and, above all, indifference to God of
the will of the creature.

After this third, and last, conversion upon the hill, which so altered
my whole life, I was for a period of some months in such a state of
exaltation and enhancement of all my faculties that I did not know
myself at all. I was, without any intention or endeavour on my own
part, suddenly become like a veritable House of Arts! The most
beautiful music flowed through my mind, in which I noticed certain
peculiarities--there was no sadness in it, and it swayed me so that I
seemed to go into a state of white-heat with emotion over it. It was
extraordinarily much smoother than any earth-music I ever heard,
and extremely consecutive, like a fluid. Now with earth-music I find
that even Wagner is not able to achieve any consecutive perfection:
he reaches to a height--only to fall back and disappoint. But this
other music, which is not heard with the senses but is invariably felt
by the soul, remains at extreme and fluid perfection, and casts such
spells over the listener that he is beside himself with enjoyment.
Colour and form, imagery of all kinds, would pass through me till I
felt like an artist, and cried out with regret, "Oh, if I had only studied
this or that art and knew the grounding of it, what heights of
proficiency I could reach now!" An object of quite ordinary charm
seemed, because of that something which now filled me, to expand
into prodigious beauty! The very pavements and houses, mean and
hideous as they are, overflowed with some inexplicable glamour.
The world was turned into a veritable paradise! When I thought of it
all I was filled with amazement, and still am, for how can we
explain such changes in manner of living and seeing? At this time
my only trouble or difficulty was to conceal my condition from
others.

But this wonderful state of things gradually passed away, and I went
into a most difficult condition. At one time of the day I would be in
an ecstasy of delight, and an hour later in some altogether
unreasonable depth of wretchedness. I went to and fro from one
extreme to the other, and my time was, I think, mostly spent in
trying to regain some kind of balance. My love for God was as great
as ever, but it had become a love all made of tears. Indeed, my
whole being seemed made of tears. I thought often of these words,
the peace of God; most certainly I had not found it. On the contrary,
my life had become an indescribable turmoil. I found no help from
my fellow-beings; I seemed to have lost the power of talking
pleasantly with them, and my point of view had become different
from theirs. Men could no longer please me, and I could not please
God! I was entirely alone spiritually, and I said to myself it would
be better if I could be alone physically as well; and I ached and
longed and dreamed of solitude till it was like a sickness. But the
only solitude I could have was in my own room.

Now, believing myself to be a sensible and practical person, I would
say to myself that my condition, being so unreasonable, must be got
out of, and I must make every effort to do it. I prayed for two
things--that I might love God with a cheerful countenance and not with
tears, and that He would teach me quickly what to pray for; and He
gave me the impulse to pray for more and greater love.

Next, I banished my own feelings as much as I could (since love
must not think of itself), paying as little attention to them as possible
by perpetually dropping them out as they came and returning to the
thought of Jesus, concerning myself at all times of the day to loving
inward conversation with Him; and in this manner I fastened myself
closer than ever to Him, continually praying for greater love to give
Him and passionately offering Him all that I already had, whilst
with all my will and strength I tried to climb out of my miserable
state. Soon I succeeded--I was out of it in a matter of weeks.

* * *

How humanity is extolled by its own kind! How men are admired,
even glorified! I am amazed, for where is the glory of any man? But
rather, how wonderful and glorious is God! that He should cause to
spring from one handful of dust such possibilities! Wonderful God!
And blessed man, that he should have so wonderful a God!

* * *

Some men say that man has invented for himself the thought of God,
because of the great need he feels within himself for such a Being.

Yet look where we will in Nature, do we find a warrant for such a
thought? Are babes inspired with the desire for milk, and is that milk
withheld from the nature of all mothers? No; to the babe is given the
desire because the mother has wherewith to satisfy. So with grown
men: for to us is given a deep and secret desire for the milk of God's
love, and to Himself He has reserved the joy of leading us to it and
bestowing it upon us.

* * *

Sometimes for a short while the soul will suffer from a sickness (I
speak now for persons already very well advanced); she is parched
and without sweetness. Her love has no joy in it. This is not a
condition to be accepted or acquiesced in, but must be overcome at
once by a remedy of prayer: prayer addressed to the Father, _in the
name of Jesus Christ,_ a prayer of praise and adoration--"I praise
and bless and love and thank Thee, I praise and bless and love and
worship Thee, I praise and bless and love and glorify Thee"--till the
heart is fired and we return to the intimacy of love. Or the Lord's
Prayer, very slow, and with an intention both outgoing and
_intaking._ So far I have never known these remedies to fail, and
joy floods the soul and sends her swinging up, up, on to the topmost
heights again. It is magnificent.

How is it that we can pass so, up from the visible into the Invisible,
and become so oned with it, and feel it so powerfully, that the
Invisible becomes a thousand times more real to us than the visible!
It is like a different manner of living altogether. And when anyone
so living finds himself even for a short time unfastened from this
way of living and back again to what is known to the average as
normal life, this normal life seems no better to him than some
horrible chaotic and uneven turmoil, and his brain ready to be turned
if he had to remain in it for long. When so unfastened, the whole
savour of life is completely gone, and a smallness of mind and
outlook is fallen back into from which the soul recoils in horror and
struggles quickly to free herself.

Is this the remnant of the unruly creature rising up and grappling
with the soul again? Is this some deliberate trial of us by the Master?
or some natural spiritual sickness? Whilst in this condition we must
disappoint the Beloved. On the other hand, we find ourselves kept
to the knowledge of our own impotence and nothingness and
dependence, and the spirit is strengthened by the efforts made
quickly to recover the lost beautiful estate.

Also we become more able to feel true patience and compassion for
such others as do not know the way of escape. So we gain, maybe,
more than we lose.

* * *

We may wonder how it is that the Mighty Maker of the Universe
should choose to condescend to the mere individual piece of clay. It
is incomprehensible. It is so incomprehensible that there is but one
way of looking at it. This is no favouritism to the individual, but the
evidence of a Mind with a vast plan pursuing a way and using a
likely individual. These individuals or willing souls He takes and,
setting them apart, fashions them to His own ends and liking. Of one
He will make a worker, and of another He fashions to Himself a
lover. It would seem to be His will to use the human implement to
help the human. As water, for usefulness to the many, must be
collected and put through channels, so it would seem must the
beneficence of God be collected into human vessels and channels
that it may be distributed for the use of the many and the more
feeble.

* * *

The more any man will consider humanity, the more he will see that
the education of the heart and will is of more importance than the
education of the brain. For in the perfectly trained and educated
heart and will we find the evidence of highest wisdom.

* * *

Why mortify the body with harsh austerities? When we over-mortify
the body with fastings, pains, and penances we are _remembering
the flesh._ Let us aim at the forgetting and not the despising of the
flesh. A sick body can be a great hindrance to the soul. By keeping
the body in a state of perfect wholesomeness we can more easily
pass away from the recollection of it. Chastise the mind rather than
the body. Christ taught, not the contempt or wilful neglect of the
body, but the humble submission of the body to all _circumstances,_
the obedience of the will to God, and the glorious and immeasurable
possibilities of the human spirit.

* * *

We know that the love of the heart can be beautiful and full of zeal
and fervour; but the love of the soul by comparison to it is like a
furnace, and the capacities of the heart are not worthy to be named
in the same breath. Yet, deplorable as is the heart of man, it is
evidently desired by God, and must be given to Him before He will
waken the soul. To my belief, we are quite unable to awaken our
own soul, though we are able to _will_ to love God with the heart,
and through this we pass up to the border of the Veil of Separation,
where He will _sting the soul into life_ and we have Perception.

After which the soul will often be swept or plucked up into
immeasurable glories and delights which are neither imagined nor
contrived, nor even desired by her at first--for how can we desire
that which we have never heard of and cannot even imagine? And
these delights are unimaginable before the soul is caught up into
them, and to my experience they constantly differ. The soul knows
herself to be in the hands and the power of another, outside herself.
She does not enter these joys of her own power or of her own will,
but by permission and intention and will of a force outside herself
though perceived and known inside herself. No lovers of arguments
or guessing games can move the soul to listen when she has once
been so handled. For to know is more than to guess.

* * *

How can a Contact with God be in any way described? It is not
seeing, but meeting and fusion with awareness. The soul retaining
her own individuality and consciousness to an intense degree, but
imbued with and fused into a life of incredible intensity, which
passes through the soul vitalities and emotions of a life so new, so
vivid, so amazing, that she knows not whether she has been
embraced by love or by fire, by joy or by anguish: for so fearful is
her joy that she is almost unable to endure the might of it. And how
can the heat or fire of God be described? It is very far from being
like the cruelty of fire, and yet it is so tremendous that the mind
knows of little else to compare it to. But it is like a vibration of great
speed and heat, like a fluid and magnetic heat.

This heat is of many degrees and of several kinds. The heat of Christ
is mixed with indescribable sweetness: giving marvellous pleasure
and refreshment and happiness, and wonderfully adapted to the
delicacy of the human creature. The heat of the Godhead is very
different, and sometimes we may even feel it to be cruel and
remorseless in its very terrible and swift intensity. But the soul, like
all great lovers, never flinches or hangs back, but passionately lends
herself. If He chose to kill her with this joy she would gladly have it
so.

By these incomprehensible wonders He seems to say to the creature:
"Come thou here, that I may teach thee what is Joy; come thou here,
that I may teach thee what is _Life._ For none are permitted to teach
of these things save I Myself."

* * *

There is another manner. The Spirit comes upon the soul in waves of
terrible power. Now in a rapture God descends upon the soul,
catching her suddenly up in a marvellous embrace: magnetising her,
ravishing her. He is come, and He is gone. In an ecstasy the soul
goes out prepared to meet Him, seeking Him by praise and prayer,
pouring up her love towards Him; and He, condescending to her,
fills her with unspeakable delights, and at rare times He will catch
her from an ecstasy into a greater rapture. At least, so it is with me:
the ecstasy is prepared for, but in the quicker rapture (or catching up)
it is He that seeks the soul. These two conditions, though given very
intermittently, become a completely natural experience. I should say
that the soul lived by this way: it is her food and her life, which she
receives with all the simplicity and naturalness of the hungry man
turning to his bodily food. But these waves of power were
something altogether new and very hard to endure. As each wave
passed I would come up out of it, as it were, gasping. It was as if
something too great for the soul to contain was being forced through
her. It was as if one should try to force at fearful pressure fluid
through a body too solid to be percolated by it. I understood nothing
of what could be intended by such happenings, neither could I give
accommodation to this intensity. I tried to make myself a wholly
willing receptacle and instrument, but after the third day of this I
could not bear any more. I was greatly distressed. I could not
understand what was required of me. I gave myself totally to Him,
and it was not enough. And at last I cried to Him, saying: "I
understand nothing: forgive me, my God, for my great foolishness,
but Thy power is too much for me. Do what Thou wilt with me; I
am altogether Thine. Drown me with Thy strength, break me in
pieces--I am willing; only do it quickly, my Lord, and have done
with it, for I am so small. But I love Thee with all that I have or am;
yet I am overwhelmed: I am still too little to be taught in this way, it
is too much for my strength. Yet do as Thou wilt; I love Thee, I love
Thee." And He heard me, and He ceased: and He returned to the
ways that I understood and dearly loved, and for weeks I lived in
Paradise. But my body was dreadfully shaken, and I suffered with
my heart and breathing.

Shortly after I began to know that another change had come into me.
God had become intensely my Father, and Christ the lover was gone
up again into the Godhead--as happened after my third conversion
upon the hill.

So great, so tremendous was this sense of the _Fatherhood_ of God
become that I had only to think the word Father to seem to be
instantly transported into His very bosom. Oh, the mighty sweetness
of it! But it is not an ecstasy. The creature and soul are dead to
world-life, as in a rapture or ecstasy; but the soul is not the bride,
she is the child, and, full of eager and adoring intimacy, she flies
into His ever-open arms, and never, never does she miss the way.
Oh, the sweetness of it, the great, great glory of it, and the folly of
words! If only all the world of men and women could have this joy!
How to help even one soul towards it is what fills my heart and
mind. How convince them, how induce them to take the first steps?
It is the first steps we need to take. He does not drive, He calls.
"Come to Me," He calls. It is this failure to have the will to go to
Him which is the root of all human woe. Would we but take the first
few steps towards Him, He will carry us all the rest of the way.
These first few steps we take holding to the hand of Jesus. For the
so-called Christian there is no other way (but he is no Christian until
he has taken it). For the Buddhist, doubtless, Gautama is permitted
to do the same. But for those who are baptized in Jesus Christ's
name, He is their only Way.

* * *

God, once found, is so poignantly ever-present to the soul that we
must sing and whisper to Him all the day.

O marvellous and exquisite God! I am so enraptured by Thy
nearness, I am so filled with love and joy, that there is no one,
nothing, in heaven or earth to me save Thine Own Self, and I could
die for love of Thee! Indeed I am in deep necessity to find Thee at
each moment of the day, for so great is Thy glamour that without
Thee my days are like bitter waters and a mouthful of gravel to a
hungry man. How long wilt Thou leave me here--set down upon the
earth in this martyrdom of languishing for love of Thee? And
suddenly, when the pain can be endured no more, He embraces the
soul. Then where do sorrow and waiting fly? and what is pain?
There never were such things!

* * *

We do well never to recall past ecstasies. In this way the soul comes
to each encounter with a lovely freshness and purity, and neither
makes comparisons nor curious comments, but gives herself wholly
to love. But by these contacts the soul gains a secret and personal
knowledge of God: without sight and without reasoning she actually
feels to partake of God, so that she passes by these means far up
beyond belief, into experiences of knowledge which in their
poignant intensity are at once an ineffable violence and a marvellous
white peace.

* * *

I find the lark the most wonderful of all birds. I cannot listen to his
rhapsodies without being inspired (no matter what I may be in the
midst of doing or saying) to throw up my own love to God. In the
soaring insistence of his song and passion I find the only thing in
Nature which so suggests the high-soaring and rapturous flights of
the soul. But I am glad that we surpass the lark in sustaining a far
more lengthy and wonderful flight; and that we sing, not downwards
to an earthly love, but upwards to a heavenly.

To my mind, this is man's only justification for considering himself
above the beasts--that we can love, and communicate with, God. For
where otherwise is his superiority? He builds fine buildings which
crumble and decay. He digs holes in the earth to take out treasures
which he has not made; and if he makes himself the very highest
tower of wealth or fame, he must come down from it and be buried
in the earth like any other carcase.

* * *

It is better not to contend, either with others or against our own body.
If we contend against anything we impress it the more firmly upon
our consciousness. So if we would overcome the lusts of the body,
let us do it not by harming or by contending against the body, which
but emphasises its powers and importance, but let us rather proceed
to ignore and make little of the body by forgetting it and passing out
of it into higher things; and eventually we shall learn to live, not in
the lower state, but in the joy of the soul. Why have a contempt for
the body? I once did, and found that I was committing a great sin
against the Maker of it.

How dare we say "my body is vile," when He fashioned it! It is
blasphemous, when we consider that it is His Temple.

To my mind the body is a beautiful and wonderful thing, and is
greatly sinned against by our evil hearts and minds and tongues. The
body would do no harm if we, with our free-will, did not think out
the wickedness first in our own hearts. For first we commit theft and
adultery with the mind, and then we cause the body to carry out
these things. We know that the body is under the law, and its
appetites are under the law, but the heart and mind and tongue are
perpetual breakers of this law. It is lawful for the body to take its
meat and drink, but not to be surfeited and drunken. It is lawful for
the body to have its desires and its loves, but not to be promiscuous
and unfaithful.

But we know that a better way is to turn all appetites and greeds to
this, that we be greedy and ravenous for Christ. Only so shall we use
the appetites of mind and heart and body for their true end, and that
not by despising but by conversion.

With great insistence I have been taught not to despise anything
whatever in Creation of _things made_ in His most beautiful and
wonderful world, though often I may cry with tears, "Lord God!
raise me to a world holier and nearer to Thyself, for I am
heartbroken here."

Yet I am taught only to despise such things as lying, deceitfulness,
hypocrisy, and uncleanness--in fact, stenches of the heart and
mind,--and not to think too much about these, but, passing on, drop
out the recollection of them in thoughts of finer things.

His inward instruction has been this, quietly to lay upon one side all
that which is not pleasing to God; and one by one, and piece by
piece, to fold up and put away all that He does not love.

Above all, He has taught me to have no self-esteem and no prides;
and to such a degree do I have to learn this, that, without the
smallest exaggeration, I am hardly ever able to think myself the
equal of a dog. But the love of a dog for his master is a very fine
thing.

* * *

I think we mistake our own power and capacity in even seeking to
imitate the Christ; let us begin rather by taking into our heart and our
mind the Christ as the Man-Jesus. For His love and power only can
show us the way to imitate the Christ which is in Him.

* * *

Is the temporary loss of grace our fault, or is it a deliberate
withdrawal and testing upon His part? Both. Every condition that we
are in which is not pure and perfect of its kind, such as pure peace,
pure joy, pure harmony, is because of failure on our part to _hold_
to Him. Whenever, and for so long, as we keep ourselves in the
single and simple condition of mind and heart necessary for the
perception and reception of Him, for just so long shall we receive
and perceive him; but this condition again we cannot maintain
without grace. All loss of joy, of serenity, of contact, is failure, then,
on our part or withdrawal upon His. Yet we learn a bitter but useful
lesson by these losses of ability for connection. To return
ignominiously to our dust is a most bitter humiliation and trial--indeed,
a desolation. Now, if we did not so return we might suppose
ourselves able, of our own power, not only to achieve momentary
connection with the Divine, but to remain at will in this sublime
condition, by which I mean in a state bordering upon ecstasy. The
withdrawal of grace therefore would seem to be a necessary part of
the education and of the constant humbling of the soul. To find
ourselves, of our own unaided capacity, by the mere force of our
own will, able to constantly go up to so high a level would
inevitably foster pride; indeed, to attain such a capacity would seem
to place us on a level with the angels!

By these withdrawals of grace, which came at first very tenderly, but
gradually with greater and greater severity, I have learnt this: that in
spite of all that has been done for me, of all that I have experienced,
in spite of all the heights to which at times I have been raised, I
remain nothing better than the frailest and unworthiest thing! The
sight of an ugly grey cloud, momentarily and gloriously illumined
by the sun, is a sufficient illustration of the temporary
transformation of our own selves touched by the light and the glory
of God.

For the carrying out of His plan, it would seem to be His good
pleasure that we are just what we are--not angels, but little human
things, full of simplicity and trust and love. "Like dear children," as
St Paul says; and yet, oh! wonder of wonders! _far more than this._
For whilst we patiently wait, from time to time He stoops and
embraces the soul in an infinite bliss, in which we are no more
children, but are caught up into High Love.

At first when we begin this new kind of living He holds us firmly, as
it were, to a condition suitable for contact with Him. If He did not
do so, having had no previous practice, we should never remain in it
for two moments together. Then little by little He teaches us to live
with less frequent joy, and this is the cause of much difficulty and
trouble. It is hard to endure being without this blessed state and
these marvellous favours, and more and more I found He withdrew
them whilst often my worldly and commonplace heart and mind still
held me back--_even from peace._ If we could but rid ourselves
quickly of all selfish desires and greeds! Not until I had learnt to do
this was I given back my joys, and then sparingly.

How I would turn towards that secret door--the door of the kingdom
of love,--and calling to Him, hear no reply! Where is He gone?--why
this desertion?--I would cry. How can He cause such pain, how can I
bear such dreadful deprivations, and what is love but a sharp sword?
Lord, let me hear Thy voice, for I am in despair; I cannot bear these
pains, I fear for everything, my joy is lost. My bread is spread with
bitterness; where is the honey that I love so well? Lord, call to me
even from far away, and I shall hear and be consoled. Lord, I am
sick and ill--how canst Thou leave me so? Hast Thou no pity for my
pain?--is this Thy love? _My_ pain! Lord, I remember! Thou hast
been kissed by pain more frequently than I. Oh, let me wipe the
memory of Thy pain away with my warm love, and let me sing to
Thee and be Thy lark, and do Thou go and wander where Thou wilt
and I will love Thee just the same! And softly the Voice of the
Beloved, saying: "I am here, I never left thee; but thou wast busy
crying of thy pains and did not hear Me when I answered thee."
Lord, so I was! I was so filled with self, and, asking for _Thy gifts, I
did forget to give!_ and so lost love.

* * *

It is hard to conquer in small things, petty irritations, worries, cares
of this world, likes and dislikes--all of these being subtle temptations,
and all selfish. For instance, very often I find the human voice the
most horrible thing that I know! I will be in a beautiful state of mind,
and people around me will drag me from it with their maddening
inanities of conversation. This one will speak of the weather, and
that one of food; another of scandal, another of amusements. They
will talk of their love for a dog, for a horse, for golf, for men or
women; but never do I hear at any time, or anywhere, anyone speak
of their love for God. I must listen to all their loves, but if I should
venture to speak of mine they would look at me amazed; indeed, I
never should dare to do it. And this is perhaps the greatest weakness
that I have to fight against now, and one that spoils the harmony of
the mind more than any other--that I cannot always control myself
from secret though unspoken irritation, impatience, and criticisms;
and to criticise is to judge, and in this there is wrong, and the
smallest breeze of wrong is enough to blow to--even to close--the
door into that other lovely world. And not only this, but every such
failure is a disappointment to the Beloved. Many times I say to Him,
"What canst Thou do with us all, Beloved--such a mass of selfish,
foolish, blundering, sinful creatures, all hanging and pulling on to
Thee at the same moment?" And I will be filled with a passionate
desire to so progress that I may stand a little alone and not be a
perpetual drag upon Him, and, feeling strong, perhaps I will say: "I
will give up my share of Thee to someone else, and not draw upon
Thee for a little while, my Beloved Lord." But oh, in less than an
hour, if He should take me at my word! I could cry and moan like a
small child, in my horrible emptiness and longing for Him. And
where now is my strength?--I have not an ounce of it without Him!
By this I learn in my own person how He is life itself to us, in all
ways. He is the air, the bread, and the blood of the soul, and no one
can live without at every moment drawing upon Him, though they
do it insensibly. What a weight to carry, what a burden, this whole
hungry clamouring mass of disobedient men and women! Oh, my
Beloved, how frequently I weep for all Thy bitter disappointment--never
ending!

But this we may be sure of--that all the marvels of His grace are not
poured out on some poor scrappit for no other reason than to give
him pleasure. There is a vast purpose behind it all, and by keenest
attention we must pick up this purpose, understand it, _and do it._
This is the true work of man, to love God with all the heart and mind
and soul and strength, and not those material works with which we
all so easily satisfy ourselves and our consciences, and our _bodily_
needs.

He has marvellous ways (and very difficult to the beginner) of
conveying His wishes. To my finding, the inward life of us is like a
perpetual interchange of conversation between the heart and its
many desires and the mind (which for myself I put into three
parts--the intelligence, the will, the reason). Now, all these parts of my
heart and of my mind formerly occupied themselves entirely with
worldly things, passing from one thing to another in most disorderly
fashion; but now they occupy themselves (save for bodily
necessities) _solely_ with Him. There is a perpetual smooth and
beautiful conversation between them _to_ Him and _of_ Him; and
suddenly He will seem to enter into this conversation, suggesting
thoughts which are not mine.

Often He will stab the soul, but not with words, also the heart; and I
have known such communications lie for weeks before they could
be taken up by the mind, turned into words, and finally as _words_
be digested by the reason. And another way to the soul only--rare,
untransferable to words, and therefore not transmittable to others or
to the reason. This way causes the creature a great amazement, and
is like a flooding or moving of whiteness, or an inwardly-felt
phosphorescence; it is a vitalising ministration greatly enjoyed by
the soul. This is not any ecstasy, and is exceedingly swift; the soul
must be at _high attention_ to receive this, yet neither anticipates
nor asks for it, but is in the act of giving great and joyful adoration.

* * *

I do not remember when I first became fully conscious that the
centre or seat of my emotions was changed, and that I now
responded to all the experiences of life only with the higher parts of
me.

This change I found inexplicable and remarkable, for it was
fundamental, and yet neither intended nor thought of by me. With
this alteration in the physical correspondences to life came a
corresponding alteration in the spiritual of me.

Formerly I supposed that the soul dwelt in, or was even a part of, the
mind. Now, though the mind must be filled wholly with God, and all
other things whatsoever put out of it if we would contemplate Him
or respond to Him, yet neither the brain nor the intelligence of the
creature can come into any contact with Him; and this I soon learnt.

Correspondence with the Divine is accomplished for the creature
through the heart and by the uppermost part of the breast, this latter
place (above the heart and below the mind) is the dwelling-place of
the celestial spark of the soul, which lies, as it were, between two
fires--that of the heart and that of the mind, responding directly to
neither of these, but to God only.

Before I was touched upon the hill I was not aware of the locality of
any part of my soul, neither was there anything which could
convince me that I even possessed a soul. I did no more than believe
and suppose that I did possess one. But the soul, once revived,
becomes the most powerful and vivid part of our being; we are not
able any longer to mistake its possession or position in the body. She
is indeed the wonderful and lovely mistress of us, with which alone
we can unlock the mysteries of God's love.

* * *

How poor and cold a thing is mere belief! No longer do I _believe_
in Jesus Christ: I do _possess Him._ So complete is the change that
He brings about in us that I now only count my life and my time
from the first day of this new God-consciousness that I received
upon the hill, for that was the first day of my real life; just as
formerly I would count my time from the first day of my physical
birth, and from that on to my falling in love and to my marriage,
which once seemed to me to be the most important dates.

Whilst these changes were taking place in me I would often be filled
with uneasiness and some alarm; asking myself what all this could
mean, and if it could be the way of martyrs or saints, for I had no
courage or liking to be one or the other and was very frightened of
suffering. And I think my cunning heart would have liked to take all
the sweets and leave the bitter. How well He knew this, and how
exquisitely He handled me, never forcing, only looking at me,
_inviting_ me with those marvellous perfections of His! How could
I possibly resist Him? All the while, all my waking hours, I felt that
strange, new, incomprehensible, steady, insistent _drawing_ and urgency
of the Spirit in me. Little by little I went--and still go--_towards_
perfection, whilst my cowardly heart endured many fears,
but these are now past. It was not any desire for my own salvation;
to this I have never given so much as two thoughts. It was the
_irresistible attraction_ of our marvellous and beautiful God. He
lured, He drew me with His loveliness, His holy perfections, His
unutterable purity. _I longed to please Him._ The whole earth was
filled with the glamour of Him, and I filled with horror to see how
utterly unlike--apart from the glorious Beloved--I was. How
frightful my blemishes, which must stink in His nostrils! Think of it!
To stink in the nostrils of the Beloved! What lover could endure to
do such a thing? No effort could be too great or painful to beautify
oneself for Him. In this there is no virtue; it is the driving necessity
of love, a necessity known by every lover worthy of the name on
earth. To please and obey this ineffable and exquisite Being!--the
privilege intoxicated me more and more.

All these changes in my heart and mind continually filled me with
surprise, for I was never pious, though inwardly and secretly I had
so ardently sought Him. I was attentive, humble, and reverent,
nothing more.

But though I had perhaps little or no piety, and never read a single
religious book, I had had a deep thirst for the perfect and the holy
and the pure, as I seemed unable to find them here on the earth. In
the quiet solemnity of church, or under the blue skies, I could detach
myself from my surroundings and reach up and out with wistful
dimness towards the ineffable holiness and purity of God--God who,
for me at least, remained persistently so unattainable.

And yet one blessed day I was to find Him suddenly, all in one
glorious hour, no longer unattainable but immanently, marvellously
near, and willing to remain for me so strangely permanently near
that I must sing silently to Him from my heart all the day long--sing
to Him silently, because even the faintest whisper would feel too
gross and loud between my soul and Him. And in hours when I fall
from this wonderful estate I think I come very near hell, so awful is
my loss.

Our greatest need is to relearn the will of God. For we are so
separated from Him that we now look upon His Will as on a cross,
as an incomprehensible sacrifice, as but self-abnegation, pain, and
gloom. We repudiate it in terror.

If we have the will to relearn His Will, we stand still and think of it,
we walk to seek it, we try to accept it, trembling we bow down to it
with obedience and many tears; and behold! it changes to an
Invitation, a sigh of beauty, a breath of spring, the song of birds, the
faces of flowers, the ever-ascending spiral of the mating of all loves,
the sunshine of the Universe; and at last, intoxicated with happiness,
we say: "My God, my Love, I sip and drink Thy Will as an
ambrosial Wine!"

* * *

To the lover of God all affections go up and become enclosed, as it
were, into one affection, which is Himself; so that we have no love
for anyone or anything _apart_ from Him. In this is included, in a
most deep and mysterious fashion, marriage-love in all its aspects.
In every way it can become a sacrament: there is nothing in it which
is not holy, in no way does the marriage bond of the body separate
the spirit from acceptableness to God.

But I was some time before I could arrive at this, and could see
marriage as the physical prototype in this physical world of the
spiritual union with Himself in the spiritual world. And this was
arrived at, not by prudish questionings and criticisms, but by
remembering that this relationship between men and women is His
thought, His plan, not ours. We are responsible for our part in it only
in so far as to keep the bond of it pure and clean and sweet, and
submit ourselves in all things _as completely and orderly as possible
to His plans, whatever they may be._ In this attitude of
unquestioning, unresisting submission, the Holy Spirit finds a swift
and easy channel through us. It is our opposition to the passage of
the Holy Will which causes all the distress and uneasiness of life. He
has no wish to impose distress and suffering upon us. His Will
towards us is pure joy, pure love, pure peace, pure sweetness. This
bond of earthly marriage is of the flesh and can be kept by the body,
and yet the heart, mind, and soul remain in lovely perfect chastity;
and I found that this exquisite freedom--after prolonged endeavours
on the part of the soul and the creature--was at length given them as
a gift by act of grace, and remained in permanence without variation.

* * *

We know that these things are deep mysteries and largely hidden;
but this I know: as the heart feels love in itself for God, in that same
instant comes God into the soul of the lover. Now, where God is we
know that there is neither evil, nor sadness, nor unhappiness, nor
any recollection of such things; therefore, to be a great and constant
lover to Him is to be automatically lifted from all unhappinesses.

This is our wisest and our best desire, to be a splendid lover to our
Most Glorious God.

The more I see of and talk with other people, the more I see how
greatly changed I am. I am _freed._ They are bound. I find them
bound by fears, by anxieties, by worries, by apprehensions of evil
things, by sadness, by fears of death for their loved ones or for
themselves. Now, we are freed of all these things _if we keep to the
Way,_ which is the Road of Love. This change we do not bring
about for ourselves, and do not perhaps even realise that it can be
effected. For myself, I seemed to be lifted into it, or into a
_capacity_ for it, on that day and in that moment in which I first
loved God. This is not to say that since that moment I have not had
to struggle, suffer, and endure, to keep myself in, and progress in
this condition; but my sufferings, struggles, and endurances, being
for love and in love and because of love, were and are in themselves
beautiful, and leave in the recollection nothing inharmonious. They
are the difficult prelude to a glorious melody.

Another thing--we become by this love for Him so large that we
seem to embrace within our own self the Universe! In some
mysterious manner we become in sympathy with all things in the
bond of His making.

Are these things worth nothing whatever, that the majority of people
should be content to spend their lives looking for five-pound notes
and even shillings--and this not only the poor, but the rich more so?
I am far more at a loss to understand my fellow-men than I am to
understand God. We have need of the shillings, but of other and
more lovely things besides, which cost no money and may be had by
the poorest. It is rapidly becoming the only sorrow of my life that
people do not all come to share this Life in which I live. How that
parable knocks at the heart, "Go out into the highways and the
hedges and compel them to come in!" To know all this _fullness_ of
life and not to be able to bring even my nearest and dearest into it:
what a terrible mystery is this!--it is an agony. Now, in this agony I
share the Agony of Jesus. This is a part of the Cross, and only the
Father can make it straight. I see Heaven held out, and _refused;_
love held out, and _refused;_ perfection shown, and killed upon a
cross. What is the crucifix but that most awful of all things--the
Grief of God made Visible? Perfect Love submitting itself to the vile
freewill of man and dying of wounds! My God! my God! and did
_I_ ever have a hand in such a thing? I did.

* * *

What is it that seems more than any other thing whatever to throw us
at last into the arms of God? Suffering. And this not because it is His
will (for how much rather would He have us turn to Him in our joy
and prosperity), but rather that it is _our_ will, that in our earthly
joys and prosperities we turn away from Him, and only seek His
consolations when we see the failure of our health or happiness. And
having by His mercy and forgiveness found Him, we too often and
too easily think to glorify ourselves and name each other saints! Did
Jesus call us saints? These glorifications mankind would appear to
bestow upon itself. He spoke of His flock, and of those who through
Him should have life eternal, and of those who, because of the road
they take, have their joys in this world only.

* * *

When I was being taught to pray for national things and for other
persons, and found these prayers answered, I was inclined to be
afraid; thinking, What am I that I should dare to petition the Most
High? But He showed it me so, which, as in everything, is for all of
us: "It is but a cloud which reflects the glories of the promise of My
rainbow; so can the dust, such as thyself, reflect yet other fashions
of My will and glory. There is no presumption in the cloud that it
should glow with My power; neither is there presumption in thy dust
that it should be My vehicle. Both the cloud and thy dust are Mine."

* * *

As we progress in this new way of living we find an increasing
difficulty in maintaining petition; for on commencing to petition we
will almost invariably be instantly lifted up to such a state of
adoration that the whole soul is nothing but a burning song, a thing
of living worship. At first I was inclined to blame myself, but now I
know that it is acceptable for us to pass from petitioning (no matter
who or what for) to high adoration, even though it is a great personal
indulgence (and the petitioning is a _hard task)--_an indulgence so
extreme that I cannot call to my mind anything in any experience or
time of my life, excepting actual raptures, which could, or can, in
any way compare or be named in the same breath with this most
marvellous joy; for out of this joy of adoration flows the Song of the
Soul.

And all these previous years of my life I have lived with the greater
part of me dead, and most persons the same! The more I think of it,
the more amazed I am at our folly--working and fretting, and
striving and looking for every kind of thing except the one thing,
beautiful, needful, and living, which is the finding of the personal
connection between ourselves and God and the Waters of Life.

Looking to my own experiences, I see clearly how I never could
have found without the most powerful and incessant assistance. We
are, then, never alone. But first we must have _the will to seek these
waters._ This is the secret of the whole matter. He can turn the vilest
into a pure lover--if the vilest be willing to have the miracle
performed on him! This is the grace of God, and what does it cost
Him to pour out this mighty power through us? For everything has
its price. My Lord! my Lord! we are not worthy of it all.

This I notice, that when He removes this grace, very shortly the
mind goes back to a false, uneven, inharmonious state; so we
become like an instrument all out of tune, and are caused
indescribable sufferings, like a musician whose ears and nerves are
tortured by false notes, whilst his unmusical neighbours feel no pain!
The musician pays a price for the privilege of his great gift; so the
lover of Christ.

Again, there is a price to pay for the immeasurable _joy_ of prayer,
for prayers are not always sweet nor life-giving. The prayers to
Christ are always a refreshment, but prayers to the Father may
suddenly be turned without any previous thought or private intention
into a most awful grief for the abominations of the whole world of
us, a terrible wordless burnt-sacrifice of the soul, of unspeakable
anguish. And high petitioning is a fearful and profound strain upon
the soul and the whole creature.

* * *

We say that we have need of the purification and conversion of the
soul; but rather it is first the conversion of the heart, mind, and will
that we have need of. For this would feel to be the drama of our
life--the human heart, intelligence, and will are the ego of the creature.
Our soul is the visitor within this creature, containing within herself
a pure, holy, and incorruptible sparkle of the Divine, and lies choked
and atrophied in her human house until revived and awakened by
her holy lover; and this awakening is not given to her till the heart
and mind of her human house (or the will and spirit of the creature)
is in a state of regeneration, or condition to go forward towards God.
Which is to say, the creature has been touched by repentance and a
desire for the pure and the holy. For if the soul should be awakened
to an unrepentant creature, this Will and imperishable worm of the
creature (which is of greater coarseness and lustiness than the
delicate and fragile soul) will overcome the soul; and this is not the
goal, neither is the death of the creature the goal, but the lifting up of
the creature into the Divine--this is the goal.

After being awakened, then, in her human house, the soul finds
herself locked in with two most treacherous and soiled companions--the
human heart and mind; and so great is her loathing and her
distress, that for shame's sake these two are constrained to improve
themselves. But their progress is slow, and now comes a long and
painful time of alternation between two states. At one time the soul
will conquer the creature, imposing upon it a sovereign beauty of
holiness; and at another the creature will conquer the soul, imposing
upon her its hideous designs and desires, and causing her many
sicknesses. Hence we have the warring which we feel within
ourselves, for the soul now desires her home and the creature its
appetites.

Until this awakening of the soul takes place, we mistake in thinking
that we either live with our soul, or know our soul, or feel with our
soul. She does but stir within us from time to time, awaking strange
echoes that we do not comprehend; and we live with the mind and
the heart and the body only--which is to say, we live as the creature;
and this is why on the complete awakening of the soul we feel in the
creature an immense and altogether indescribable enhancement of
life and of all our faculties, so that in great amazement we say, "I
have never _lived_ until this day." When first the will of the creature
is wholly submitted to the lovely guidance of the divine part of the
soul, then first we know the ineffable joys of the world of free spirit.
For to live with the mind and the body is to be in a state of existence
in nature. But to live with the soul is to live above nature, in the
immeasurable freedom and intensity of the spirit. And this is the
tremendous task of the soul--that she help to redeem the heart and
mind from their vileness of the creature and so lift the human
upwards with herself to the Divine from whence she came. This,
then, is the transmutation or evolution by divine means of the human
into the divine; and for this we need to seek repentance or change of
heart and mind, which is the will of the creature turning itself
towards the beauties of the spirit, that Christ may awaken in us the
glories of that sleeping soul which is His bride.

When the soul is fully revived we can know it by this, that we are
not able any longer to content ourselves with anything nor anyone
save God. Neither are we able to love any save God, for all human
desires and loves mysteriously ascend and are merged into the
Divine. So, though we love our friend, we love him in God, and in
every man perceive but another lover for the Beloved.

* * *

To love God might commence to be expressed as being a great quiet,
an intense activity, a prodigious joy, and the poignant knowledge of
_the immensity of an amazing new life shared._

The contemplation of God might be expressed as the folding up or
complete forgetfulness of all earthly and bodily things, desires, and
attractions, and the raising of the heart and mind and the centring of
them in great and joyful intensity upon God, by means of love. Of
this contemplation of God I find two principal forms: the passive
and the active. In the first we are in a state of steady, quiet, and
loving perception and reception, and at some farness; in this we are
able to remain for hours, entering this state when waking at dawn
and remaining in it till rising.

In active contemplation we are in rapturous and passionate adoration
with great nearness, and are not able to remain in it long because of
bodily weakness. The soul feels to be never tired by the longest
flight, but must return because of the exhaustion of the forlorn and
wretched creature, which creature is complete in itself, having its
body, of which, being able to touch it, we say, "It is my body," and
its heart and mind with intelligence, of which we are wont to think,
"This is myself"; yet it is but a part, for the intelligence of our
creature is by no means the intelligence of the divine soul, but a far
lesser light: for with the intelligence of the divine soul we reach out
to God and attain Him, but with the intelligence of the creature we
reach towards Him but do not attain, for with it we are unable to
penetrate the veil. Therefore, who would know the joys of
contemplation must come to them by love, for love is the only
means by which the creature can attain. The soul attains God as her
birthright, but the creature by adoption and redemption, and this
through love. By love the creature dies and is reborn into the spirit.

* * *

The word "poverty," as used to express a necessary condition of our
coming to God, is a most misleading term. For how can any
condition be rightly named poverty which brings us into the riches
of God? Rather let us use the words "singleness of heart," or
"simplicity": which is to say, we _put out_ all other interests save
those pleasing to God (to commence with), and afterwards we reach
the condition in which we _have no_ interests but in God Himself--the
heart and mind and will of the creature becoming wholly God's,
and God filling them. How can we say, then, that it is poverty to be
filled with God! Rather is it rightly expressed as being a heart fixed
in singleness upon God, through drastic simplification of interests:
the which is no poverty, but the wealth of all the Universe.

* * *

Some of us seem open to suggestion, others to the steadier effects of
personal influence. I never came under the personal influence of
another except once, when I came under the influence of the being I
loved most--my brother. At ten he saved my life from drowning, and
at eighteen his influence and total lack of faith in God, coupled with
the searchings and probings of my own intelligence, took me away
from God, in whom I had previously had a comfortable faith. At
seventeen I began to lap up the hardest scientific books as a cat laps
milk. I said to myself, "I must find truth, I must find out what
everything really is"; but I could not reconcile science with Church
teaching. I was not able to adjust the truths of science--which were
demonstrable to both senses and intelligence--with the unprovable
dogmas set forth by the Church as necessary to salvation. I slowly
and surely lost what faith I had, and hung a withered heart upon the
pitiless and nameless bosom of the Cosmos. Inward life became for
me a horrible emptiness without hope. Surrounded with gaieties and
the innumerable social successes of youth, I found that neither
science nor society could satisfy my soul, or that something living
within me which knew a terrible necessity for God. For two long
and dreadful years I fought secretly and desperately to regain this
lost belief, and when at last I succeeded there remained a monstrous
and impenetrable wall between myself and God. But by comparison
with the horrors of past loneliness it was heaven to me to feel Him
there, even behind that wall. (Now that I have found Him by love, I
am able to return to science as to a most exquisite unrolling of the
majesty of His truths and powers and laws, and am brought nearer
and nearer to Him the more I learn of science.) Outside the wall I
remained for more than twenty years, seeking and searching for an
opening in that mighty barrier.

And after more than twenty years I found the Door--and it was Jesus
Christ.

* * *

Lately I have seen the word "contemplation" used as expressing the
heights of attainment in God-consciousness of men, and I find it
inadequate. From the age of seventeen I fell into the habit of
contemplation, not of God, but of Nature: which is to say, I would
first place myself, sitting, in such a position that my body would not
fall and I might completely forget it, and then would look about me
and drink in the beauty of the scene, my eyes coming finally to rest
upon the spot most beautiful to me. There they remained fixed. All
thoughts were now folded up so that my mind, flowing singly in one
direction, concentrated itself upon the beauty on which I gazed. This
soon vanished, and I saw nothing whatever, but, bearing away into a
place of complete silence and emptiness, I there assimilated and
enjoyed inwardly the soaring essence of the beauty which I had
previously drawn into my mind through my eyes, being now no
longer conscious of seeing outwardly, but living entirely from the
inward. This I did almost every day, but to do it I was obliged to
seek solitude, and absolute solitude is a hard thing to find; but I
sought it, no matter where, even in a churchyard! I saw no graves. I
saw the sky, or a marvellous cloud pink with the kisses of the sun,
and away I went. I judge this now to have been contemplation,
though I never thought of it by so fine-sounding a name; it was only
my delightful pastime, yet there was a strange inexpressible sadness
in it. Nature and beauty were not enough. The more beauty I saw,
the more I longed for something to which I could not put a name. At
times the ache of this pain became terrible, almost agonising, but I
could not forgo my pastime. Now, at last, I know what this pain was:
my soul looked for God, but my creature did not know it. For just in
this same way we contemplate God, savouring Him without seeing
Him, and being filled to the brim with marvellous delights with no
sadness.

But this condition of contemplation is very far from being the
mountain-top; it is but a high plateau from which we make the final
ascent. The summit is an indescribable contact, and this summit is
not one summit but many summits. Which is to say, we have contact
of several separate forms--that of giving, that of receiving, and that
of immersion or absorption, which _at its highest_ is altogether
unendurable as fire.

Of this last I am able only to say this: that not only is it inexpressible
by any words, but that that which is a state of extreme beatitude to
the soul is death to the creature by excess of joy. Therefore both
heart and mind fear to recall any details of the memory of this
highest attainment. I knew it but once. To know it again would be
the death of my body. For more than two hours (as well as I am able
to judge) before coming to this highest experience, my soul travelled
through what felt to be an ocean, for she rose and fell upon billows
in a state of infinite bliss.

Of other forms of contact we have a swift, unexpected, even
unsought-for attainment, which is entirely of His volition; that
sudden condescension to the soul, in which in unspeakable rapture
she is caught up to her holy lover.

These are the topmost heights which the creature dare recall, though
to the soul they remain in memory as life itself. The variations of
these forms of contact are infinite, for God would seem to will to be
both eternal changelessness and variation in infinitude.

Because of this, and the marvellous depths and heights and breadths
of life revealed to her, the soul is able to conceive of an eternity of
bliss, for monotony ceases to be joy. In Nature we see that no two
trees in a forest are alike, and two fruits gathered from one bough
have not the same flavour.

But to my feeling all degrees of attainment are only to be
distinguished as varying degrees of union, the joy of which is of a
form and a degree of intensity and purity which can enter neither the
heart nor the mind to imagine, but must be experienced to be
understood, and when experienced remains in part incomprehensible.
It is not to be obtained by force of the will, neither can it be obtained
without the will. It is, then, a mystery of two wills in unison, in
which our will is temporarily fused into and consumed by the will of
God and is in transports of felicity over its own annihilation! This is
outside reason and therefore incomprehensible to the creature, but
comprehensible to the soul, and becomes the aim and object of our
life to attain in permanence, and is the uttermost limit of all
conceivable rapture.

When I first knew union and contact upon the hill I had the
impression of a very great light outside of me. I never again had an
outward impression of it.

But when any sense of inward _light_ is felt I consider it to be a
high ecstasy and hard for the body. It is the sweet and gentle
touchings of Christ which are the great and unspeakable comfort of
both soul and body. Inward heat I never felt till many months after
my third conversion and more than four years from my first
conversion. This extraordinary sensation, which to my mind is like a
magnetic seething with heat and ravishment of joy, I felt inwardly
only after I had learnt to know a sudden, secret, joyous delight of
love in the soul, which is easiest described as sweetness of love, is
from the Christ, and _very frequently_ given by Him. And some six
months after the heat, fire, electric seething, or however best it may
be named, I first knew the song of the soul. Now, although it is
better not to dwell upon the memory of past spiritual joys, lest we
become greedy, and equally wise not to dwell upon the memory of
anguishes, lest we fall into self-pity, which of all emotions is the
most sickly and useless (and our wisest is to live only from hour to
hour with all the sweetness that we can, leaving to Him the choosing
of our daily bread, whether it be high joy or pain), still I confess that
I have thought over and compared these joys sufficiently to know
very well which I love the best. Heat of love is very wonderful, and
sweetness is very lovely, and raptures and ecstasies are outside
words; but most beautiful of all is the song of the soul, and this is
when--in highest adoration--passing beyond heat, and further than
sweetness, the soul goes up alone upon the highest summit of love,
and there like a bird pours out the rapturous and golden passion of
her love. And His Spirit, biding very near, never touches her; for if
He touch, it is at once an ecstasy, and because of the stress of this
she would have neither words nor song with which to rejoice Him.

Oh, the pure happiness of the soul in this wonderful song!

Truly I think it is greater than in the rapture or the ecstasy, because
in these the soul receives, but in the song, mounting right up to Him,
she gives. And now at last we know the fuller meaning of Christ's
words where He says: "It is more blessed to give than to receive."

Beloved, Thou takest the creature and liftest it up; Thou takest the
creature and liftest it high, so that nevermore can it offend Thee, and
the soul is free to sing of her love. Then is it Thy will that the
creature should love Thee? Or is it Thy will that the soul should
adore? Beloved, I know not whether with my heart and mind I most
adore Thee, or whether with my soul I love Thee more. And where
is that secret trysting-place of love? I do not know; for whilst I go
there and whilst I return I am blind, and whilst I am there I am
blinded by Love Himself.

O wondrous trysting-place I which is indeed the only trysting-place
of all the world worthy to be named.

For every other love on earth is but a poor, pale counterfeit of love--a
wan Ophelia, wandering with a garland of sad perished flowers to
crown the dust.

* * *

As the loving creature progresses he will find himself ceasing to live
in things, or thoughts of things or of persons, but his whole mind
and heart will be concentrated upon the thought of God alone. Now
Jesus, now the High Christ, now the Father, but never away from
one of the aspects or personalities of God, though his conditions of
nearness will vary. For at times he will be in a condition of great
nearness, at times in a condition of some farness, or, more properly
speaking, of obscurity. He will be in a condition of waiting (this
exceedingly frequent, the most frequent of all); a condition of
amazing happiness; a condition of pain, of desolation at being still
upon the earth instead of with God. He will be in a condition of
giving love to God, or a condition of receiving love, of
remembrance and attention. He will be in a condition of
immeasurable glamour, an extraordinary illumination of every
faculty, not by any act of his own, but poured through him until he is
filled with the elixir of some new form of life, and feels himself
before these experiences never to have lived--he but existed as a part
of Nature. But now, although he is become more united to Nature
than ever before, he also is mysteriously drawn apart from her,
without being in any way presumptuous, he feels to be above her,
not by any merits but by intention of Another. He is become lifted
up into the spirit and essence of Nature, and the heavy and more
obvious parts of her bind him no more. He is in a condition of
freedom, he is frequently in a condition of great splendour, and is
wrapped perpetually round about with that most glorious
mantle--God-consciousness.

These are man's right and proper conditions. These are the lovely
will of God for us. And too many of us have the will to go contrary
to Him. Oh, the tragedy of it! If the whole world of men and women
could be gathered and lifted into this garden of love! Persuaded to
rise from lesser loves into the bosom of His mighty Love!

For the truly loving soul here on earth there are no longer heavens,
nor conditions of heavens, nor grades, nor crowns, nor angels, nor
archangels, nor saints, nor holy spirits; but, going out and up and on,
we reach at last THE ONE, and for marvellous unspeakably glorious
moments KNOW HIM.

This is life: to be in Him and He in us, _and know it._

* * *

These beautiful flights of the soul cannot be taken through idleness,
though they are taken in what would outwardly appear to be a great
stillness. This stillness is but the necessary abstraction from physical
activity, even from physical consciousness; but inwardly the spirit is
in a great activity, a very ferment of secret work. This, to the writer,
is frequently produced by the beautiful in Nature, the spirit
involuntarily passing at sight of beauty into a passionate admiration
for the Maker of it. This high, pure emotion, which is also an
_intense activity_ of the spirit, would seem so to etherealise the
creature that instantly the delicate soul is able to escape her loosened
bonds and flies towards her home, filled with ineffable,
incomparable delight, praising, singing, and joying in her Lord and
God until the body can endure no more, and swiftly she must return
to bondage in it. But the most wonderful flights of the soul are made
during a high adoring contemplation of God. We are in high
contemplation when the heart, mind, and soul, having dropped
consciousness of all earthly matters, have been brought to a full
concentration upon God--God totally invisible, totally unimaged,
_and yet focussed to a centre-point by the great power of love._ The
soul, whilst she is able to maintain this most difficult height of
contemplation, may be visited by an intensely vivid perception,
inward vision, and knowledge of God's attributes or perfections,
very brief; and this _as a gift,_ for she is not able to will such a
felicity to herself, but being given such she is instantly consumed
with adoration, and _enters ecstasy._

Having achieved these degrees of progress, the heart and mind will
say: "Now I may surely repose, for I have attained!" And so we may
repose, but not in idleness, which is to say, not without abundance of
prayer. For only by prayer is our condition maintained and renewed;
but without prayer, by which I mean an incessant inward
communion, quickly our condition changes and wears away. No
matter to what degree of love we have attained, we need to pray for
more; without persistent but short prayer for faith and love we might
fall back into strange woeful periods of cold obscurity.

To the accomplished lover great and wonderful is prayer; the more
completely the mind and heart are lifted up in it, the slower the
wording. The greater the prayer, the shorter in words, though the
longer the saying of it, for each syllable will needs be held up upon
the soul before God, slowly and, as it were, in a casket of fire, and
with marvellous joy. And there are prayers without words, and
others without even thoughts, in which the soul in a great stillness
passes up like an incense to the Most High. This is very pure, great
love; wonderful, high bliss.

* * *

In the earlier stages of progress, when the heart and mind suffer
from frequent inconstancy, loss of warmth, even total losses of love,
set the heart and mind to recall to themselves by reading or thinking
some favourite aspect of their Lord Jesus Christ. It may be His
gentleness, or His marvellous forgiveness, as to Peter when "He
turned and looked at him" after the denial; for so He turns and looks
upon ourselves. Or it may be His sweetness that most draws us. But
let us fasten the heart and mind upon whichever it may be, and in the
warmth of admiration _love will return to us._

* * *

The mode of entrance into active contemplation I would try to
convey in this way. The body must be placed either sitting or
kneeling, and supported, or flat on the back as though dead. Now the
mind must commence to fold itself, closing forwards as an open rose
might close her petals to a bud again, for every thought and image
must be laid away and nothing left but a great forward-moving love
intention. Out glides the mind all smooth and swift, and plunges
deep, then takes an upward curve and up and on till willingly it
faints, the creature dies, and consciousness is taken over by the soul,
which, quickly coming to the trysting-place, _spreads herself_ and
there awaits the revelations of her God. To my feeling this final
complete passing over of consciousness from the mind to the soul is
by act and will of God only, and cannot be performed by will of the
creature, and is the fundamental difference between the
contemplation of Nature and the contemplation of God. The creature
worships, but the soul alone knows contact. And yet the mode of
contemplation is a far simpler thing than all these words--it is the
very essence of simplicity itself; and in this sublime adventure we
are really conscious of no mode nor plan nor flight, nought but the
mighty need of spirit to Spirit and love to Love.

* * *

The picking out and choosing of certain persons, and the naming of
them "elect" and "chosen" souls, when I first read of it, filled me
with such a sinking that I tried, when coming upon the words, not to
admit the meaning of them into myself; for that some should be
chosen and some not I felt to be favouritism, and could not
understand or see the justice of it. I never ask questions. He left me
in this condition for eighteen months. Then He led me to an
explanation sufficient for me. The way He showed it me was not by
comparisons with great things--angels and saints and holy persons;
but by that humble creature, man's friend, the dog, He showed me
the elect creature. It was this way.

One evening as I passed through the city I had one of those sudden
strong impulses (by which He guides us) to go to a certain and
particular cinematograph exhibition. I was very tired, and tried to
put away the thought, but it pressed in the way that I know, and I
knew it better to go. I sat for an hour seeing things that had no
interest for me, and wondering why I should have had to come,
when at last a film was shown of war-dogs in training--dogs trained
especially to assist men and to carry their messages.

These dogs were especially selected, not for their charm of outward
appearance, but for their inward capacities; _not for an especial love
of the dog_ (or favouritism), but for that which they were willing to
learn how to do. The qualifications for (s)election were willingness,
obedience, fidelity, endurance. Once chosen they were set apart.
Then commenced the training, and we were shown how man put his
will through the dog: he was able to do this _only because of the
willingness of the dog._ The purport of the training was to carry a
message for his master wherever his master willed. He must go
instantly and at full speed; he must leap any obstacle; he must turn
away from his own kind if they should entice him to linger on the
way; he must subdue all his natural desires and instincts entirely to
his master's desires; he must be indifferent to danger. And to secure
this he was fired over by numbers of men, difficulties were set for
him, and he was distracted from his straight course by a number of
tests. Yet we saw the brave and faithful creatures running on their
way at their fullest speed until, exhausted and breathless but filled
with joy of _love and willingness,_ they reached the journey's end,
to be caressed and cared for beyond other dogs until the next
occasion should arise. Then we were shown the dog in his
fully-trained condition. His master could now always rely upon him. A
dog always ready, always faithful and self-forgetful, was then set
apart into a still smaller and more (s)elect group and surrounded
with most especial care and love. Never would it want for anything.
In this there was justice. Forsaking all their natural ways, these dogs
had submitted themselves wholly, in loving willingness, to their
master's will, and he in return would lavish all his best on them. It
was but just. Oh, how my heart leaped over it! At last I understood--for
as the dog, so the human creature. We become chosen souls,
not for our own sakes (which had always seemed to me such
favouritism), but for our willingness to learn our Master's Will. And
what is His will and what is His work? Of many, many kinds, and
this is shown to the soul in her training. But the hardest to learn is
not that of the worker, but of the messenger and lover. As the
messenger, to take His messages, in whatever direction, instantly
and correctly, and to take back the answer from man to Himself--which
is to say, to hold before Him the needs of man on the fire of
the soul, known to most persons under the name of prayer. And as
the lover, to sing to Him with never-failing joyful love and thanks.

But the learning and work of the soul is not so simple as that of the
dog, who carries the message in writing upon his collar. The soul
can have no written paper to assist her, and long and painful is her
training; and exquisitely sweet it is when, having swiftly and
accurately taken the message, she waits before Him for the rapture
of those caresses that she knows so well.

How I was spurred! For I said, "Shall dogs outdo us in love and
devotion?" Only in a condition of total submission, self-forgetfulness,
self-abnegation, can the soul either receive or deliver her
message. In this way she is justified of the joys of her election.
The dog, faithful in all ways to his master, receives in return all
praise and all meats, whatever he desires. The faithful soul also
receives all praise and all meats, both spiritual and carnal, for
nothing of earthly needs will lack her _if she asks_; and without
asking, her needs are mysteriously and completely given her. Her
spiritual meats are, in this world, peace, joy, ecstasy, rapture; and of
the world to come it is written that eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things that God has
prepared for them that love Him.

It might be supposed that only persons filled with public charities
and social improvements, ardent and painstaking church workers,
might most surely and easily learn to be messengers. But all these
persons pursue and follow their own line of thought, the promptings
of their own minds and hearts. They are admirable workers, but not
messengers. For the hound of God must have in his heart no plan of
his own. It is hard for the heart to say, "I have no wishes of my own;
I have no interests, no plans, no ambitions, no schemes, no desires,
no loves, no will. Thy will is my will. Thy desire is my desire. Thy
love is my all. I am empty of all things, that I may be a channel for
the stream of Thy will."

With what patience, what tenderness, what inexpressible
endearments He helps the soul, training her by love!--which is not to
say that she is trained without much suffering of the creature. So we
are trained by two opposite ways--by suffering and by joys; and the
whole under an attitude of passionate and devoted attention on our
part. The sufferings of the soul baffle all description with their
strange intensities.

Our encouragements are great and extraordinary sweetnesses,
urgings, and joyful uplifting of the spirit. So that when we would
stop, we are pressed forward; when we are exhausted, we are filled
with the wine of sweetness; when we are in tears, we are embraced
into the Holy Spirit.

* * *

Sin and ill are the false notes struck by man across the harmony of
God's will, and to strike upon or even remember such notes is instant
banishment from the music of His presence. Where all is joy, there
joy is all_;_ and he who has not reached this joy does not know
God--he is still a follower, and not a possessor, and he should refuse
in his heart to remain satisfied with his condition, but climb on. Why
stay behind? Climb on, climb on!

How often I have been mystified and disturbed by the attitude of
many religious and pious people, that to follow Christ is a way of
gloom, of sadness, of heaviness! How often have I gathered from
sermons that we are to give up all bright and enticing things if we
would follow Him, and the preacher _goes no further!_ Has the
Lord, then, no enticements, no sweetnesses, no brightness to offer us,
that we should be asked to forsake all pleasantnesses, all brightness,
all attractions if we follow Him? This to me always seemed terrible,
and my heart would sink. Indeed, to my poor mind and heart it
seemed nothing more hopeful than a going from bad to worse!

All the pictures I have seen, either of the Crucifixion or the Way of
the Cross (and especially those of more recent times and painting),
portray His Blessed Face all worn with gloom; and I know now that
this is far from the truth. For perfect love knows agony, but no
gloom. He went through all His agony, lifted high above gloom, in a
great ecstasy of love for us.

To speak of _sacrifice_ in connection with following Him is, to my
mind, the work of a very foolish person and one in danger of being
blasphemous. For how dare we say that it is a sacrifice when, by the
putting away of foolish desires, we find God! And to find God,
through the following of Jesus Christ, is to _gain so much_ (even in
this world, and without waiting for the next) that those who gain it
never cease to be amazed at the vastness of it.

We find this to be an absolute truth, that if we have not Him we
have, and are, nothing, in comparison with that which we are and
that which we have when we have Him.

In my earlier stages I was greatly set back and disturbed by this
gloom and sacrifice (which is no sacrifice) of myself so put forward
by pulpit teaching. It was a great hindrance to me and blinded me to
the truth. I was only a normal, ordinary creature, and they thrust a
great burden into my arms.

Little by little, as I was able to learn directly from His own heart, I
came to know Him as He is; and I could not reconcile this
knowledge of Himself which He gave me, especially of His high
willingness and serenity, with pulpit teachings of heavy gloom. The
Church too frequently spoke to me of following Him in terms which
conveyed a burden: "Pick up thy cross, pick up thy cross!" they
cried; and He spoke to me in terms which conveyed a great joy:
"Come to Me, come to Me, for I love thee!"

I thought I was very cowardly and sinned by this inability to like the
gloomy burden, and one day I came upon this out of Jeremiah: "As
for the prophet, or the priest, or the people, that shall say, The
burden of the Lord, I will punish that man and his house . . . because
ye say, The burden of the Lord, I will utterly forget you and forsake
you, and cast you out of My presence."

These words of Jesus, "Take up thy cross and follow Me": whoever
will do it will be shown by Jesus that the cross of following Him is
no burden, but a deliverance, a finding of life, the way of escape, a
great joy, and a garland of love.

The world thinks of joyousness as being laughter, cackling, and
much silly noise; and to such I do not speak. But the Christ's
joyousness is of a high, still, marvellous, and ineffable
completeness--beyond all words; and _wholly satisfying_ to heart
and soul and body and mind.

It is written, "They shall love silver, and not be satisfied with it"--for
why? Only those are _satisfied_ who know the gold of Christ.

All of which is not to say that by following Him we shall escape
from happenings and inconveniences and sorrows and illnesses
common to life; but that when these come we are raised out of our
distress into His ineffable peace.

When the heart is sad, use this sadness in a comprehension of the
deeper pain of Jesus, who was in the self-same exile as we ourselves.
The more the soul is truly awakened and touched, the more she feels
herself to be in exile; and this is her cross.

But the remedy for her sadness is that she should courageously pass
out of her woes of exile and go up to meet her lover with smiles.
Now, He cannot resist this smiling courage and love of the soul, and
very quickly He must send her His sweetness, and her sadness is
gone.

* * *

When I say that if we will take a few steps alone towards Christ--which
is to say, if we will make some strenuous efforts to cleanse
ourselves and change our minds and ways--He will take us all the
rest of the way, I speak from experience. For amongst many things
this happened to me: at a certain stage, after my third conversion on
the hill, He caused my former thoughts, desires, and follies to go
away from me! It was as though He had sent a veil between me and
such thoughts of my heart and mind as might not be pleasing to Him,
so that they disappeared from my knowledge and my actions!

By this marvellous act He removed my difficulties, and put me into
a state of innocence which resembled the innocence I remember to
have had up to the age of four or five years. But I find this new
innocence far more wonderful than that of childhood, which is but
the innocence of ignorance. But this new innocence--which is a gift
of God--is innocence with knowledge. I am not able to express the
gratitude and amazement and wonder that have never ceased to fill
me about this. Such things can only be spoken of by the soul to her
lover, and then not in words but in a silence of tears.

What did I ever do that He should show me such kindness? I did
nothing except this: I desired with all the force of my heart and soul
and mind and body to love Him. I said, "Oh, if I could be the
warmest, tenderest lover that ever thou didst have! Teach me to be
Thy burning lover." This was my perpetual prayer. And my idea of
Heaven was and is this, that without so much as knowing, or being
known or perceived by _any save Himself,_ without even a name,
yet retaining my full consciousness of individuality, I should be with
Him for always.

What is this love for God, and how define it? For myself, I never
knew it until I was filled with it upon the hill. Many judge it to be _a
following_ of Christ and His wishes, but this is only a part of it and
the way we begin it, and often we begin from duty, fear of future
punishment, desire for salvation or spiritual pre-eminence, and
obedience; and in none of these is there the joy of love.

By such standards I might count myself to have loved Him for
twenty years; but know I did not. For ten years past I felt myself to
have so great a need of Him, I sought Him so, that for me Heaven
contained no re-met former earthly loves, much as I loved them here.
I knew that He would be my all. Nevertheless, He was not yet my
Love, but my Need.

Love is a fire, for we feel the great heat of it.

Love is a light, for we perceive the white glare of it.

Of things known, to what can we compare it? Most perhaps to
electricity, for here we have both light and heat, and the lightning
flash strikes that which already contains the most of itself (or
electricity). And the lightning of God's love strikes him whose heart
contains the most love for Himself. And He strikes when He will,
and afterwards visits when He will; and I do not count myself (for
all my earthly loves) to have so much as known the outer edge of the
meaning of the word love, till He struck me with His own upon that
hill.

Truly, fair and holy love is our warranty, our only pass for entering
into Heaven.

Brave and wilful, rapturous and insistent, love passes with bold yet
humble ecstasy into the very presence of her Lord and God; and
alone, out of all creation, is never denied the Right of Way.

* * *

I have seen it quoted, "Turn to the heights, turn to the deeps, turn
within, turn without, everywhere thou shalt find the Cross." But I
see it so: "Turn to the heights, turn to the deeps, turn within, turn
without, everywhere thou shalt find His Love." Love to help on the
way. Too much we might suppose, to hear pious people talk, that
because of Christ's way we must be miserable and our life an
endless Cross! And so life may be a cross, but He carries it for us.

Do sinful men never suffer? Do the sinful escape disease? and live
for ever without biting the dust in death or disappointment? Why,
disease and suffering are the very twin-children of sin. I am amazed
that people can take such a view of the Cross as to think it an
unhappy, miserable way. For so marvellous is the beauty of such
love that there is no other so desirable a thing upon earth.

"Come, walk the way with Me," says the Beloved; "I am all serenity,
all peace, all might, all power, all love. Come, walk with Me, and
forget thy tiny cares in the peace of My bosom."

* * *

We do not love God because we do not yet know Him. And we do
not know Him because we seek only to know and have our own
desires: and having learnt to know these, we would have our
unknown God accommodate Himself to us and them.

But let us first seek to know God's desires by heart, and then
accommodate our own to His: so shall we learn to be pleasing to
Christ, that He may lead us, whilst here, into His Garden. For to the
creature that ardently pursues God there comes at last a time when
He reveals Himself to the searching soul, saying: "I Am Here.
Come!" Then in secrecy we arise,--and go to Him out of the House
of Vanity into the music of the great Beyond.

There is small credit or virtue to the soul when, in a state of high
grace or nearness, she burns with love for her God: for she is under
the spell of the enticement of His Presence--how can she help but
burn! It is as though two earthly lovers, in full sight and nearness,
are filled each for each with great love, and are content.

But this is a credit to the soul and the creature (as to the earthly
lovers), that in separation and farness they should seek no other, but
continue to dwell with great intentness upon the absent love. This is
fidelity.

At times it is as if her Lord said to the soul: "I have other to do than
to stay by thee; and also thou hast had more than enough to thy
share of My honey"; and, so saying, He departs.

And this is fidelity of the soul and the creature, and a great virtue,
that, without change of face, without complaint or petitioning, they
should with all sweetness continue to pour up to Him their unabated
love. If any can do this, he is a perfect lover and has no more to
learn.

When the love of the soul, as it were, exceeds itself, it passes up and
beyond even the song of love; and being unable to express itself by
words or by song, or by deep sighings, or by any of those subtle,
silent, spiritual means known only between herself and God, when
all means fail because of the too great stress of her adoration, then
the soul passes into a great pain, which is the anguish of love and a
hard thing to bear. This excess is to the fullness of the Godhead.

And now the soul must turn to prayer for help, but not to the
Godhead: for the more she turns to the Godhead the greater becomes
her anguish. But coming down to His humanity, she must beseech
sweet Jesus for His aid, and so regain her equilibrium.

* * *

Many of us are, perhaps unwittingly, impudent to God. In this way
we are impudent: We question (even though it be in secret, hidden in
the heart and not spoken) the justice of God, the ways of God, the
plans of God, the love of God: by which means we argue with God
and judge Him. And another manner of impudence we have is this,
that we dare to attribute or to blame Him for the results of man's
own filth, saying: "This and this is the will of God, for we see that it
exists, and His will is omnipotent." Oh, beware of this impudence,
drop it out of the heart and mind, and flee from it as from the plague!
"How then can these things be, if He is omnipotent?" we say.
Because of this, that in the trust of His great love He gave us the
royal and Godly gift of free-will, and our souls have proved
themselves unworthy to have it; and now the creature is brought
before the Beautiful, and the Holy, and the Pure, but turning away,
like the sow, prefers the mire and the festering sores proceeding
from such wallowings. If there were no choice, there were no virtue,
and no progress home. But let no man venture in his heart to
attribute to that Holy and Marvellous Being whom we speak of as
God, not knowing as yet His Name, any will towards festers and
corruptions, for what does He say Himself? "Their sins rise up
before Me and stink in My nostrils!"

We surely forget that this world is not yet God's Kingdom, and that
His will is not done here, and will not be until the Judgment Day.
This world is but a tiny testing-chamber in His mighty workshop;
and great and wonderful is the care He has for the workers in it.

O man! whence come thy wretchednesses? Look round and think.
Do they not all proceed from self and fellow-men, alive or dead?
Then why blame God?

"Why am I here?" we cry, "to suffer all these pains, and my consent
not asked? A poor, sad puppet dancing to a tune I know not the
rhythm of. Where is my recompense? And where my wages? I will
take all I can of what is offered here, and give no thanks! It is but
my scant due for all my wretchednesses!"

O foolish man! so timid of all future possibilities of bliss that he
must grasp and burn himself with such delights as he finds here!
And equally mistaken and small-minded man who thinks that all our
Mighty God will have to offer us hereafter are crowns, damp clouds
and mists, and endless hymns! Such little hearts are far away indeed
from knowing the _magnitudes of Life._

O wretched man! why this distrust? Hast thou created even thine
own palate and digestion? Hast thou invented any of those fond
delights that so enslave thee now? Hast thou thyself devised the
means wherewith to satisfy the longing of thy _creature_ for the
sweets of life? They were provided thee; all that thou hast created is
misuse! Thou art but a perverted thing!--a crooked tool of self, a fly
drowning in the honey that it sought too greedily to own!

O wretched, wretched man! so cloyed with sweets of earth thou
canst not raise thy head to see the sunrise out beyond the world, and
know true sweets! How many are the tears wept over thee by the
great heart of God!

* * *

Since coming into this new way of living, the more I come into
contact with music the more I sense a mysterious connection
between melody--the soul--and her _origin._ Alone out of all the
sciences and arts, music has no foundation upon anything on earth.
There is no music in nature until the soul, come to a perfect
harmony within herself, brings out the hidden harmony in all
creation, and, turning it to melody within herself, returns it to her
Lord in song, whether by outward instrument or inward love.

The soul, indeed, would seem to have come out of a life of infinite
melody and to have dropped into an existence of mere contrary and
vexing time-beat.

Who can by any means account for the variety of passions excited
within him by the mere difference of the spacing, time, or rhythm of
music? In my new condition of living I notice that the soul throws
out with most disdainful impatience music that was formerly
beautiful to my mind and heart (or my creature); and certain types of
flowing cadences (very rarely to be found), sustained in high,
flowing, delicate, and soaring continuity will produce in her
conditions akin to a madness of joy. For one brief instant _she
remembers! but cannot utter what!_

Of visions I know nothing, but received all my experiences into my
soul as amazingly real inward perceptions. That these perceptions
are of unprecedented intensity, and more realistic than those which
are merely visual, can be understood by bodily comparisons; for to
_feel_ or to be one with fire is more than to _see_ it.

To try to compare spiritual life with physical experiences would
seem to be useless; for, to my feeling, while we live in the spirit we
live at a great speed,--indeed, an incalculably great speed--and as a
whole and not in parts. For with physical living we live at one
moment by the eyes, at another with the mind, at another through
the heart, at another with the body. But the spirit feels to have no
parts, for all parts are of so perfect a concordance that in this
marvellous harmony all is one and one is all. And this with
_incredible intensity,_ so that we live not as now--dully--but at
white heat of sensibility.

_Prayer_

Prayer is the golden wedding-ring between ourselves and God. For
myself, I divide it into two halves--the one petitioning, the other
offering.

Of petitioning I would say that this is the _work_ of the soul; and of
offering, that it is the pleasure of the soul.

Of petitioning, that I come to it under His command; and of offering,
that I come to it of my own high, passionate desire.

I make upon my knees, three times a day, three short and formal
prayers of humble worship, as befits the creature worshipping its
Ineffable and Mighty God: and for the rest of my time I sing to Him
from my heart and soul, as befits the joyful lover, adoring and
conversing with the Ineffable and Exquisite Beloved.

* * *

This is the circle of His way with us. First is prayer; then love; and
after love, humility. With humility comes grace; and after grace,
temptation; and in temptation we must quickly enter prayer again.

* * *

O wonderful and ineffable God! who, while remaining hidden from
His lovers in this life, yet so ravishes their hearts and minds and
souls that they are unable to find truly sweet even the greatest of
life's former joys--for nothing can now ever satisfy them but the
secret and marvellous administrations of His love and grace! On one
day feeling to be forsaken, the most desolate and lonely of all
creatures in the Universe; and on another exalted to almost
unbearable pinnacles of bliss, equal to the angels in felicity, and
blest beyond all power of words to say--such and so are the lovers of
God.

* * *

The soul has six wings: love, obedience, humility, simplicity,
perseverance, and courage. With these she can attain God.

We know very well that no man will find God either enclosed, held
fast, or demonstrated within a circle of dogmatic words; but every
man can find, in his own soul, an exquisite and incomparable
instrument of communication with God. To establish the working of
this communication is the whole object and meaning of life in this
world--this world of material, finite, and physical things, in which
the human body is at once a means and a debt.

The key to progress is a continual dressing of the will and mind and
heart towards God, best brought about by continually filling the
heart and mind with beautiful, grateful, and loving thoughts of Him.
At all stages of progress the thoughts persistently fly away to other
things in the near and visible world, and we have need quietly and
perpetually to pick them up and re-centre them on Him. With the
mind turned in this way, steadily towards God, we are in that state
known to science as polarisation: we are in that condition in which
common iron becomes a magnet. It is so that God transforms us into
a diminutive part-likeness of Himself.

When at last the soul reaches union with Him, she is for a while so
caressed, so held in a perpetual contact and nearness, that we may
think ourselves already permanently entered into Paradise! But this
is not the plan; and, our education being exceedingly incomplete, we
return to our schooling.

We commence to experience profound and even terrible longings to
leave the world and all creatures, for we cannot bear either the sight
or the sound of them, and seek all day long to be alone with the
Beloved God. To conquer this last selfishness and weakness of the
soul, we must go again--as in the beginning--to Jesus. He teaches us
to go to and fro _willingly,_ gladly, from the highest to the lowest.
To pick up our daily life and duties, our obligations to a physical
world, in all humility, sweet reasonableness, and submission. He
teaches us to willingly accept incessant interruptions, and with
smiling face and perfect inward smoothness to descend from a
high contemplation of God (and only those who know high
contemplation can judge of the immensity of what I say) to listen
and _attend to_ some most trivial want of a fellow-creature! Reader,
it is the hardest thing of all. No sooner have we learnt the hard and
difficult way of ascent than we must willingly come down it, even
remain altogether in the valley below, and that with a smiling face
and, if possible, no thought of impatience! This is the true sacrifice
of the soul. Now, the sacrifices of the creature are the giving up of
the near and visible joys and prides of the world to follow Christ,
and are not real but seeming sacrifices, for, if done heartily and with
courage, an exchange between these joys and the joys of the
invisible is rapidly effected, and there remains no sacrifice, but "the
hidden treasure" is ours! But the sacrifice of the soul is real and long;
for having at last re-found God, she must resign her full joy of Him
till the death of the body--and this willingly, thankfully, without
complaint, not asking favours but pouring up her gratitude. In joy or
in pain, in happiness or in tribulation--gratitude! gratitude!--and this
not by her own strength but by strength of the Holy Ghost.

* * *

Because of this new way of living, the mind acquires a great
increase of capacity and strength and clearness: being able to deal
quickly and correctly with all matters brought before it with an ease
previously altogether unknown to its owner. It is no exaggeration to
say that the sagacity, scope, and grasp of the mind feels to be more
than doubled from that which it previously was, and this not because
of any study, but by an involuntary alteration. So that, though the
mind and attention are now given almost exclusively to the things of
God, yet when the things of the world have to be dealt with, this is
accomplished with extraordinary efficiency and quickness, though
very distasteful to the mind.

* * *

As the soul returns to her source nothing is more strongly
emphasised to her than the strength and intensity of individuality;
she is shown that the essence of all joy is Individuality in Union.

In the marvellous condition of Contact, though we cease to be the
creature or the soul adoring the Creator (but by an incomprehensible
condescension we are accepted as one with Himself in love), yet we
retain our own consciousness, which is our individuality.

In the highest rapture I ever was in, my soul passed into a fearful
extremity of experience: she was burned with so terrible an excess
of bliss, that she was in great fear and anguish because of this excess.
Indeed, she was so overcome by this too great realisation of the
strength of God that she was in terror of both God and joy. It was
three days before she recovered any peace, and more than a year
before I dared recall one instant of it to mind.

I am not able to think that even in Heaven the soul could endure
such heights for more than a period. These heights are incomparably,
unutterably beyond vision and union. They are the uttermost
extremity of that which can be endured by the soul, at least until she
has re-risen to great altitudes of holiness in ages to come.

By contact with God we acquire certain wonderful and terrible
realisations of truth and knowledge. For one thing, we learn the
nature and mode of spirit-life, as over against body- or sense-life.
We learn, at first with great fear, something of the awful intensities
of pain, as of joy, which can be endured by the spirit when free of
the body: for when we are in the spirit we do not _see_ fire, but we
feel to _become it_ and yet live! And so equally of pain or joy--we
do not feel these things delicately, as with, and in, the body, but we
pass into the essence of these things themselves, in all their terrible
and marvellous intensity, which is comparatively without limit.

Woe to those who must gather the garland of pain--which is
remorse-after death! It is easier to suffer a whole lifetime in the
body than one day in the spirit. O soul! come to thy contrition here
in this world, where pain has short limit! Repent and return!

* * *

Of the marvellous favours shown to the soul the heart cries out: "O
mighty God! of the magnitude of Thy condescensions I am afraid
even to think; they are too great for me, and I dare to recall them,
but only with all the simplicity of a little child!"

* * *

Those who feel desire and need within themselves to reach the
heights of inward life will do it best, not through diversity of
interests in fellow-creatures, but by unification of all interests in
God.

God once found, and possessed, we return to the interests of
creatures in moderation and with judgment.

* * *

What is pain? It is a mystery of separation, and we are gangrenous
with sin and pain because of separation from the source of life.

Truth now comes to us in such small segments that we no longer see
the pattern of it; but this we are able to perceive: that the mystery of
Separation is equal in degree with the mystery of Union, and that the
child of separation is Pain.

How did the soul ever become so separated from God? To my
feeling, in curiosity of loves we may find the answer, and know the
"fall" to be not that of the animal man but of the soul, which, once
living in perpetual beatitude--knowing nothing of pain because of
the unity with God, not understanding or being even grateful for her
bliss because of its invariable presence, and given free-will,--in
curiosity went out in search of newer and yet newer loves. And this
is the retribution of the soul for her unfaithful wanderings--that as
separation grows greater she commences to know pain, and,
becoming anxious therefrom to return to the source of her
remembered joys, she finds herself unable to accomplish this
because of the weight and grossness of the nature of the loves to
which she has hired herself, and from which _she is totally unable to
free herself,_ and yet which she must by some means overcome that
she may rise again to sanctity and return to God.

Now comes the marvellous, the pitiful, the universal Christ to her
aid--the Mighty Lover; and we may see in the whole scheme of
Creation, as we know it here, from jelly-fish to man, a plan by
which the soul may bring her wanderings to a term in time
conditions instead of timeless sons. When all this earth is evolved
for her great need, at last by the mercy of God she is interned in the
body of finite man, and must clothe herself in the heart and mind of
the human and take upon herself the nature of this creature man,
made and fashioned to be a suitable instrument and habitation for
her. To counterbalance the grossness and ineptitude of the creature's
material body with its appetites, man is imbued with the knowledge
of right, and with a secret longing for a _happiness which is not that
of the beast._

The soul must raise the brute in him, with all its appetites, to
purity,--a mighty task, accomplished with much pain, yet in infinitely
shorter duration of pain than if left in disembodied spirit-life; and,
indeed, we may come to look upon pain in this world as one of our
best privileges because of its powers of purification within a time-limit,
and to know that by the mercy of the God of Love we may take our hell
of cleansing in this world rather than in those worlds of disembodied
spirits where progress is of infinite slowness--revolving and revolving
upon itself, as a sand-spiral in a blast-furnace, without hope of death.

Oh, how convey any warning of this terrible knowledge, which is
not communicable by words! He said, "Though one return from the
dead, ye would not believe." But, O soul! repent and return while
still in the body! Lay hold on the Christ!

In the life of this world, then, does our God of love and mercy give
us rapid means (by conquest of the animal grossness and corruptible
body, raising man to the ideal man, according to God's intention) to
reunite ourselves with Him. And the soul of all animal creation is
also thereby gradually raised with us into a universal adoration of
the One Almighty God.

This is no fallen but a rising world, in which all Creation is slowly
and gloriously rising step by step.

So may our soul repay her debt to God for her past infidelities.

"Thy Maker is thine husband," says the voice of the prophet.

And the creature, with its suffering heart and mind and body, has
also its incomparable reward of bliss: for because of its love and
obedience it is raised into the spiritual body, AND TOGETHER
WITH THE SOUL BECOMES THE CHILD OF THE RESURRECTION.

------

[Transcriber's Notes:  The name of the author, Lilian Staveley, is not
mentioned on the title page of this text, but I have added it here.  I
have made one spelling change:  "enough to blow-to" to "enough to
blow to".]








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Golden Fountain, by Lilian Staveley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN FOUNTAIN ***

***** This file should be named 29449.txt or 29449.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/4/4/29449/

Produced by Ruth Hart

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
