The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Foreign Tour of Messrs. Brown, Jones
and Robinson, by Richard Doyle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Foreign Tour of Messrs. Brown, Jones and Robinson
       Being the History of What They Saw, and Did, in Belgium,
       Germany, Switzerland & Italy.

Author: Richard Doyle

Release Date: July 20, 2009 [EBook #29463]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOREIGN TOUR--BROWN, JONES, ROBINSON ***




Produced by Louise Hope




[This plain-text file, containing only the captions to Richard Doyle's
drawings, is included for completeness. The HTML version includes all
drawings and decorative text.

Except for "The Review" and some decorative headers, the entire book
was printed in CAPITAL LETTERS. It has been reformatted for readability;
capitalization decisions are the transcriber's. Text shown in +marks+
was printed in decorative blackletter type.]




  The Foreign Tour

  of Messrs

  BROWN, JONES, and ROBINSON.

  Being the History of
  What They Saw, and Did
  in Belgium, Germany,
  Switzerland & Italy.

  by

  Richard Doyle.


  London. Bradbury & Evans. Whitefriars.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


[LONDON.]


The mail train to Dover. Brown, Jones, and Robinson starting on their
travels.




[OSTEND.]


After a rough passage, Brown, Jones, and Robinson are here seen landed
at Ostend, surrounded, and a little bewildered, by the natives, who
overwhelm them with attentions--seize the luggage, thrust cards into
their hands, drag them in several directions at once, all talking
together (which prevented their directions being so clear as they
otherwise would have been)--and, finally, all expecting money!


They are at the Douane, waiting for the officials to search the luggage.

Robinson and Jones (alarmed by expression of Brown's countenance).
--"What's the matter now?" Brown (in a voice of agony). --"I've left the
key of my bag at home!"




[OSTEND TO COLOGNE.]


A sketch made at Malines.


How they saw Belgium.




[COLOGNE.]


THE ARRIVAL AT COLOGNE.

Travellers passing their examination. In the foreground is Jones's
portmanteau undergoing the "ordeal by touch."


Manner and custom of the people, as seen from the railway by Brown, and
made a note of.


B. J. and R., who took their places on the roof the better to command
the view, are seen at the moment when the idea occurred to the two
former that they might possibly not "fit" under the archway. Robinson is
so wrapped up in thought, and a cigar, that he is unconscious of all
else.

This represents the Cologne omnibus on its journey from the station into
the city, when stopped by the military, and made to "stand and deliver"
the passports.


Arrival at the hotel, and first coming in sight of that amiable and
obliging race, the German waiter. He is small in stature (scarcely the
size of life, as Jones remarked), and remains always a boy.


"Speise-Saal" hotel, Cologne-- Enter Brown, Jones, and Robinson,
fatigued, and somewhat disordered by travel, and "so hungry."


How an agent of Jean Maria Farina addressed them, who was kind enough
to put some of the celebrated "Eau" upon their handkerchiefs, and to
receive orders for the same.


The real Eau de Cologne, and its effect upon the noses of three
illustrious individuals.


"Kellner" presents the bill.


They "do" Cologne cathedral.




[COLOGNE TO BONN.]


The railway from Cologne to Bonn. --B. J. and R. "Just in time."


First glimpse of Rhine scenery.




[BONN.]


Jones's little all is contained in this small portmanteau.


Robinson, on the contrary, finds it quite impossible to move with less
than this.


This scene represents the Rhine boat about to start from Bonn, and
passengers from the railway embarking. In the foreground an accident has
occurred, a porter having upset the luggage of an English family, the
head of which is saluting him with the national "Damn," while the
courier of the party expresses the same idea in German.




[THE RHINE.]


BROWN'S FIRST IMPRESSION OF THE RHINE.

_From an ORIGINAL SKETCH in the possession of his family._


HEADS OF THE NATIVES.

_A Leaf from Brown's Sketch Book._


COMPANY ON BOARD THE RHINE BOAT.

Amongst them was a travelling tutor, and three young gentlemen, his
pupils. He stood in the midst of them smiling blandly, an open volume in
his hand, (probably a classic author,) between which, and his pupils,
and the scenery, he divided his attention in about equal parts. There
was a specimen of the English grumbler, big, burly, and as if in danger
of choking from the tightness of his cravat. Every one knows him, his
pleasant ways, and his constant flow of good humour and cheerfulness;
that is he, sitting to the right. There were besides, numerous young
gentlemen from the universities, from the army, from the bar, all with
more or less hair on their upper lips; and there was a cavalry officer
of the Russian guard, and a professor, on his way to Heidelberg, and
loose, dishevelled, hairy, smoky young Germans, with long beards, and
longer pipes. And there was a British nobleman, and a British alderman,
and a British alderwoman; and there were British ladies whom I can't
describe, because they wore those "ugly" things which prevent them being
seen; intelligent young Americans on their way all over the world; nuns,
with their quiet, happy faces; Red Republicans from Frankfort, and snobs
from London.


THE GREAT BRITON.

As he stood contemplating the Rhine-land, wondering if it would be
possible to live in that country; and considering (supposing he had one
of those castles, now) how many thousands a-year one could do it with.
The scenery would do; and with English institutions it might be made a
good thing of.

N.B. --He little thinks what Brown is doing.

Even the nun was not safe from Brown. He is here seen taking her off, in
a rapid act of sketching.


B. J. and R. had just begun to enjoy the scenery, when, to their
consternation, who should appear on board but the "Bore," who instantly
was down upon them. For three mortal hours he entertained them with
fashionable intelligence, anecdotes of the aristocracy, the court
circular, births, deaths, marriages, &c.


This was supposed to be an M.P. travelling in search of "facts." He is
giving Brown his views; and also the statistics of everything.


A VIEW ON THE RHINE.


THE LONDON GENT UP THE RHINE.

He is taken at the moment when expressing his opinion that the whole
concern is a "do" and a "sell."


BRITISH FARMER AND SON IN FOREIGN PARTS.

They both wore a perpetual grin and stare of surprise, Jones thought
that they had taken leave of England and their senses at once, owing to
the withdrawal of protection.


THE RHINE BOAT.

Brown may be seen seated there upon the paddle-box, rapidly sketching
every church, ruined castle, town, or other object of interest on either
bank of the river. Those are Jones and Robinson, leaning over the side
of the boat below him. Observe, also, the stout party who has called for
brandy-and-water, and whose countenance almost lapses into a smile as
"Kellner" approaches with the beverage. The tutor, it is pleasant to
see, has at last put his "Classic" in his pocket, and gives himself up
to the undivided enjoyment of the scene, while his "young charge" is
wrapped in contemplation of mechanical science as exemplified in the
structure of the wheel. And that must surely be the gent who has such a
low opinion of the beauty of the Rhine-land, seated at the stern of the
boat with his legs dangling over the river. Let us hope that he is happy
now!


THE ENGLISH "MILORD" UPON THE RHINE.

How happy he looks! He dislikes the hum of men, and sits all day shut up
in his carriage reading the literature of his country. How rude of those
Germans to be laughing and joking so near his lordship!


PERFECT ENJOYMENT.




[COBLENTZ.]


Indignation of Robinson, at sight of inadequate washing apparatus. He
rang the bell with such violence, that all the waiters rushed in,
thinking that the hotel was on fire, or that a revolution had broken
out.

There he stood, pointing to the water, about half a pint in a basin the
size of a breakfast cup; and in a voice of suppressed emotion, demanding
to know if "Das ist, etc."


JONES'S NIGHT THOUGHTS.

"Man wants but little here below," _but_ "wants that little long."


If you should forget the number of your key and room (_as BROWN did on
returning late from the theatre_), what are you to do?


+An Incident in the Life of Jones's Dog.+

How this animal seemed to have imbibed communistic principles, and how
he stole a sausage, and how the population rose like one man, and hunted
him through the town.


The dog having outstripped the populace, proceeds to eat the sausage.


Having done so, he looks stouter than he did, and is inclined to rest.
The inhabitants, eager for vengeance, surround him, but are kept at bay
by the expression of his countenance.


One burly peasant having the hardihood to approach too near, he is made
as example of. _Exeunt omnes._




[THE RHINE.]


Brown, with noble perseverance, sits upon the paddle-box, regardless of
the storm, and sketches the castles and towns, as the steam-boat passes
them.


--Till in a moment of grief his hat and several sketches were carried
off for ever: and then he thought it time to go below.


How a citizen of the United States addressed Brown; and how he put the
following questions during the first five minutes of their acquaintance.

1. "Where are you going?"

2. "What place do you hail from?"

3. "Conclude you go toe Frankfort?"

4. "You're Mr. Brown, I reckon?"

5. "What names do your friends go by?"

Statements made during the same period.

1. "This here Rhine ain't much by the side of our Mississippi."

2. "Old Europe is 'tarnally chawed up."


BROWN'S HAT.

Robinson was very merry about this incident, and both he and Jones kept
poking fun at Brown during the rest of the day. They parodied the well
known song of "My heart's on the Rhine," substituting "My hat's in the
Rhine;"--(it was very poor stuff, we have been assured by Brown)--and
they made pointed allusions to the name of "Wide-Awake."

The above drawing is from a rude sketch by Jones.


THE SCENERY BECOMES MYSTERIOUS.

They now became enveloped in what seemed a combination of fog
(London November) and mist (Scotch). Only think of those two national
institutions going up the Rhine with the rest of the fashionable world.
At first it obscured the hill tops, with the ruins thereon; then the
villages and vineyards below; and finally both banks of the river
entirely disappeared. The company on board the steamboat did not,
at this period, present the most cheerful aspect.




[MAYENCE TO FRANKFORT.]


How Robinson's favourite portmanteau, which he had forgotten to lock,
was dropped accidentally by a porter while conveying it to the omnibus.


Jones hints to Robinson that it is time to get up.




[FRANKFORT.]


How they visited a "quarter" of the city of Frankfort, and what they saw
there!


Robinson here wrote his celebrated letter to the "Times," on the subject
of the deficiency of soap and water, from which, as we have seen in a
former page, he suffered so grievously. It was conceived in terms of
indignant eloquence; and drew a terrible picture of the state of social,
political, and religious degradation into which a country must have
sunk, where such things could be tolerated.


As they walked through the town, bent upon seeing the Ariadne, and
unconscious of danger, suddenly an object appeared in sight that filled
them with terror. It was the "Bore!" stepping jauntily along on the
other side of the street. To hesitate was to be lost! So they plunged
into the nearest shop for protection, and stood there breathless with
expectation and fear. Presently Jones--putting his head very gradually
out--reconnoitred, and finding all safe they resumed their way.


Robinson thinks it "the thing" to encourage native industry wherever he
goes, and so buys a German pipe.




[HEIDELBERG.]


"Kellner!"


While Brown, Jones, and Robinson supped, a party of philosophers carry
on an aesthetical discussion, with an accompaniment of pipes and beer.


"*  *  *  The night was beautiful, so we determined after supper to have
a look at the celebrated castle--Jones and I did, that is to say, for
Robinson was so fatigued with travel that he declined moving, muttering
something about 'Castle can wait.' We ascended; the moon shone brightly
through the ruins, and bathed the landscape in its silvery light, the
beautiful Neckar flowing at our feet. Under us lay the town, a thousand
lights twinkling in the stillness."  *  *  "Suddenly, to our horror,
there appeared upon the terrace 'The Bore!'" --_Extract from Brown's
Journal._


"At last he left us. But not before he had taken from his pocket a
letter received that morning from Green ('You know Green, of course,'
he said, 'everybody does'), and read it aloud from beginning to end. It
told of a 'good thing' said at the club by Smith; and of two marriages,
and a duel likely to come off, besides several interesting particulars
regarding the winner of the St. Leger." --_Ibid._

When Jones and Brown were left once more alone, they wandered and
pondered amongst the ruins, and moralised over the instability of
things--they were even becoming sentimental--when, suddenly, a terrific
sound was heard--like the barking of a dog--and the next moment the
animal himself was seen emerging from the darkness, and making towards
them at the top of his speed. They turned and fled!


Meeting by moonlight.


Robinson, after the departure of Jones and Brown, seated himself before
the fire and fell fast asleep.


He continued in that state, notwithstanding that the philosophers became
very noisy, and even warlike.


--And although--after the latter had retired (fortunately without coming
to blows)--his chair toppled over, he quietly assumed a horizontal
position.

Fancy the feelings of Jones and Brown on returning, and finding their
friend lying on his back upon the floor, snoring!


They lifted him up, and carried him off to bed.


Next morning they entertained Robinson with a thrilling account of the
dangers of their expedition, in which that dreadful dog filled a very
large space.

The above will give some faint idea of what they pictured to themselves
(and to Robinson).




[THE REVIEW.]


Brown, Jones, and Robinson have arrived at ----, the capital of ----, a
small German state (we won't say which, as it would be giving it an
undue distinction, and might offend the others).

They have been received with distinguished consideration, the "local"
paper having announced their arrival as Count Robinson, Sir Brown, and
the Rev. Jones. They have been invited to be present at a grand review,
and Robinson--who amongst other necessaries in those portmanteaus of
his, carried a uniform as Captain of Yeomanry--thought that this was
just the proper occasion to appear in it. Accordingly, he rode on to the
ground upon a charger (hired), in the character of a warrior, with a
solemnity of countenance befitting the scene and his country, and
accompanied by Jones (also mounted), but in the costume of an ordinary
individual of the period. Brown preferred going on foot. That is
Robinson in the centre. Just at the time when he ought to be riding up
the line, inspecting the troops with the Grand Duke and his staff--his
horse (a "disgusting brute," as Robinson afterwards described him, "who
could not have been in the habit of carrying gentlemen") suddenly stood
on his hind legs, in the very middle of the field, so that his rider was
forced to cling on to him in an absurd manner, in full view of the army,
the people, and the court.

R. at that moment earnestly desired that the earth might open and
swallow him.

KEY TO THE CARTOON.

1. Robinson. 2. The Grand Duke. 3. The Crown Prince. 4. The Rest of the
Serene Family. 5. Mr. Jones. 6. The Population. 7. Mr. Jones's Dog.
8. Mr. Brown. 9. The Army. 10. Distant View of the Capital. 11. Foreign
Visitors. 12. Monument to late Duke.




[BADEN.]


A SCENE AT BADEN.


THE RIGHT OF SEARCH.


+Of the Adventure that befel Jones.+


I.

Jones's dog having come upon a sentinel, and struck, perhaps, by his
small size compared with the sentinels he is used to, commences to say,
"Bow!--wow!--wow!--wew--u--u!"

The soldier, offended by these remarks, presents for the animal's
consideration, the point of his bayonet.


II.

Jones expostulates, with that freedom of speech which is the birthright
of every Englishman.


III.

But obtaining no satisfaction, calls on the miserable foreigner to
"Come on."


IV.

First (and last) round. --The soldier did "Come on," frowning. Jones
received him, smiling. --The soldier made play with his musket: Jones
put in his left. They closed, and a terrific struggle ensued, in the
course of which Jones got his adversary's "Nob" into "Chancery."


V.

The soldier, at this point, unable to use his arms, took to his legs,
and administered a series of kicks upon the shins of Jones, who in
return seized him, lifted him in the air, and threw him.


VI.

Then, considering that justice and the honour of his country were alike
satisfied, he retired, leaving the body of his antagonist on the field.


VII.

Shows the "body," on discovering that life was not extinct, attempting
to rise.

P.S. --He was last seen making frantic efforts to regain his feet, and
seemingly prevented from doing so by the weight of his knapsack, and
other accoutrements.


VIII.

Jones was late at breakfast; he found Robinson reading "Galignani," and
Brown looking out of window, and after giving them an amusing account of
the fun he had had, was just sitting down to the table, when Brown
shouted out, "By Jove, there is a regiment of soldiers coming down the
street!"


IX.

At first Jones was incredulous; but presently Brown, his hair standing
on end, rushed towards him, and in a voice of agony, cried, "As sure as
we are alive they have stopped in front of the house, and the _OFFICER
IS COMING IN!_"


X.

It was too true. The soldiers had come to look after the Englishman who
had attacked and beaten their comrade.


XI.

After a few moments of breathless suspense, the officer enters--Jones
stands like a man about to struggle with adversity.


XII.

Nevertheless he is arrested and marched off.


XIII.

Robinson, in agony, calls for his coat and hat, "For," as he cried out
to Brown, "not a moment is to be lost in endeavouring to see the British
Minister."


XIV.

They gain an audience of His Excellency the British Minister, and ask
his interference in behalf of a persecuted countryman.

We are happy to add that the interference was quite successful. Jones
was liberated immediately, and shortly afterwards the British Minister
for Foreign Affairs, in a despatch to the German Minister for the same,
expressed his conviction that "The whole civilised world reprobated,
with one voice, a system at once tyrannical and cruel, a remnant of the
darkest ages of man's history, and utterly unworthy of the present era
of progress and enlightenment."

Our friends were advised, however, to leave the country as soon and as
quietly as possible. They departed accordingly.




[BADEN TO BASLE.]


Head-dresses of peasantry. A sketch on the road to Basle.


How Brown and Jones went in a third class carriage (Robinson would not;
it did not seem "respectable"), that they might see the natives, and how
B. drew the portrait of one, to her evident dissatisfaction.


The omnibus besieged and taken by storm.




[BASLE.]


"The height of the omnibusses is quite disgusting." --_Extract from
unpublished documents in possession of ROBINSON, who himself fell in the
mud, while climbing from the roof of one of those vehicles._


Scene from the road, near Basle.


Storks' nest, Basle.




[SWITZERLAND.]


BOAT STATION ON THE LAKE OF LUCERNE;
AS SKETCHED BY BROWN FROM THE STEAMER.

According to the guide-book, the paintings on the wall represent Furst,
Stauffach, and Melchthal, swearing to liberate their country; but Jones
said he believed them to be portraits of a medieval Swiss Brown, Jones,
and Robinson, in the act of vowing eternal friendship.


The safest way of coming down a mountain.


"We got out of the diligence (at a time when it was obliged to go very
slowly), in order to make an excursion on foot in search of the
picturesque, being told that we might meet the carriage at a certain
point, about a mile further on. We saw many magnificent views, and did a
great deal of what might be called rough walking; but perhaps the thing
that struck us most was, that on emerging at the appointed spot for
rejoining the diligence, we beheld it a speck in the distance, just
departing out of sight." --_Extract from Jones's Journal._


The seven ages of Robinson's beard.


What are they to do now?


DESCENT OF THE ST. GOTHARD.

Having taken their places on the outside of the diligence, Brown, Jones,
and Robinson can the better enjoy the grandeur of the scenery.


They see Italy in the distance.


A meeting on the mountain.


Pilgrims coming _down_ the "Hill of Difficulty."




[ITALY.]


BREAKFAST AT BELLINZONA.

It was their first day in Italy, and how they did enjoy it! The repast
was served in a stone summer-house attached to the hotel. The sun was so
bright, and so hot; the sky was so blue, the vegetation so green, the
mountains so purple, the grapes so large, and everything so beautiful,
that Brown and Jones both decided that the scene fully realised all
their imaginings of Italy. Robinson was enthusiastic, too, at first, and
was beginning to say something about "Italia, O Italia," when his eye
lit upon a green lizard running up the wall. From that moment he was
more subdued.


How they got Robinson up the hills.




[ITALIAN LAKES.]


They land upon Austrian territory en route for Milan. While the "proper
officer" takes possession of their passports, the whole available
population pounces upon the luggage, and, after apportioning it into
"small allotments," carries it off to the custom house.


The official here is seen "pointing" on the scent (as he thinks) of
contraband goods in one of Robinson's portmanteaus. He did not "find,"
but in the hunt, tossed R.'s "things" dreadfully. Brown revenged the
wrongs of self and friends, by taking a full length, on the spot, of
that imposing administrator, who stands over there, with the passports
in his hand.


"Excelsior!"


An Italian view.


"Buon giorno."


EVENING ON THE LAGO MAGGIORE.


"'Knowest thou the land' where the grapes are as plentiful as
blackberries in England; and where one has only to stop a minute at the
roadside, and pull no end of 'em. O 'tis there! 'tis there! etc."
--_Robinson's letters to his kinsfolk._


MARIE.

Oh! Marie of the Lago d'Orta, maid of the inn, and most beautiful of
waitresses, how well do I remember thee! How graceful were all thy
movements; what natural ease, together with what a dignified reserve;
--How truly a lady wert thou! You did not know it, but when you waited
upon us, I always felt inclined to jump up from my chair, and open
the door for you-- to take the dishes from your hands, to ask you
respectfully to be seated, to wait upon you in fact. And O! How I did
detest that wicked old landlady, your mistress, who used to bully and
scold you. And I wonder whether you remember me. --_From a MS., very
rare, in possession of Brown._


This picture represents Brown as he appeared, his feelings being "too
many for him," on hearing that elderly she-dragon, the landlady, venting
her ill-humour upon the gentle Marie. He stole out of the dining-room,
looked over into the yard, and there beheld the furious old female
shaking her fist, and pouring forth a torrent of abuse. Brown was not
naturally of a savage temperament, but at that moment he felt that he
could have--but it is best not to say what he could have done--it was
too terrible for publication in these pages.


A BOAT AT ORTA.


A MOUNTAIN WALK.

Robinson, with warmth, and some distance behind,-- "What is the use of
going on at that rate?"


Poor Jones! Who would have thought he could ever be tired!


Pleasant.


The accident that befell Robinson. --No. 1.


The accident that befell Robinson. --No. 2.




[ORTA.]


ROBINSON RETIRES FOR THE NIGHT.

To prevent anxiety, we had better state that he is tired--nothing else.


"Now do, Robinson, jump up like a good fellow; we ought to be starting
now--and think how pleasant it will be, once you are up!"




[VARALLO.]


THE INN.


How Brown, returning from sketching, was beset by beggars in a lonely
place.




[MILAN.]


They pay a visit to the marionette theatre.


A snob they saw writing his name upon roof of Milan cathedral.


ENLIGHTENED BEHAVIOUR IN A FOREIGN CHURCH.

We are happy to say, that B. J. and R. had no connection with the above
party.


Robinson's determination to let his beard grow "naturally," had an
absurd result, the hair growing in violent and abrupt crops in some
places, and not at all in others; so that Jones, who was sensitive about
appearances, (and whose own moustache was doing beautifully,) insisted
at last upon R.'s being shaved, which event accordingly took place in
the city of Milan. It was well that Robinson consented, for the barber
eyed him eagerly, and as if he would spring upon him and shave him by
force.


CAFE MILAN.--SUDDEN AND UNEXPECTED ARRIVAL OF DISTINGUISHED FOREIGNERS.

The moment we seated ourselves in a cafe, an awful group of beggars
stood before us--so suddenly that they appeared to have come up through
a trap-door--and demanded alms. They would not go without money, and
when they got it they took it as a right. It would not do for one of us
to "settle" with them for the whole party, for no sooner had I given
them a coin than they turned to Jones, and when done with him, coolly
set upon Robinson. The instant one tribe departed, a fresh relais
arrived, so that there was a constant supply (of beggars) and demand (on
our purses).

No place seemed safe: in the most magnificent and luxuriously-decorated
cafes they had perfect right of way, the contrast between the rich
gilding, glass, fountains, etc., of the one, and the rags, dirt, and
dramatically got-up horrors of the other being picturesque, but
certainly not pleasant; and yet, as Jones remarked, they say this
country has not free institutions.




[VERONA.]


THE AMPHITHEATRE, VERONA.

Jones asks Robinson, whether he "Sees before him the gladiator die?" but
Robinson maintains a dignified silence.


Austrian detective stops Brown to examine his sketching stool. It
puzzles him. There is an air of mystery about it. It might possibly be a
weapon to be used for political purposes, or an infernal machine! Who
knows? On the whole, he thinks he had better detain it.


SCENE--DISCOVERS BROWN SKETCHING.

Enter the Austrian army. They advance upon him, they think he is taking
the fortifications.


Robinson, who is much given to quotation, is, at the very moment,
languidly reciting the lines:--

  "Am I in Italy? Is this the Mincius?
  And those the distant turrets of Verona?
  And shall I sup where Juliet at the masque
  Saw her loved Montague?" --etc., etc.


Not being familiar with the German, or the Croatian language, Brown is
helpless. He protests his innocence, but the military don't understand
him. They see treason in his hat, which is of an illegal shape, and they
arrest him.


Jones and Robinson appear, to the surprise of the military, and relief
of Brown.


Brown, quite resigned, walks quietly to meet his fate. Jones plunges
violently, but is finally overcome. Robinson resists passively, and is
accordingly dragged along.


SKETCHES FOUND UPON BROWN.


They are brought before the Governor. That is he seated at the table,
the soldiers showing him the libellous representations of the Croats
found in Brown's portfolio. The latter expects to be ordered for instant
execution; but Jones assumes an air of great dignity, and says, "_Civis
Romanus sum_."


The Governor, Field-Marshal Lieutenant Count Brown, of the Imperial
service, discovers in his prisoner a near relation of his own; and our
friend is instantly locked in the embrace of that distinguished warrior.
Jones remarked "All's well that ends well;" and Robinson, greatly
relieved, broke out with:--

  "Thus may each" nephew "whom chance directs,
  Find an" uncle "when he least expects."




[VENICE.]


EXAMINATION OF PASSPORTS.


HOTEL.


MODERN VENETIAN TROUBADOURS.

An evening scene before the Cafe Florian, Piazza San Marco.


Brown at this period undertook, at the urgent request of Jones and
Robinson, to settle the accounts of the party, which had become
complicated owing to that perplexing "medium," to those unused to it,
the Austrian paper money.

This is a faithful picture of the unfortunate man as he sat, in the
solitude of his chamber, until a late hour of the night, drawing up the
"financial" statement.


Robinson (_solo_). --"I stood in Venice," etc.; Jones and Brown, having
heard something like it before, have walked on a little way.

_Reflection made by BROWN._ --Why do people when repeating poetry always
look unhappy?


ENJOYMENT!

A scene upon the Grand Canal.


THE THEATRE MALIBRAN.

The entertainment commenced at 5 P.M., and lasted till 7. It consisted
of a melodrama, full of awful crimes, and the most pathetic sentiment.
The audience, chiefly composed of "the people," was, from beginning to
end, in an extraordinary state of excitement, fizzing, like the
perpetual going off of soda-water. The theatre was lighted (?) by about
four oil lamps; and such was the darkness, that our travellers--who may
be seen, perhaps, through the "dim obscure," up in a private box--could
scarcely discern anything but the white uniform and glittering bayonet
of an Austrian sentinel in the pit.




[A NIGHT IN VENICE.]


BROWN RETIRED TO REST.


MISERY.

NOTE.-- If the Musquitos appear rather large in this and the following
scenes, let it be remembered that in the "Heroic" it was a principle of
many of the great painters to exaggerate the "parts."


DESPERATION.


MOMENTARY RELIEF.


MADNESS!


BELL!!


BOOTS!!


DESPAIR!!!!




[VENICE.]


THE ACCADEMIA.


GONDOLA ON THE LAGOON.

Sentiment spoken by Robinson, with marks of adhesion from Brown and
Jones. "Oh, if there be an Elysium on earth, it is this, it is this!!"


+The Accademia.+


Scene I.

Brown (soliloquy). --"This is pleasant! To be quite alone here (dab),
surrounded by these magnificent works (dab, dab, dab), and everything so
quiet too--nothing to disturb one." (Dab) after a pause. "I wonder what
Jones and Robinson are doing (dab, splash)--lying at full length in a
gondola, I dare say--smoking (dab), I think I could spend my life in
this place" (dab, dab).

"It is difficult to say which is the greatest pleasure, (another dab,)
copying these splendid pictures, or painting from nature, those
beautiful blue skies and crumbling old picturesque palaces, outside."

(Sings) --"'How happy could I be with either.'" (Prolonged pause, and
great play with brush) --"Oh! That sunset last evening! As we lay out in
our gondola upon the perfectly calm waters, by the Armenian convent, and
watched the sun slowly going down behind the distant towers and spires
of the 'City of the sea'--one mass of gold spreading all over the west!"
 *  *  "Oh! Those clouds! (Another pause) Ah! That was happiness. One
such hour is worth--let me see--how many years of one's life?  *  *  and
yet this is--"


Scene II.

He is set upon and surrounded by an English family, and the following
dialogue ensues:--

The Mamma. --"What a delightful occupation, to be sure."

Young Lady (in a whisper). --"He is copying the Tintoret."

Youthful Son and Heir (with confidence). --"No, he ain't; he's doing
that stunning big one with the rainbow, and three river gods."

Second Young Lady. --"It's sweetly pretty, isn't it!"

Papa (a British merchant, and of a practical turn). --"Very
good--v-e-r-y good. Ahem! Now I wonder what one could make a year by
that kind of thing."

Young Man (with glass in his eye). --"Slow, I should think."

At this point Brown's attention was attracted to a scuffle going on
behind him amongst the junior members of the party. Two of the little
innocents had taken a fancy to the same drawing (a copy of his favourite
John Bellino), and after a brief, but fierce struggle for possession,
had settled the difficulty by tearing it in two. (Party retires rather
precipitately.)




[TRIESTE TO VIENNA.]


SKETCH MADE BY BROWN AT TRIESTE.

NOTE.--If any one doubts the fact, Jones and Robinson are ready to make
affidavit of it.


ROBINSON SEARCHED AND INDIGNANT.

Such things never happen anywhere else.




[VIENNA.]


Arrived at Vienna, they visit the theatre. A gentleman there,
unobtrusively pays them great attention.


SCENE--SHOP, VIENNA.

Jones to Brown-- "What do you say?"

Brown (who sees that Robinson is bent upon making a "magnificent
addition" to himself, and that it is useless to expostulate). --"Oh, I
think it is splendid; and if you will only appear in it in Pall Mall,
when we get home again, you will make a sensation."


THEY VISIT THE PICTURE GALLERIES.

That man in the doorway seems to take a great interest in their
movements.


THE PROMENADE.

Brown thinks it is the same man! What can he want?


THE PUBLIC GARDEN.

There he was again! Jones suggested that perhaps it was a government
official, who took them for liberty, equality, and fraternity.


No sooner did they take their places at the Table d'Hote to dine, than
Brown fell back in his chair. There could be no doubt about it--he was
better dressed than before--but it was the same man! He must be a spy!


Jones at the opera abroad.


How unlike Jones at the opera at home.




[VIENNA TO PRAGUE.]


"Just ten minutes to dress, breakfast, and get to the train."




[PRAGUE.]


WALLENSTEIN'S HORSE.

"The head, neck, legs, and part of the body have been repaired--all the
rest is the real horse." --_From speech of the young woman who showed
the animal._


A "KNEIPE" AT PRAGUE.


Robinson is so confused with rapid travelling, that he addresses a
waiter in three languages at once. "Kellner!-- Mittags-essen pour
trois-- Presto presto-- and-- waiter!-- Soda water-- col cognac--
geschwind!"


TABLE D'HOTE, PRAGUE.




[PRAGUE TO COLOGNE.]


"Passports!" --"That's the sixth time we have been woke up," groaned
Robinson.




[RHINELAND AGAIN.]


DUSSELDORF.

Brown _loq._ --I have left my bag behind!


MINDEN.

Here is the bag.


How Brown was seated between two soldiers, and how they would examine
each other's swords, and how those fearful weapons were flashing about,
often within an inch of B.'S nose: and how (being of a mild and peaceful
disposition), B. was kept thereby in a constant state of uneasiness.




[BELGIUM.]


Eye of the government; as kept upon the travellers, during their stay in
the Austrian dominions. --_Drawn from the haunted imagination of Brown._


THEIR LAST REPAST IN FOREIGN PARTS.

Time and train wait for no man.


ARTICLES PURCHASED BY ROBINSON.

1. Eau de Cologne. 2. Pipe; (never smoked.) 3. Hat; (never worn, and
found decidedly in the way.) 4. Cigars; (stopped at Custom House.)
5. Tauchnitz editions; (also seized.) 6. Cornet a pistons; (bought in
Germany with the intention of learning to play upon it some day.)
7. Gloves; (purchased at Venice, a great bargain, and found utterly
worthless.)




[OLD ENGLAND.]


+Sic(k) Transit+


+Gloria Mundi!+


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


BRADBURY AND EVANS,

Printers extraordinary to the queen,

Whitefriars.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


Errors and Iconsistencies (noted by transcriber):

  They both wore a perpetual grin and stare of surprise,
    [comma in original: error for period (full stop)?]
  3. "Conclude you go toe Frankfort?"  [text unchanged]
  An evening scene before the Cafe Florain  [error for Florian]
  If the Musquitos appear rather large  [variant spelling unchanged]
  +Of the Adventure that befel Jones.+
  The accident that befell Robinson.
    [inconsistent spelling unchanged]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Foreign Tour of Messrs. Brown,
Jones and Robinson, by Richard Doyle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOREIGN TOUR--BROWN, JONES, ROBINSON ***

***** This file should be named 29463.txt or 29463.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/4/6/29463/

Produced by Louise Hope

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
