The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Waif of the Mountains, by Edward S. Ellis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Waif of the Mountains

Author: Edward S. Ellis

Release Date: August 15, 2009 [EBook #29693]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WAIF OF THE MOUNTAINS ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: SHE STARED BEWILDERED INTO THE SHAGGY FACES AROUND
HER.--PAGE 21.]




A WAIF OF THE MOUNTAINS

BY

EDWARD S. ELLIS

AUTHOR OF "UP THE TAPAJOS," "FROM THE THROTTLE TO THE PRESIDENT'S CHAIR,"
"THE LAND OF WONDERS," ETC.

CHICAGO

GEO. M. HILL CO.

PUBLISHERS




COPYRIGHT, 1900,

BY

THE MERSHON COMPANY




A WAIF OF THE MOUNTAINS

CHAPTER I

AT NEW CONSTANTINOPLE


IT had been snowing hard for twenty-four hours at Dead Man's Gulch.
Beginning with a few feathery particles, they had steadily increased
in number until the biting air was filled with billions of snowflakes,
which whirled and eddied in the gale that howled through the gorges
and canyons of the Sierras. It was still snowing with no sign of
cessation, and the blizzard blanketed the earth to the depth of
several feet, filling up the treacherous hollows, caverns and abysses
and making travel almost impossible for man or animal.

The shanties of the miners in Dead Man's Gulch were just eleven in
number. They were strung along the eastern side of the gorge and at an
altitude of two or three hundred feet from the bed of the pass or
canyon. The site protruded in the form of a table-land, offering a
secure foundation for the structures, which were thus elevated
sufficiently to be beyond reach of the terrific torrents that
sometimes rushed through the ravine during the melting of the snow in
the spring, or after one of those fierce cloud-bursts that give
scarcely a minute's warning of their coming.

The diggings were in the mountain side at varying distances. The
success in mining had been only moderate, although several promising
finds raised hopes. The population numbered precisely thirty men,
representing all quarters of the Union, while five came from Europe.
The majority were shaggy, bronzed adventurers, the variety being
almost as great as the numbers. Some had been clerks, several were
college graduates, a number were the sons of wealthy parents, and one
was a full-fledged parson, while there was a certain percentage who
had left their homes to escape the grip of the offended law.

With that yearning for picturesqueness which is a peculiar trait of
Americans, the miners felt that when their settlement had attained the
dignity of nearly a dozen dwellings, it was entitled to an appropriate
name. The gorge, which seemed to have been gouged out of the solid
mass of boulders and rocks, when the mountains were split apart in the
remote past, was known from the first by the title already given,
which also clung to the diggings themselves.

The single saloon presided over by Max Ortigies, was the Heavenly
Bower,--so _that_ point was settled, but when it came to naming the
settlement itself, the difficulties were so numerous that days and
weeks passed without an agreement being reached. No matter how
striking and expressive the title offered by one man, the majority
promptly protested. It was too sulphurous, or too insipid or it lacked
in that nebulous characteristic which may be defined as true
Americanism. It looked as if the problem would never be solved, when
Landlord Ortigies, taking the bull by the horns, appointed a committee
of three to select a name, the others pledging themselves to accept
whatever the committee submitted.

But the mischief was to pay when on the night of the blizzard the
committee met at the Heavenly Bower to make their report. The chairman
insisted upon "E Pluribus Unum," the second member's favorite was
"Murderer's Holler," while the third would not listen to anything
except "Wolf Eye," and each was immovably set in his convictions.

Budge Isham was not a member of the committee, but he was known as a
college graduate. From his seat on an overturned box at the rear of
the room, where he was smoking a pipe, he asked troublesome questions
and succeeded in arraying the committeemen so fiercely against one
another that each was eager to vote, in the event of failing to carry
his own point, in favor of any name objectionable to the rest.

The chairman as stated favored the patriotic name "E Pluribus Unum,"
and boldly announced the fact.

"It has a lofty sound," blandly remarked Isham; "will the chairman be
good enough to translate it for us? In other words, what does 'E
Pluribus Unum' mean?"

"Why," replied the chairman with scorn in his manner; "everybody
oughter know it means, 'Hurrah for the red, white and blue.'"

"Thank you," returned Isham, puffing at his pipe.

Vose Adams, the second committeeman, felt it his duty to explain his
position.

"The trouble with that outlandish name is in the fust place that it
has three words and consequently it's too much to manage. Whoever
heard of a town with three handles to its name? Then it's foreign.
When I was in college (several disrespectful sniffs which caused the
speaker to stop and glare around in quest of the offenders); I say
when I was in college and studying Greek and Chinese and Russian, I
larned that that name was made up of all three of them languages. I
b'leve in America for the Americans, and if we can't find a name
that's in the American language, why let's wait till we can."

This sentiment was delivered with such dramatic force that several of
the miners nodded their heads in approval. It was an appeal to the
patriotic side of their nature--which was quick to respond.

"Mr. Chairman," said Budge Isham, addressing the landlord, who, by
general consent, was the presiding officer at these disputations, and
who like the others failed to see the quiet amusement the educated man
was extracting, "if it is agreeable to Mr. Adams, to whose eloquent
speech we have listened with much edification, I would like him to
give us his reasons for calling our handsome town 'Murderers'
Hollow.'"

The gentleman appealed to rose to his feet. Turning toward the man who
had called upon him, he gave him a look which ought to have made him
sink to the floor with mortification, preliminary to saying with
polished irony:

"If the gentleman had paid attention as he oughter, he would have
obsarved that I said 'Murderer's Holler,' not 'Murderers' _Hollow_.' I
would advise him not to forget that he ain't the only man in this
place that has received a college eddycation. Now as to the name: it
proclaims our stern virtue and love for law."

The orator paused, but the wondering expression of the bronzed
faces turned toward him showed that he would have to descend to
particulars.

"When violators of the law hear that name, what does it say to them?
It says that if any murderer shows his face in this place, he will
receive such rough handling that he will have to holler 'enough,' and
will be glad to get out--I don't see what there is to laugh at!"
exclaimed Vose angrily, looking threateningly around again with his
fists clenched and his gaze fixed specially upon the grinning Budge
Isham.

"There's some sense in what Vose says, which ain't often the case,"
remarked Ike Hoe, the other member of the committee, "but the trouble
will be that when folks hear of the name, they won't think to give it
the meanin' that he gives it. They'll conclude that this place is the
home of murderers, and, if it keeps on, bime by of hoss thieves. If it
warn't for that danger, I might go in for backing up Vose with his
name, but as it stands it won't do."

The argument of Ike had produced its effect. There was little sympathy
in the first place for the title, and that little was destroyed by the
words of Ike, who proceeded to plead for his own choice.

"Now as to 'Wolf Eye.' In the first place, it is short and easy to
say. There ain't any slur in the name, that might offend a new comer,
who would think the 'Murderer's Holler' contained ungentlemanly
allusions to his past. It is warning, too, that the place has got an
eye on everybody and has teeth as sharp as a wolf. Then there is
poetry in the name. Gentlemen," added Ike in a burst of enthusiasm,
"we oughter go in for poetry. How can any one live in such a glorious
country as this with the towering kenyons around him, with the
mountains thousands of feet deep, with the grand sun kissin' the
western tips in the morning and sinking to rest at night in the
east,--with the snow storms in summer and the blazing heat in
winter--with the glo----"

"Hold on! hold on!" called Budge Isham, rising solemnly to his feet,
with hands uplifted in protest; "if Ike doesn't stop, he'll have us
all standing on our heads. There's a brand of liquor down in
Sacramento called 'Wolf Eye;' I don't make any charges, gentlemen,
against my friend Ike, but you can draw your inferences. Wolf Eye
won't do."

A general laugh greeted this sally, seeing which the indignant Ike
turned the tables upon Budge with an admirable piece of sarcasm.

"Seeing as how all of us together don't know 'nough to git up a name
that will suit, I move that the college eddycated gentleman supplies
the brains and does it himself."

The crushing irony of this remark was spoiled by Budge accepting it in
all seriousness. He bowed his head and gracefully thanked the
satirical Vose.

"I shall be very glad to do so. The committee meant well enough, but
the trouble was that there were too many fools on it----"

At this point Wade Ruggles sprang to his feet, with the fierce
question:

"Does the gentleman refer to _me_?"

His hand was at his hip on the butt of his revolver and matters
looked squally, but the tactful Budge quelled the rising storm with
Chesterfieldian grace. Waving his hand and bowing, he said:

"I did not intend the remotest reference to you."

Vose Adams came up promptly.

"Then it's _me_ and I'm ready to make any man eat his words."

"My good friend is mistaken; nothing could induce me to apply such a
term to him; I hold him in too high esteem."

Since this left Ike Hoe as the only remaining member, he began to show
signs of explosion, perceiving which the incomprehensible Budge
proceeded to mollify him.

"And Ike knows that I would be the last person in the world to slur a
gentleman from whom I as well as the others have received so much
instruction."

Ike was mystified. He looked at the other members of the committee and
then into the faces of the group. He couldn't make it out.

"If it's all the same, Mr. Chairman, since the gentleman has said
there was too many fools on the committee, and has just explained that
he didn't mean any one of us three, I'll be obliged if he'll explain
who in thunder he did mean."

This sounded unanswerable, but the cunning Budge was equal to the
occasion.

"It gives me pleasure to answer the question of the gentleman: my
remark was made in a Pickwickian sense."

He leaned forward with a beaming smile, as if his explanation left
nothing to be added. No one understood to what he referred, but all
were too proud to admit the fact. There was a general nodding of
heads, and Ike, with the manner of a man who magnanimously accepts the
humble apology of him whom he has worsted, leaned back on his stool
and audibly remarked:

"That makes it all right."

Budge Isham resumed his seat, when he was reminded that he was
expected to submit a name for the new settlement.

"I beg pardon," he said, rising again, "it is a fact known to this
highly intelligent assemblage, that every city of prominence in Europe
has from one to forty namesakes in this country. There is one
exception, however; doubtless all know to what city I refer."

In response to his inquiring looks, the group tried to appear as if
the name was familiar to them, but no one spoke.

"It is hardly necessary for me to mention the city, but I may say it
is Constantinople."

A contemptuous sniff greeted this proposal.

"That's the worst yet," said Wade Ruggles, drawing a match along the
thigh of his trousers to relight his pipe, which had gone out during
the excitement; "the man that insults this party with such a
proposition, ought to be run out of the place."

"What's the matter with it?" demanded Budge.

"It's too long in the fust place," commented Ike Hoe; "it bothers a
man to git his mouth around it and it hain't any music, like the other
names such as Starvation Kenyon, Hangman's Noose, Blizzard Gorge and
the rest. I stick to mine as the purtiest of all."

"What's that?"

"'Blazes,' short and sweet and innercent like."

Landlord Ortigies was leaning with both elbows on the bar. The new
name struck him favorably.

"I'm inclined to agree with Budge," he said, "cause there hain't any
other place that's hit onto it. All of them names that you chaps have
tried to spring onto us, have been used in other places, or at least
some part of the names, but, as Budge has observed, no galoot has
scooped 'Constantinople.'"

"'Cause no one ain't fool enough," observed Ike Hoe, who noted the
drift of the sentiment.

"But they'll pounce onto it powerful quick if we don't grab it while
it's passin'; it's a good long name, and what if it does make a chap
sling the muscles of his jaw to warble it? All the better; it'll make
him think well of his town, which I prophesy is going to be the
emporium of the West."

"Let's see," growled Wade Ruggles, "Constantinople is in Ireland isn't
it?"

"Where's your eddycation?" sneered Ike Vose; "it's the oldest town in
Wales."

Landlord Ortigies raised his head and filled the room with his genial
laughter.

"If there was anything I was strong on when I led my class at the
Squankum High School it was astronermy; I was never catched in
locating places."

"If you know so much," remarked Ruggles, "you'll let us know something
'bout that town which I scorn to name."

"I'm allers ready to enlighten ign'rance, though I've never visited
Constantinople, which stands on the top of the Himalaya Mountains, in
the southern part of Iceland."

"That's very good," said Budge Isham, who with his usual tact
maneuvered to keep the ally he had gained, "but the Constantinople I
have in mind is in Turkey, which is such a goodly sized country that
it straddles from Europe to Asia."

"Which the same I suppose means to imply that this ere Constantinople
will do likewise similar."

"No doubt that's what it'll do in time," assented the landlord.

"I beg to offer an amendment to my own motion," continued the oily
Budge; "when the boom strikes this town, as it is bound soon to do,
and it rivals in size the famous city on the other side of the
Atlantic, there should be something to distinguish the two. We have no
wish to rob any other place of the honors it has taken centuries to
gain; so, while we reserve the principal name, I propose that we
distinguish it from the old city by prefixing the word 'New.'"

"You mean that this town shall be 'New Constantinople?'" was the
inquiring remark of the landlord.

"Precisely; and I now make the motion that that be our name."

There were seventeen persons present and it looked as if a decision
was inevitable. The landlord was shrewd. His first act was to invite
all to drink at his expense, after which he made each pledge himself
to abide by the decision, whatever it might be. These preliminaries
being arranged, a show of hands was called for. The vote was eight for
and eight against the new name.

"That's a tie," commented the landlord from behind his immense beard;
"and therefore the question ain't settled."

"It's easy 'nough to settle it," said Ike Hoe.

"How?"

"Take another vote."

"I don't see how that'll do it, onless some one changes his mind; but
again, gentlemen: all who favor the new name, raise their right
hands."

Eight horny palms were elevated in air, while the same number were
displayed in the negative. The landlord looked troubled.

"We must keep it up till some one weakens," observed Wade Ruggles.

The host scanned the earnest faces in front of him.

"Which of you gentlemen will promise to weaken if we keep this thing
up for half the night?"

"I'll stay here a week," was the reply of Vose Adams, while the
general nodding of heads showed that he echoed the sentiments of the
others. The landlord met the crisis with becoming dignity.

"Gentlemen, when I was a member of Congress, all questions that was
tied was settled by the presiding officer casting the deciding vote,
and which as aforesaid we don't lay any claim to being higher than
Congress, I therefore, by virtue of the aforesaid right vested in me,
cast my vote in favor of this city being called New Constantinople,
which the same is on me again; gentlemen, what will you have?"

It was a coup d'etat, the victory being clinched before the opposition
realized it. Ere the company had fairly recovered from their
bewilderment, Budge Isham declared that the victory was really his,
due to the good sense and high toned chivalry of his friends, and he
insisted upon doing the honors. He would accept no denial and the
engaging style in which he acquitted himself of this duty restored
good humor. Thus it was that the little mining town of the Sierras in
the days that are gone received its title.

The Heavenly Bower consisted of two large apartments, both on the
ground floor. The one at the rear was used by Landlord Ortigies for
sleeping, eating and partial storage purposes. When Vose Adams made
his quarterly visits to Sacramento, he was accompanied by two mules.
They were not necessary to take and bring the mail, since the pocket
of Adams' great coat was sufficient for that, but they carried down to
Sacramento several empty casks which came back filled, or rather they
were thus when the return journey was begun, but to the dismay of the
proprietor of the Heavenly Bower, he found that they were barely
two-thirds full, when unloaded at his place. Vose explained that the
leakage was due to the roughness of the trail. Since there seemed no
other way of overcoming this, the landlord sent an extra cask with the
request to Vose that he would confine his leakage to that and Vose
kindly obliged him.

The stuff thus provided for the Heavenly Bower was generally in
concentrated form, thereby permitting a dilution which insured a full
supply for the customers who were afflicted with an eternal thirst.

The bar room was of extensive proportions. Nearly all of one side was
occupied by the bar. Opposite was the huge fireplace, and scattered
around were a number of stools, rickety chairs and strong boxes which
served equally well for seats.

The crackling fire, the genial warmth and good cheer within the room
were the more striking because of their contrast with the howling
storm without. The gale roared around the corners of the rude but
strong structure, rattling against the massive door and the log walls,
spitting vicious gusts down the chimney and flinging great drifts
hither and yon with a fury that threatened to send the building
skurrying through the snowy space.

"It's the worst blizzard we ever had," remarked Wade Ruggles, after
one of these violent outbursts; "God pity any one that's abroad
to-night."

"It reminds me of that zephyr last winter," observed Vose Adams, "when
I was bringing your freight, Max, from Sacramento."

"I remember," nodded the landlord; "you started with two kegs and got
here with about half a one; the leakage was tremenjus on that trip."

"True; the blizzards is always rough on Mountain Dew, and sorter makes
it shrink," replied the unblushing Vose.

"Can't you stop the casks leaking so much," inquired Felix Brush, who
had been a parson in Missouri, and claimed that he had never been
"unfrocked."

The landlord solemnly swayed his head.

"Not as long as Vose has charge of the freight----"

At that instant a dull but resounding thump was heard on the roof
overhead. It shook every log in the structure, checked speech and
caused each man to look wonderingly at his neighbor.

"The mountain has fell on us!" exclaimed Ike Hoe in a husky whisper.

"If it was the mountain," said Budge Isham, slightly raising his
voice, as the courage of the party came back; "none of us would be
able to tell of it."

"Then it's a rock--well, I'm blessed! the thing is moving!"

Something was certainly astir in the mass of snow overhead.

"I guess it's a angel that has lost its way," submitted Hoe.

"More likely it's a grizzly b'ar that's stumbled off the rocks--"

But all these speculations were scattered to the winds by the sound of
a voice muffled and seemingly far away, which came to them through the
storm:

"_Helloa, the house_!"




CHAPTER II

WHAT THE BLIZZARD BROUGHT TO NEW CONSTANTINOPLE


A moment after the hail was heard from the roof, the muffled noise
which accompanied it ceased. The stranger groping about in the snowy
gloom had stepped off the roof into the huge drift outside the
Heavenly Bower, and a minute later, lifted the latch of the door and
pushed in among the astonished miners. They saw the figure of a sturdy
man holding something in his arms, so wrapped round with blankets and
coverings that no one could tell its nature. He stamped the snow from
his boots, shook himself like a shaggy dog, then walked heavily to the
chair which Budge Isham placed near the fire for him, and almost fell
into it.

"Good evening, friends," he said in a grave voice; "It was no fault of
mine that I tried at first to enter by the roof."

"When I built the Heavenly Bower," replied Landlord Ortigies; "I
meant to place a door up there, but there wasn't anybody in New
Constantinople with enough sense to know how to do it. I 'spose you
was looking fur it, stranger."

"No," was the reply, "I wasn't looking for anything; I was just
walking, walking through the storm, not knowing or caring where I
went. I can't say how far I came, but it must have been a number of
miles. I was still plodding on, when I set my foot on vacancy and down
I went."

"Gracious! you fell nearly a hundred feet," said Parson Brush; "it was
a wonderful providence that saved you from being dashed to death."

"The snow on the roof must be five or six feet deep," replied the
stranger; "for it received me as if it were a feather bed. I saw a
glow from the top of your chimney against the rocks and knew I was on
the roof of a house. I hardly felt jarred and groped my way off into a
lot more snow and here I am."

The astonishment of the listeners did not make them forget the laws of
hospitality. Budge Isham looked significantly at the landlord, but he
had already drawn a glass of spirits and was coming from behind the
bar with it.

"Stranger, swallow this; you look cold; you're welcome to the Heavenly
Bower, whether you come through the roof or down the chimbley."

"Thank you; I'll take the whiskey in a minute."

And then feeling that he owed those who made him so welcome some
explanation of his coming among them, the stranger said:

"My friends, my name is Maurice Dawson. About two months ago, I left
Independence, Missouri, with an emigrant train for the Pacific coast.
The elements, disease and the Indians made such inroads upon us that
after a time only half a dozen families remained. As if that wasn't
enough, the few survivors quarreled over the course to follow, most of
them aiming for a pass through the mountains into Southern California,
while I, the greatest fool of them all, set out to find Dead Man's
Gulch, of which I had heard from a party of trappers. My canvas
covered wagon, with a single span of horses, contained all my worldly
goods, and my companions were my wife and little girl Nellie, only
three years old. Everything might have gone well but for this
blizzard, which jumbled up the points of the compass and made
traveling so difficult that after a time it became impossible."

All were listening with the closest interest, and every heart was
touched by the emotion of the man, which he could not control for
several minutes. No one interrupted, and, feeling that his story was
not quite completed, he added:

"I fired my gun in the hope of attracting attention, but fortunately
for others I was the only one abroad. By and by the horses stopped.
They could draw the wagon no further. They stood panting and exhausted
and soon lay down in the snow. I turned to speak to my wife, when I
found she had been dead for some minutes, the cold carrying her off as
quietly as if she were dropping asleep. Before she passed away, she
wrapped nearly all her clothing about Nellie, who was cuddling beside
her, so that really the mother, like the noble woman she was, gave her
life for the little one. It was because Nellie was alive, that I
jumped out of the wagon and began floundering through the snow. I
ploughed blindly forward until providence guided me to you."

While uttering the last words, Maurice Dawson was tenderly unwrapping
the bundle in his arms. There were many folds to draw away, but at
last he reached the treasure within, which was his Nellie, still sound
asleep.

If the miners were startled by the resounding thump on the roof, they
were now almost struck dumb with amazement. They sat with open mouths,
staring eyes and for a minute no one spoke or stirred.

"God bless you, my Nellie," murmured the father, bending his head and
touching his lips to the cool forehead; "I had no hope of this when I
left your dead mother and started on my tramp through the snow."

A general sigh went up from the group of awed miners. Wade Ruggles,
who had been leaning on the bar, with his gaze fixed on that of the
handsome stranger, was the first to recover from the spell which held
them all. Tiptoeing across the room, he paused in front of the father
and his child and stared, wondering and speechless. Then one by one
the others did the same, until the whole company were grouped around
the man and child, each afraid to whisper, as if doing so would
dissolve the heavenly vision.

When the wrappings had been laid aside, and the little one was placed
upright, she stared bewildered into the shaggy faces around her. Her
big blue eyes were open to their widest extent, the mass of golden
curls rippled about her shoulders and the fairy-like feet were
inclosed in thick, warm shoes and stockings. The dress of a dull brown
color and thick texture, fitted her tiny frame perfectly and she
formed a most winsome picture of infantile beauty.

For fully five minutes all stared in silence at the marvelous picture.
As before, Wade Ruggles was the first to come to himself, but when he
spoke, it was in an awed, hesitating whisper:

"Is she really alive?"

The sorrowful face of the father lit up with a faint smile as he
answered:

"Yes; thank heaven; alive and well."

"May I touch her?" timidly asked Ike Hoe, extending his finger which
faintly brushed the rosy cheek, and was instantly snatched away as if
he felt he had done a sacrilegious thing.

"I say," ventured Ruggles gathering courage, "I wonder now if she
would let me take her in my arms for a minute or so; I won't drop her;
but that's too much to ask, howsumever."

While he stood hopeful, hesitating and doubtful, Nellie with a half
frightened smile, dived her head under the arm of her father, as if to
get away from the embarrassing situation. He gently fondled the golden
hair and drew her face into view again.

"There, little one, there's nothing to be frightened at; these people
are all your friends and will do anything they can to please you."

"You're right!" exclaimed Landlord Ortigies, with a shake of his head;
"we'll do anything in the world for you; if you say the word, I'll
stand on my head or stand any one else here the same way."

And he showed an alarming inclination to invert himself for the
amusement of the child, but she did not seem to grasp the meaning of
the offer. She fixed her eyes upon Ruggles, who made bold by what
seemed a favorable sign, took a step forward and invitingly extended
his hands. She debated for a moment, whether to meet the proffer and
then with the impulsiveness of infancy leaned toward him. With a
thrill of pleasure the grizzled miner carefully placed his huge arms
underneath hers, and lifted her as if she were a doll from her
father's knee. As he did so, every one saw the big tears trickling
down his cheeks.

"I can't help it, boys," he said apologetically; "the last child I
held in these arms was my own Jennie, and she was dead."

With infinite affection, he pressed his bearded lips against the
chubby cheek, while she, relieved of all fear, flung her dimpled arms
about his neck and kissed him in return. With one hand, she lifted the
flapping hat from his head and with the other smoothed away the
luxuriant hair from his forehead.

"I like you ever so much, but you are crying," she said sympathetically;
"what makes you do that? Haven't you got a little girl like me?"

"No, my precious child; I once had just such a sweet tot as you, but
the good Lord took her from me, and I love you just as I loved her."

"And that's what we all are going to do," remarked Ike Hoe, with a
sniff as he drew his sleeve across his eyes; "this beats anything in
the history of New Constantinople, by seven hundred and eighty-four
thousand majority."

"Come, Wade, you must be fair with us," said the landlord, reaching
out his arms; "we all claim an equal share in her."

The miner felt the truth of this, and without a word relinquished the
treasure. Drawing his handkerchief, he wiped his eyes clear of their
mist and jealously followed the surrendered one as she was fondled in
turn by the others. First one and then another, until she had
completed the round. All had something pleasant to say to her and she
replied in her sweet innocent way, causing laughter and winning her
path straight to the hearts of the hardy fellows, to whom such
endearments had been unknown for years, but whose better natures were
stirred by the presence of the child, as if she were in reality an
angel sent from heaven.

Felix Brush had purposely left his turn for the last, hoping thereby
to retain her longer than his friends. After chatting with her for a
moment and repeating some rigmarole that set her laughing, followed by
the request for him to say it again, he stood her on the bar. Then he
danced in front of her, swung his arms like a jumping-jack, and told
some outlandish fairy story from the stock that no one had ever
suspected he possessed.

"Can you stand on your head?" asked Nellie, rippling over with fun.

"Certainly," he replied, as without a moment's hesitation, he inverted
himself and cracked his heels together, though the attitude was such
an unfamiliar one that he careened and went over on his back with a
thump that made the room tremble. Nellie clapped her chubby hands
with delight and before Brush could repeat the performance, she
called:

"Catch me; I'm going to jump."

"All right; I'm ready for you."

She recoiled a step to gather momentum and Landlord Ortigies,
terrified at the fear that she might step off backward, made a dive
round the end of the bar, catching his foot in an obstruction and
falling with a crash that drew all attention to him.

"I'm so sorry; be you hurt?" asked Nellie, turning her head and
surveying him, as his face came up to view like the full moon rising
above the horizon.

"Not a bit; I done that on purpose to make you laugh; I always do that
to please good little girls like you."

"Bime by I'll let you fall all the time, but just see me jump."

Felix Brush was still standing, with arms outstretched, and, without a
second's hesitation the child leaped off into space. She showed no
fright, for there was no cause for it, since she was caught fairly and
securely. Inasmuch as she had been fondled by every one, and the
parson had had her longer than anyone else, he set her down on the
floor and she began running here and there, displaying a childish
curiosity to understand everything in sight. Going to the half-opened
door, communicating with the darkened apartment at the rear, she
peeped timidly in.

"Who lives in dere?" she asked, turning around and addressing the
whole group who were laughingly watching her.

"That's where I live," replied Ortigies.

"Do you live all alone?"

"Yes, my child."

"Haven't you got any little girl like me?"

"No; I'd give all I have in the world if I had."

"Wouldn't you like to have me for your little girl?"

"Indeed I would; will you be my little girl?"

The baby face became thoughtful. She thrust one finger in the corner
of her mouth and looked down at the floor.

"What would papa do and those other folks? I will be the little girl
for all of you."

This struck the party as the brightest and wittiest expression ever
made by a mortal. They laughed, clapped their hands and striking each
other on the shoulder wanted to know whether anything of the like had
ever before been heard. Certainly not. Without paying any heed to
them, Nellie was peering into the room again.

"It's dark and cold," she said in an awed voice, turning her face
around, the better to communicate the information; "but I ain't
afraid."

Before she could fairly enter the place, her father, who was
affectionately watching her, said:

"I guess you would better not go in there, Nellie; it's growing late
and is time you prepared for bed."

"I'll fix a place for her," said Ortigies; "we ain't much on style
here, but I can manage to make her comfortable."

"But will it not discommode you?"

"That little gal can't discommode any one in New Constantinople; if
she would prefer to have me go out and sleep in the snow, I'll be glad
to do it."

"I've just the place for her," interposed Wade Ruggles; "couldn't be
better if I had taken a week to get it ready."

"Can't begin with my quarters," Felix Brush hastened to say, and there
would have been a general wrangle for the privilege of accommodating
the little one, had not her father, seeing how matters were going,
smilingly raised his hand in protest.

"I cannot tell you, my friends, how much I thank you all for your
kindness. Ah, if my poor wife could have held out until she reached
here, but that was not to be. I shall be glad to stay with Mr.
Ortigies to-night, and with your permission shall remain for a few
days in your settlement. I have lost everything I owned in the world,
and will need some time to decide what is best to do. Our stay in New
Constantinople will give all a better chance to get acquainted with
Nellie. I'll surrender her to you until you get tired of her."

"Get tired of her!" repeated Vose Adams, voicing the sentiments of
all; "we're not the kind of galoots to git tired of an angel."

The father expressed his thanks with such winsome grace, that every
man instinctively felt that he was a born gentleman. There was not a
miner in the room who did not sympathize with him in his affliction,
and yet they envied him the possession of the child, whose innocence
and beauty impressed them as more wonderful than they had ever looked
upon before. When Felix Brush whispered to Budge Isham that
arrangements must be made in some way to keep the father with them,
for the sake of having the child, his friend nodded his head, and said
he had made up his mind to the same effect from the moment the parent
referred to the matter. And the sentiments of these two were those of
the rest.

"Come, Nellie, let me prepare you for bed; it's a long time since you
have had that privilege."

The little one obediently walked to her father and turned her back to
him that he might better remove her clothing.

"I suppose you have plenty of covering for her?" remarked the parent
inquiringly to the landlord.

"There's all she can need."

Lifting her on his knee, the father began removing the shoes and
stockings, the little one giving what aid she could, when it came to
the garments. One of the last acts of the affectionate mother had been
to place upon her child the gown she was accustomed to wear while
asleep. When at last she was ready, she looked up to her father and
asked in a half whisper:

"Where's mamma?"

"She will not be with us to-night."

"Then she will come in the morning?"

"Wait until then, my child; don't say anything more about mamma now."

She was satisfied, and signified that she was ready to have her father
carry her to her bed. Then she exclaimed with a laugh:

"Ain't that funny?"

"What's that?"

"I like to fordot to say my prayers."

And slipping from her father's knee, she knelt on the floor, with her
hands covering her face which, as it pressed his knee, was hidden by
the mass of golden ringlets clustering and falling about it. Not a man
stirred or spoke. All were so silent that the sifting of the snow
against the logs, the moaning of the gale and the soft rustle of the
embers that broke apart on the hearth were audible. But all these were
as the "voice of silence" itself, so that when the child began her
prayer in a low voice, every syllable was heard.

     "Now I lay me down to sleep.
     I pray the Lord my soul to keep;
     If I should die before I wake,
     I pray the Lord my soul to take.
     God bless papa, mamma and make Nellie a good girl; bless--"

Wheeling short round at the silent, awed group, she looked at the
landlord and asked:

"What is your name?"

"Or-ti-gies," he replied, pronouncing it carefully.

She made rather sorry work at first, but there could be no doubt that
the One to whom she was addressing the petition understood her wishes.
When she had satisfied herself and included the landlord in her
prayer, she ceased again, and this time looked up at her father whose
hand was resting on her head.

"I must pray for _all_ of them, musn't I?"

"Certainly, my child."

"But I don't know dere names."

"They will all tell them."

No act of worship in church or grand cathedral was more solemn and
reverential than that of the men, as each in turn stepped softly
forward with bowed head, and repeated his name to the tiny petitioner,
who immediately included it with those for whom she had already prayed
and it was wafted upward through space to Him who delights to hear and
answer such petitions.

She did not forget one. To make sure, she looked up while still on her
knees and asked:

"Did I fordot any of you?"

"No," replied the parent; "you have not missed any. That's a good
girl."

"And I know they will all be good, for I asked God to make 'em so."

The father now rose to his feet with her in his arms, and she
called a general good night, flinging a kiss to all. Landlord
Ortigies had lit an extra lamp and with it in hand, he led the way to
the rear room, where as he stated, comfortable quarters were
provided for the little one. Since the Heavenly Bower was the only
place in the mining settlement where the wanderer, who occasionally
made his way into that remote part of the world, could expect to
find sleeping accommodations, Ortigies was always prepared for
visitors. Thus he was able to furnish the father with a couch so
placed that he virtually shared the bed with his child.

Ten minutes later, when he stole back into the room with the landlord
to see whether everything was right with his child, she was found sunk
in the sweet, dreamless slumber of infancy. The picture was so winsome
as she lay with her cheek resting upon the rough pillow, that Ortigies
stepped softly to the door and beckoned to his friends. Everyone stole
forward, and stood looking down for several minutes upon the sleeper,
and, as he did so, new resolves sprang into his heart. Already it may
be said they were better men because of the blessed messenger that had
come among them.




CHAPTER III

A SLIP OR TWO


The blizzard gradually subsided toward morning, but when the fall of
snow ceased, it lay to the depth of several feet on the level, while
the gorges were choked with vast drifts. The cold was below zero and
no work could be done in the diggings until a rise in temperature
came.

It was hardly light, however, on the succeeding morning, when three of
the miners accompanied Maurice Dawson in his search for the abandoned
wagon and team. There was not a trace of anything resembling a trail,
the footprints of the man having been obliterated by the wind-driven
snow, and the skill of the party was taxed to the utmost. Several
times they were compelled to rest, and Dawson himself suggested that
the search be given up until a change in the weather; but the kind
hearted men saw how deeply he grieved, and their sympathy kept them
toiling until about noon when success came.

The wagon was so covered with snow that it resembled a hummock, which
ordinarily would have been passed without notice. The horses and the
inanimate form within were like blocks of wood. The slight figure was
lifted tenderly from its resting place and brought to Dead Man's
Gulch.

Since the last recollection of Nellie was when she supposed her mother
alive, it was deemed kinder that she should not look upon the lifeless
form again. With hard labor the picks and shovels hollowed out a
shallow grave into which the form, wrapped about with a single
blanket, was laid away to rest until the last day.

The father, when questioned by the little one, explained that her
mother had gone on a long, long journey and there was no saying when
she would be seen again. Nellie cried a good deal and it saddened her
parent's heart, when stealing softly into her room, he saw the traces
of tears on her cheeks. Who can tell the sorrows of childhood when
such a cruel affliction comes upon it? But it is a blessed truth that
time is the healer of all wounds, and after awhile the little one
ceased to ask about her mother. When the whole truth was told her, she
had become old enough to bear the blow.

Maurice Dawson's first purpose was to remain only for a week or two
with the friends of himself and child. He had set out for the Pacific
coast, and, although it was still a thousand miles distant, he felt it
his duty to press on, but he suffered himself to be dissuaded, when it
was explained that the prospect of obtaining gold was as good at New
Constantinople, whereas, if he continued his journey, he would have to
make his home among strangers, who were not likely to feel the
interest in him and his child that was felt by those who were the
means of saving their lives. Furthermore, since he had lost his team,
he was without the means of pressing on. None of the emigrant trains
turned so far out of their course as to come to Dead Man's Gulch, and
nothing was plainer than that the citizens of that place would not
give the least help in an enterprise that was to deprive them of
Nellie. It is impossible to say what would have followed, had he
persisted in his first decision, for while the men might have
consented to let him go, they would have rebelled had he attempted to
take the child from them.

And so it came about, we repeat, that Maurice Dawson decided to make
his home indefinitely in the town that had been christened New
Constantinople. With the help of his neighbors, Landlord Ortigies
divided his rear room into two apartments, one of which was turned
over to the parent and his child. Nearly every miner brought some
article, such as a fragment of mirror, a picture or trinket and
presented it to the little one, whose room naturally became the finest
in New Constantinople.

Dawson himself joined the miners at their work, all showing an
eagerness to lend him a helping hand, and there was reason to hope
that in time there would be a fair reward for their labor. He was not
only an educated man, but was strong and enterprising, considerate of
the feelings of others, and now that his life partner was gone, he had
but the little daughter to live for. Gladly he toiled for her, for no
child was ever more tenderly loved by parent than she. His thoughts
turned to the future, but for some years he believed it was better
that she should remain where she was.

Nellie Dawson became the pet of the mining town. There was not a man
in the place, no matter how rough his ways, nor how dark had been his
past, who was not made the better by her presence. She touched a
responsive chord in every heart. She awoke tones that had been silent
for years, and stirred into life resolves that had lain dormant for a
generation. When the weather grew milder with the approach of spring,
she flitted like a bird from cabin to cabin, equally at home and
dearly prized in all. Many a time when night came, the father was
unable to find her, and perhaps saw nothing of her until the next day,
but he never felt any solicitude. He knew that some of the men had
persuaded her to remain with them, and he was too considerate to rob
them of the pleasure of listening to her innocent prattle, while they
racked their ingenuity and threw dignity to the winds in the effort to
entertain her. Each one strove to make her think more of him than the
others, and it ended by her loving them all.

As a rule, Nellie ate her morning meal at home, after spending the
night with her father, and then she was off for the day, returning or
remaining away as her airy fancy prompted. Her sweet influence in the
mining camp was beyond the power of human calculation to fathom. No
gauge could be placed upon it. Like the sweep of an angel's wing, her
coming seemed to have wafted nearly all the coarseness, wrong and evil
from her path.

"There's a serious question that I want to lay afore this company,"
gravely remarked Wade Ruggles one night in the Heavenly Bower. Dawson
was absent with a brother miner at the lower end of the settlement, so
the gathering felt at liberty to discuss him and his child. Wade of
late had fallen into the habit of taking the lead in such discussions,
and Landlord Ortigies was quite willing to turn over the honors of the
chairmanship to the outspoken fellow.

The remainder of the company were smoking, drinking and talking as the
mood took them, and all looked inquiringly at the speaker, seeing
which Wade continued with the same earnestness he had shown at first:

"It is this: that little angel that was tossed down here in the
blizzard is growing fast; she's larning something cute every day; she
notices things that you don't think of; fact is she's the smartest
youngster that was ever born. Does any gent feel disposed to dispoot
the aforesaid statement?" he abruptly asked, laying his hand on the
butt of his revolver and looking severely around in the faces of his
friends.

No one questioned the assertion. Had it been left to them to choose
the words, they would have made them stronger.

"Wal, the remark I was about to remark is that I hear some coarse
observations once in awhile. I may say that I have indulged in a few
myself when the 'casion was suitable and called for 'em, but I want to
give notice that the thing must stop in the presence of the angel."

"Your suggestions generally ain't worth listenin' to," observed Ike
Hoe, "but there's solid sense in them words. I have been troubled over
the same thing and was goin' to submit a proposition."

"You're a purty one to do it," commented Vose Adams scornfully; "why
it's only yesterday that I heerd you say 'darn' just because I
happened to smash the end of your finger, with the hammer I was
drivin' a nail with."

"Did the little one hear him?" asked Wade Ruggles, while an expression
of horror settled on every countenance.

"No, sir!" declared Ike; "afore I indulged in the expression, so
proper under the tryin' circumstances, I looked round to make sartin
she wasn't in hearing distance."

"You must have looked very quick," said Vose; "for the horrible words
was simultaneous with the flattenin' of your big forefinger.
Howsumever, I gazed round myself and am happy to say she warn't in
sight. If she had been, I'd smashed all your fingers."

"A very proper Christian spirit," commended Wade; "I hope all the rest
of you will strive to emerlate it."

Felix Brush was leaning on the end of the bar with a glass of steaming
toddy, which he had partly sipped, and was now caressing with his
hand.

"Gentlemen," said he impressively, "permit me a word. Wade has touched
a subject which appeals to us all. I have given it much thought for
the past few days and feel it my duty to look after the religious
instruction of the child."

Two or three disrespectful snickers followed this declaration. The
parson instantly flared up.

"If any reprobate here feels a desire to scoff, he's only to step
outside for a few minutes and see who can get the drop on the other."

Everybody knew that the parson was always well heeled, and no one
questioned his courage. His friends contented themselves with pitying
smiles and significant glances at one another. Felix hastily
swallowed his toddy, with the evident intention of airing his emphatic
views, when Wade Ruggles interposed:

"Pards, you're gettin' off the track; we hain't got to the religious
racket yit; that'll come later. What I want to 'rive at is as to using
cuss words and unproper language where the angel hears it. It ain't
'nough for us to agree that we won't do it; it must be fixed so we
don't take no chances."

This was not exactly clear and Wade was asked to be more explicit.

"I mean that there must be a penalty, such as will stop a galoot that
has once offended from doing the same thing again."

This clearly intimated that the punishment which the chairman had in
mind was of a frightful nature. The landlord begged Wade to come down
to particulars.

"My idee is that whoever offends this little one by unproper language
shall be filled full of bullet holes: how does _that_ strike you?"

"It hits me just right!" responded the landlord, with several nods of
his head; "but there's one thing in the way."

"What's that?" demanded Wade, showing some temper at this attack upon
his scheme.

"It 'lows a man to say the unproper words in the hearin' of the angel,
_afore_ he's shot; so it won't prevent her ears from being 'fended.
Can't we fix it some way, so that she shan't hear 'em at all?"

"There's no trouble about that," solemnly remarked Budge Isham from
his seat at the further end of the room; "You have only to find out
when a fellow has made up his mind to use improper language in the
presence of the child, and then shoot him before he can say the
words."

"But how shall we know he's going to say 'em?" inquired the chairman,
who in the earnestness of his feelings felt no suspicion of the
honesty of his friend.

"You will have to judge that by the expression of his countenance. I
think when a fellow has made up his mind to swear his looks give
notice of what is coming. The rest of us must be on the alert and pick
him off before the words get out of his mouth. And yet I am sorry to
say," added Budge gravely rising to his feet, "that there is one
serious drawback to my proposition."

"The chairman is anxious to hear it."

"There might be mistakes made. A man's expression is not always an
index of his thoughts. He might be suffering from some inward pain,
and be in the act of uttering some expression, but his face could have
so mean a look that if our law was in force, he would be shot on
sight. For instance, studying these faces all turned toward me, I
should say, speaking on general principles, that all except one or
two deserve, not shooting, but hanging, and if looks were to determine
a man's depth of infamy, mighty few of you would live five minutes."

Budge sank gravely into his seat and resumed smoking, while his
friends, understanding his trifling character, contemptuously refused
attention to his disrespectful remarks. In the general discussion
which followed, several insisted that the only proper punishment for
the grave offence was death; but the sentiment crystallized into the
feeling that that penalty was somewhat severe for the first breaking
of the law. It was proper enough for the second crime, but a man who
had been accustomed to picturesque and emphatic words was liable to
err once at least while on the road to reformation. The agreement
finally reached was that the offender should be heavily fined,
compelled to fast several days, or, more frightful than all, be
deprived of the privileges of the bar for the same length of time.
When the last penalty was fixed there were several suppressed groans
and a general setting of lips, with the unshakable resolve to steer
clear of that appalling punishment.

Everything was serene for several days, when, as might have been
anticipated, the explosion came. Al Bidwell, in coming out of the
Heavenly Bower, caught the toe of one of his boots and fell forward on
his hands and knees. Two of his friends seeing him naturally laughed,
whereupon, as he picked himself up, he demanded in the name of the
presiding genius of hades, what they saw to laugh at. By way of
answer, one of them pointed to Nellie Dawson, who ran forward to help
him to his feet.

"Did you hurt yourself, Mr. Bidwell? I's so sorry."

"You may well be, little one," was the bitter response, as he realized
his awful offence; "for this will play thunder with me--there it goes
agin! Please don't say another word," he exclaimed desperately,
striding down the street to save himself from piling up a mountain of
unpardonable crimes.

The committee did not gather until late that evening, for Nellie was
at home and it was thought advisable to wait until she was asleep, so
that she should not know anything of what was in the air. The
conversation was in subdued tones until Mr. Dawson tip-toed out of the
rear room, with the announcement that the little one was sunk in
slumber.

"Such bein' the case," remarked Wade Ruggles, with becoming gravity,
"this meeting will proceed to bus'ness. Pards, a hein'us crime has
been committed among us. In the proud history of New Constantinople,
we've had hangin' bees; we've shot three Injins 'cause they _was_
Injins; there has been any number of holes plugged inter them as was a
little careless of speech, and more'n once there has been the devil to
pay, but nothin' like this, _never_! Vose Adams, you was one as heard
this wretch Bidwell indulge in his shocking profanity. You'll be good
'nough to give the partic'lars to the gents that I must warn to brace
themselves fur the shock."

Vose Adams told the story which was familiar to all. He and Budge
Isham were approaching the Heavenly Bower that forenoon, the cause
being a due regard for the requirement of the laws of health, when
Albert Bidwell, the accused, stubbed his toe. Hearing a laugh, he
looked up and demanded to know what the ---- they were laughing at.
While the query, though objectionable on aesthetic grounds, might have
passed muster in the diggings or anywhere in New Constantinople
previous to the advent of the angel at present making her home with
them, yet the horror of the thing was that the aforesaid angel heard
it. She ran to the help of the villain, who added to his monumental
crime by calmly remarking to her that what he had just said would play
thunder with him.

This second offence was unanimously felt by those present to be more
unpardonable than the first, since it was in the nature of an
addendum, had nothing to do with the business proper, and worst of
all, was addressed to Nellie herself.

Chairman Ruggles turned his severest frown upon the prisoner, who was
sitting disconsolately on a box, and drawing at his brier wood pipe,
which in the depth of his emotion, he failed to notice was unlighted.

"What has the prisoner to say fur himself?"

Bidwell shuffled to his feet, took the pipe from his mouth and looked
around upon the cold, unsympathetic faces.

"Wal, pards," he remarked, heaving a great sigh, "I don't see that
there's anything partic'lar fur me to say. When a thing is fairly
proved onto you, you can't make nothin' by denyin' of the same. I've
been tryin' to walk a chalk line ever since the angel arrove among us.
Two or three times I fell over backward and bruised my head, owin' to
my tryin' to stand up too straight. I was just bracin' myself to do
the same as aforesaid, when comin' out of this disgraceful place, when
I took a headlong dive and struck the earth so hard, I must have made
a bulge in China. Two unmannerly ijuts that happened to see me,
instead of expressin' sorrer for my mishap, broke out laughin', and in
my righteous indignation, I asked them a emphatic question."

"Ord'narily," observed the Court, "your explanation would do. In the
old times, nothin' would have been said if you'd drawed your gun and
give 'em a lesson in manners, but that aint the question afore the
house: Why did you do it in the presence of the angel?"

"Didn't see her till after the crime was committed."

"But why didn't you look fur her to larn whether she was in sight or
was liable to hear your shocking words?"

"Didn't think of it."

"Your reply only aggervates the offence. If any man feels that he must
swear or bust, he must bust, purvided the little one is in sight; or
he must hold in till he can climb on top of the rocks, or creep among
the foothills where he's sure of being alone. The Court hain't any
'bjection to your thinking all the cuss words you want to, but you
mus'n't speak 'em when she's about. You understand the position of the
Court?"

"I'd be a fool if I didn't," growled the accused.

"It's onnecessary to understand 'em in order to be a fool, Mr.
Bidwell, but how 'bout your second offence, when you used the word
'thunder,' and addressed it to the gal herself?"

The prisoner felt that nothing could be said in palliation of this
charge.

"That _was_ bad bus'ness, I'll confess; but I was so disgusted with
myself that I didn't know what I was doing or saying; the words come
out afore I had time to pull myself together. I was so afeard of
adding something still worser that I just rushed off to git out of
danger."

[Illustration: AS HE PICKED HIMSELF UP, HE DEMANDED IN THE NAME OF THE
PRESIDING GENIUS OF HADES WHAT THEY SAW TO LAUGH AT.--PAGE 43.]

"There's where you showed the first grain of sense the Court ever
knowed you to show. If I had been in your place, I would have jumped
off the rocks, into the kenyon, two thousand feet below. If you'd done
that you'd been saved the disgrace of being put on trial in this
honorable Court. Gents," added Ruggles, glancing from the prisoner
into the expectant faces, "since the man owns up, it rests with you to
fix the penalty for his crime of bigamous murder."

The prisoner resumed his seat and the chairman looked around, as an
invitation for those present to express their views. When they came to
do so, a wide diversity came to the surface. Vose Adams suggested that
the criminal be compelled to go without any food for three days, but
this was not favorably received, since the rough, trying life which
each man had been compelled to follow at times during the past years,
made the punishment much less than it appeared to be.

Ike Hoe suggested that instead of food, the accused's liquid
refreshment should be shut off for the time named. The accused
groaned.

When this had continued for some time, Felix Brush, the parson, took
the floor.

"Gentlemen, it's a principle in law to be lenient with the first
offence, and, since this is the first time that Bidwell has offended
and he deeply feels his disgrace, why not require him to apologize to
the young lady and stand treat for the crowd, with the understanding
that his next crime shall be visited with condign punishment?"

"Do you propose to let him off?" demanded the wrathful chairman.

"Yes; for this once, but never again."

"I'll never consent to anything of the kind! The dignity of the Court
must be preserved; the law must be executed, and any man who says
'devil' or 'thunder' in the presence of the little gal, I don't care
what the circumstances, orter to be shot, so that there wont be any
delay in his going to the devil, where he belongs."

"_O, Mr. Ruggles, I heard you_!"

A little figure dressed in white stood at the door leading to the rear
room, and the startled auditors turning their heads, saw Nellie
Dawson, with her chubby finger pointed reprovingly at the dumbfounded
chairman.




CHAPTER IV

SUITING THE PUNISHMENT TO THE CRIME


Wade Ruggles was speechless. He sat with his mouth wide open and his
eyes staring at the little figure, as if it were a veritable
apparition. All the others looked in the same direction. Nellie Dawson
stood for a moment with her finger pointed reprovingly at the
chairman, and then turning about ran back into the rear room and
plunged into her bed.

"Max, quick!" said Ruggles faintly, pointing to the black bottle at
the rear of the bar. The landlord hastily poured out some of the fiery
stuff, and the miserable fellow swallowed it at a gulp. It served
partly to revive him, but he was really on the verge of collapse.

The only one of the company not impressed was Maurice Dawson, father
of the little girl. He was sitting well back of the rest, where no one
paid attention to him. Comprehending the meaning of this incident, he
drew his hand across his mouth to conceal the smile that could not be
wholly restrained. Then he hurried back into the room to see that his
child was "tucked up" and properly covered for the night. Finding
himself in the dark, where he could not be observed, he laughed
deeply and silently, his mirth all the greater because of the
oppressive gravity of every one else. Then bending over, he said, as
he kissed the little one:

"I thought you were asleep, Nellie?"

"So I was, but Mr. Ruggles spoke those bad words so loud he woked
me."

"You mustn't get up again, will you?"

"Not if you don't want me to."

"I have just told you I don't wish you to."

"Then I wont get up."

The father lingered in the room, until he mastered his disposition to
laugh, and then, when he walked out among his friends no countenance
was graver than his.

"I say, Dawson," said Ruggles, swallowing a lump in his throat, "will
you oblige me by acting as chairman?--I don't feel--very--well."

The gentleman walked forward to where Ruggles had been standing with
his back against the bar, looking down in the faces of his friends.
The poor fellow seemed to have aged ten years, as he slouched off to
an upturned box near the door, where he dejectedly seated himself.

"What is your pleasure, gentlemen?" asked Dawson, as if presiding over
the deliberations of one of the most august assemblages in the land;
"I am ready to hear any suggestion or motion."

Al Bidwell rose to his feet.

"Mr. Chairman, I wish to endorse with all my heart, the soul-stirring,
eloquent address to which we have just listened from the late Mr.
Ruggles,--I mean the late Chairman. Them sentiments of his is as sound
as a gold dollar. He maintains that any gent that uses an unproper
word, such as he used and which I scorn to repeat, in the presence of
the young lady, who has just listened to his remarks, oughter to be
sent to the individooal whose name is too shocking fur me to
pronounce, since the aforesaid young lady is in the adjoining
apartment, from whence she was awoke by the awful profanity of the
gent who lately served as our chairman."

And having gotten back on Ruggles in this masterly manner, Bidwell sat
down, slung one leg over the other, and relit his pipe. The oppressive
silence was broken by a prodigious sigh from Ruggles.

Parson Brush, after the stillness had continued some minutes, rose to
his feet.

"Mr. Chairman, an extraordinary state of affairs has arisen. You have
not forgotten that I plead for charity for Mr. Bidwell, because it was
his first offence. My plea was not well received, but my sentiments
are unchanged, and I now make the same plea for Mr. Ruggles and on the
same grounds. When he was denouncing in fitting terms the sin of
Bidwell, he had no thought of committing the crime himself, but in
his earnestness he did. This being plain to all of us, I renew----"

Wade Ruggles bounded to his feet.

"I don't want any one to plead for me! I ain't pleading fur myself! I
can take my medicine like a man; if there's any galoot here----"

He suddenly checked himself with an apprehensive glance at the door of
the rear room, and then resumed in a more subdued voice:

"I insist that Al Bidwell shall suffer for his onspeakable crime and
me too, 'cause mine was onspeakabler. Jedgin' from the evidence that
showed itself, I must have awoke the little gal from peaceful slumber,
by them awful words of mine."

He paused and looked inquiringly at the chairman, who calmly returned
his gaze, without speaking. It was Parson Brush who interposed:

"I should like to ask, Mr. Dawson, whether the supposition of Mr.
Ruggles has any foundation in fact."

"It has; when I asked Nellie what caused her to awake, she said it was
Mr. Ruggles when he used those bad words."

"Just what I thought!" exclaimed Ruggles, as if he enjoyed heaping
fire upon his own head; "there ain't any depth of infamy which I
hain't reached. For me to try to sneak out now, when I made such
a----(Here he again threw a startled glance at the rear of the room)
would be to do something which Wade Ruggles never done in his
variegated career of nigh onto forty years. All I ask is that you'll
git through it as soon as you kin and fix our terms of imprisonment or
our deaths and hev done with it."

Al Bidwell took an unworthy delight in prodding the man who had been
so severe upon him.

"I beg humbly to suggest to the gent that there are plenty of places
in the mountains where he can make a jump of a thousand feet or two
into the kenyons. Wouldn't it be a good idee fur the gent to try it?"

"I will if you'll join me," retorted Wade, turning upon him like a
flash.

"I'll let you try it first and see how it works," replied Bidwell, so
crushed that he remained silent henceforward.

"Since I am chairman," said Dawson, with becoming dignity, "it is my
duty to listen to suggestions and to hear motions. What is your
pleasure, gentlemen?"

No one in looking at the countenance of Maurice Dawson would have
suspected he was extracting the keenest enjoyment from these
proceedings, yet such was the fact. There was something so intensely
ludicrous in the whole business, that only by assuming preternatural
gravity could he refrain from breaking into merriment. His policy was
to egg on the discussion until the company were ready for a decision,
when he would interpose with the proposal to wipe out the whole matter
and begin over again. The earnestness of Wade Ruggles, however,
threatened to check anything of that nature. He was on his feet
several times until Budge Isham, who shrewdly suspected the sentiments
of the chairman, protested.

"With all due respect to the parson, to Ruggles and to Bidwell, it
strikes me, Mr. Chairman, that they should give the rest of us a show.
We have listened to their yawping until it has grown monotonous.
Having told us a dozen times, more or less, that he wants us to punish
him all he deserves, Mr. Ruggles ought to let it rest with that; but
he shouldn't forget," added Budge, with the solemn manner which always
marked his waggery, "that, if we took him at his word, he would be
kicking vacancy this minute. However, this hasn't anything to do with
his general cussedness, but concerns his offence against the young
lady. That is all there is before the house, and I insist that we
confine ourselves to that----"

"Isn't that what I've been insistin' on?" demanded Wade Ruggles.

"There you go again! I have the floor, and you have no parliamentary
right to interrupt me with your frivolous remarks. Am I correct, Mr.
Chairman?"

"You are most unquestionably; proceed."

"Well, to bring this tiresome matter to a close, I move that Mr.
Bidwell be deprived of the bar privileges of the Heavenly Bower for a
period of four days, and that the same be denied to Mr. Ruggles for a
period of one week. Did I hear a groan?" asked Budge, looking round at
the two men, who were trying bravely to bear up under the threatened
punishment.

Both shook their heads, afraid to trust their voices by way of reply.

"If the gentlemen will permit me," said the chairman, "I should like
to say a few words."

"I am sure we shall be glad to hear from Mr. Dawson," remarked the
parson.

"Thank you. What I had in mind is this:--It is creditable to your
honor that you should pledge yourselves to refrain from unbecoming
language in the hearing of my little girl, for you cannot help being
her instructors, no matter how much you may wish it were otherwise.
But you are magnifying the matter. I am sure every man of you will
strive just as hard, without being incited thereto by the fear of
punishment. I would beg to suggest----"

He paused, for, looking at Wade Ruggles, he saw it was useless to go
further. Bidwell would have been glad to receive leniency, but his
partner in crime was immovable, and it would not do to punish one and
allow the other to go free. Dawson was wise enough to accept the
situation promptly.

"You have heard the penalties suggested for the offences of the two
gentlemen accused. All who favor such punishment will show it by
raising their right hands."

Every man in the room, except the chairman, voted in the affirmative.

"It isn't worth while to put the negative. The accused have heard the
verdict, which is that Mr. Bidwell shall not drink a drop of anything
except water or coffee for a period of four days, dating from this
moment, while Mr. Ruggles is to undergo the same penalty for a period
of one week."

"That's right," growled Bidwell; "for he drank about half of what was
in the bottle only a few minutes ago."

"And you would have drunk it all," retorted Ruggles, "if you'd knowed
what was coming."




CHAPTER V

A HUNDRED FOLD


All this may seem a trifling matter to the reader who does not
understand the real punishment suffered by these two men, who, like
all the rest of their companions, had been accustomed to the use of
ardent spirits for many years. There was no deprivation which they
could not have borne with less distress, but their great consolation
was that both knew the penalty was fully deserved, and they would not
have complained had it been made more severe.

"I tell you," said Bidwell, at the end of the fourth day, when he had
celebrated his release from purgatory, "it pays, Ruggles."

"What pays?"

"The reward you git for all this. At the end of a week you'll have a
thirst that you wouldn't take a thousand dollars fur."

"But the week isn't much more'n half gone and I'd sell my thirst
mighty cheap now."

"Don't you do it! Hold fast to it."

"That's what I'm doing, 'cause I can't help myself. Howsumever it's
the thirst that's holding fast to me."

"That's the beauty of it; it'll git stronger and stronger, and then
it's so big that you can't well handle it. It seems to me that ten
minutes after I've had a drink, I'm thirsty agin, which reminds me;
I'd like to invite you, Wade."

"Invite all you want to, 'cause it won't do any more hurt than good;
don't let me keep you," added Ruggles, observing the longing eyes his
friend cast in the direction of the Heavenly Bower. Bidwell moved off
with pretended reluctance, out of consideration for the feelings of
his friend, but once inside, he gave another demonstration of the
truth of his remarks concerning thirst.

As for Ruggles, only he who has been similarly placed can appreciate
his trial. No man is so deserving of sympathy as he who is making a
resolute effort to conquer the debasing appetite that has brought him
to the gutter.

On that fourth night the thirst of the fellow was a raging fever. He
drank copious draughts of spring water, but all the help it gave was
to fill him up. The insatiate craving remained and could not be
soothed. It seemed as if every nerve was crying out for the stimulant
which it was denied.

"The only time I ever went through anything like this," he said to
himself, "was twenty years ago, when a party of us were lost in the
Death Valley. Three of 'em died of thirst, and I come so nigh it that
it makes me shudder to think of it even at this late day."

A wonderful experience came to Wade Ruggles. To his unbounded
amazement, he noticed a sensible diminution, on the fifth day, of his
thirst. It startled him at first and caused something in the nature of
alarm. He feared some radical change had taken place in his system
which threatened a dangerous issue. When this misgiving passed, it was
succeeded by something of the nature of regret. One consoling
reflection from the moment his torture began, was the reward which Al
Bidwell had named, that is,--the glorious enjoyment of fully quenching
his terrific craving, but, if that craving diminished, the future
bliss must shrink in a corresponding ratio, and _that_ was a calamity
to make a man like him shudder.

On the evening of the fifth day, he ventured for the first time during
his penal term, to enter the Heavenly Bower. He wished to test his
self-control. When he sat quietly and saw his friends imbibing, and
was yet able to restrain himself from a headlong rush to join them, he
knew that beyond all question, his fearful appetite had lost a part of
its control over him. Still he believed it was only a temporary
disarrangement, and that the following day would bring a renewal of
his thirst, with all its merciless violence.

But lo! on the sixth morning, the appetite was weaker than ever. His
craving was so moderate that, after a deep draught of mountain spring
water, he was hardly conscious of any longing for liquor. He seemed to
be losing his memory of it.

"I don't understand it," he mused, keeping the astonishing truth to
himself; "It's less than a week ago that I was one of the heaviest
drinkers in New Constantinople, and if anyone had told me of this, I
would have been sure he'd lost his senses, which the same may be
what's the matter with me."

But there was no awakening of his torment during the day, and when he
lay down at night, he was disturbed by strange musings.

"If we had a doctor in the place, I would ask him to tell me what it
means. The queerest thing 'bout the whole bus'ness is that I feel
three thousand per cent. better. I wonder if it can be on 'count of my
not swallerin' any of Ortigies' pison which the same he calls Mountain
Dew. I guess it must be that."

But that night he was restless, and gradually his thoughts turned into
a new channel. A momentous problem presented itself for solution.

"If I've improved so much after goin' six days without drinkin', won't
I feel a blamed sight better, if I try it for six weeks--six
months--six years--_forever_."

And as an extraordinary, a marvelous resolution simmered and finally
crystallized, he chortled.

"What'll the boys say? What'll the parson think? What'll I think? What
would that good old mother of mine think, if she was alive? But she
died afore she knowed what a good for nothin' man her boy turned out
to be. God rest her soul!" he added softly, "she must have prayed over
me a good many hundred times; if she's kept track of me all these
years, this is an answer to her prayers."

Budge Isham was the partner of Wade, and shared his cabin with him. He
slept across the room, and noticed how his friend tossed and muttered
in his sleep.

"Great Gee!" he exclaimed, "but Wade's got it pretty bad; I wonder if
it's the jim jams that is getting hold of him; I'll sleep with one eye
open, for he will need looking after. What a blessed thing it is that
he has only one more day. Then he can celebrate and be happy. I have
no doubt that by the end of another week, he will have brought things
up to their old average."

And with this conclusion, the man who a few years before took the
first honors at Yale, shifted his position, so as to keep an eye on
his comrade, and straightway proceeded to drop into a sound slumber,
which was not broken until the sun rose on the following morning.

The sympathy for Wade was general. Had he not insisted upon carrying
out in spirit and letter the full punishment pronounced upon him,
there would have been a unanimous agreement to commute his term by
one or two days at least; but all knew the grit or "sand" of the
fellow too well to propose it.

His actions on the seventh day caused considerable disquietude. He had
labored in the mines, in a desultory fashion up to that time, but he
did not do a stroke of work during the concluding hours of his ordeal.
It was observed by his partner, Budge Isham, that his appetite was
unusually good and he seemed to be in high spirits. His friends
attributed this to the closeness of his reward for his abstention, but
he took several walks up the mountain side and was gone for a good
while. He wore a smiling face and Vose Adams declared that he
overheard him communing with himself, when he thought he was too far
off for the act to be noticed.

"No use of talkin'," whispered Vose; "Wade ain't quite himself; he's a
little off and won't be exactly right till after two or three days."

"He has my sympathy," remarked the parson, "but it will serve as a
lesson which he will always remember."

"And won't _we_ remember it?" said Ike Hoe, with a shudder. "When
we're disposed to say one of them unproper words, the picture of that
miserable scamp going a full week without a touch of Mountain Dew,
will freeze up our lips closer than a clam."

That night the usual group was gathered at the Heavenly Bower. There
were the same merry jests, the reminiscences, the conjectures how
certain diggings would pan out, the small talk and the general good
feeling. Common hardship and suffering had brought these rough men
close to one another. They were indulgent and charitable and each one
would have eagerly risked his life for the sake of the rest. Quick to
anger, they were equally quick to forgive, mutually rejoicing in good
fortune, and mutually sympathetic in sorrow.

There was more than one furtive glance at Ruggles, who was among the
first arrivals. Whispers had passed around of his strange actions, and
the surprise would not have been great had it been found that he had
gone clean daft; but nothing in his manner indicated anything of that
nature. He was as full of quip and jest as ever, and none was in
higher or more buoyant spirits than he.

He suddenly called:

"Dawson, what time is it?"

The latest comer among them carried a watch which he drew out and
examined.

"It is exactly half-past nine."

"When did my punishment begin?"

"A week ago to-night, precisely at this hour; I began to fear that you
had forgotten it."

"No danger of my ever forgetting it," grimly responded Ruggles; "what
I want to know is whether I have served out my full term."

"You have unquestionably."

"Is there anyone here disposed to dispute this statement?" asked Wade,
standing very erect and looking around in the faces of his friends.

No one interposed an objection. He had not only the sympathy but the
respect of every one.

"You sarved your time like a man," remarked Ike Hoe; "the week is up
and you've give good measure."

"Which the same being the case, I invite all to come forward and
liquidate."

Never was an invitation responded to with more enthusiasm. The
grinning Ortigies set out a couple of bottles, intending as a matter
of course to join in the celebration. He feelingly remarked:

"Wade, my heart bled for you and thar ain't a pard here that wouldn't
have been willing to take your place--that is for a limited time," the
landlord hastened to add.

Each tumbler was half-filled with the fiery stuff and all looked in
smiling expectancy at their host to give the cue. He poured a small
quantity into his glass, and elevating it almost to a level with his
lips, looked over the top.

"Are you ready, pards? here goes."

Up went every glass and down went the stuff. But there was one
exception. While the glass was at his lips, and while the familiar
odor was in his nostrils, Wade Ruggles deliberately inverted the
tumbler and emptied the contents on the floor.

It was the strangest incident that had ever occurred in New
Constantinople.




CHAPTER VI

TEACHER AND PUPIL


The group looked at Wade Ruggles in breathless amazement. He had
invited them to the bar to join in celebrating his release from
thralldom; all had filled their glasses and he had raised his own to
his lips, though several noticed that there was only a small amount of
liquid in the tumbler. Then, when every glass was upraised and there
was a general gurgling, he had turned his glass upside down and
spilled every drop on the floor.

Before anyone could think of suitable terms in which to express his
emotions, Wade said, with a smile that rather added than detracted
from his seriousness:

"Pards, never again does a drop of that stuff go down my throat! I've
suffered hell, but I've come out of the flames, and the one that
fetched me through is the little gal which lays asleep in the next
room."

He did not attempt to deliver a temperance lecture to his friends, nor
did they trifle with him. They questioned him closely as to how he had
reached this extraordinary decision, and he gave a vivid and truthful
account of his experience. It made several of the men thoughtful, but
most of them felt dubious about his persistence in the new path he had
laid out for himself.

"You know, boys, whether I've got a will of my own," he quietly
replied; "just wait and see how this thing comes out."

It was noticed that Parson Brush was the most interested inquirer,
and, though he had comparatively little to say, he left the Bower
unusually early. He had begun his system of instruction with Nellie
Dawson, and reported that she was making remarkably good progress. Had
the contrary been the fact, it may be doubted whether it would have
been safe for him to proclaim it.

And now the scene changes. It is the close of a radiant summer day in
the Sierras. Far down in the canyon-like chasm between the mountainous
spurs, nestled the little mining settlement, which had been christened
but a short time before, New Constantinople. Here and there tiny
wounds had been gouged into the ribs of the mountain walls, and the
miners were pecking away with pick and shovel, deepening the hurts in
their quest for the yellow atoms or dark ore which had been the means
of bringing every man thousands of miles to the spot.

Far up toward the clouds were the towering, craggy peaks, with many a
rent and yawn and table-land and lesser elevation, until, as if to
check the climbing ambition of the prodigious monster, nature had
flung an immense blanket of snow, whose ragged and torn edges lapped
far down the sides of the crests. Ages ago the chilling blanket was
tucked around the mountain tops, there to remain through the long
stretch of centuries to follow.

Down the valley, at the bottom of the winding canyon, the air
palpitated with the fervor of the torrid zone. He who attempted to
plod forward panted and perspired, but a little way up the mountain
side, the cool breath crept downward from the regions of perpetual ice
and snow, through the balsamic pines and cedars, with a revivifying
power that was grateful to all who felt its life-giving embrace.

The sun hovered in a sky of unclouded azure. It shot its arrows into
the gullies, ravines and gorges, but made no impression on the frozen
covering far up in cloudland itself. Long pointed ravelings on the
lower edge of the mantle showed where some of the snow had turned to
water, which changed again to ice, when the sun dipped below the
horizon.

The miners were pigmies as they toiled in the sides of the towering
mountain walls, where they had toiled for many a day. On the lip of a
projecting crag, half a mile above were three other pigmies, who
neither toiled nor spun. Viewed through a glass, it was seen that they
wore stained feathers in their black hair dangling about their
shoulders, with the blankets wrapped round their forms descending to
their moccasined feet. They were watching in grim silence these proofs
of the invasion of their homes by the children of another race, and
mayhap were conjuring some scheme for driving them back into the great
sea across which they had sailed to occupy the new land.

One of the Indians was a chieftain. He had come in violent contact
with these hated creatures and he bore on his person the scars of such
meeting. All carried bows and arrows, though others of their tribe had
learned the use of the deadly firearms, which has played such havoc
with the American race.

Suddenly the chief uttered an exclamation. Then drawing an arrow from
the quiver over his shoulder, he fitted it to the string of his long
bow, and pointing downward toward the group of miners, launched the
shaft. Except for the power of gravity, it would have been a foolhardy
effort, but guided by the wisp of feather twisted around the reed, the
missile spun far outward over the canyon, and dived through the vast
reach of space, as if it were endowed with life and determined to seek
out and pierce the intruders. The black eyes of the three warriors
followed the arrow until it was only a flickering speck, far below
them; but, before that moment arrived, they saw that it was speeding
wide of the mark. When at last, the sharp point struck the flinty
rock, and the missile doubled over upon itself and dropped harmlessly
to the bottom of the canyon, it was at such a distance from the miners,
that they knew nothing of it. They never looked up, nor were they
aware of the futile anger of the red men, who seeing how useless was
everything of that nature, turned about and soon passed from view.

The incident was typical of the futility of the red man struggling
against his inevitable doom at the hands of his white brother.

Half way between the bottom of the canyon and the lower fringe of the
vast mantle of snow, a waterfall tumbled over the edge of a rock, and
with many a twist and eddy found its way to the small stream, which
rippled along the bottom of the gorge, until its winding course
carried it beyond sight. Now and then a rift of wind blew aside some
of the foam, like a wisp of snow, and brought the murmur more clearly
to the ear of the listener, shutting out for the time, the faint
hollow roar that was wafted from the region of pines and cedars. It
was a picture of lonely grandeur and desolation, made all the more
impressive by the tiny bits of life, showing in the few spots along
the mountain wall.

[Illustration: THE TEACHER HAD MARKED ON THE DARK FACE OF THE ROCK WITH A
SPECIES OF CHALK ALL THE LETTERS OF THE ALPHABET.--PAGE 71.]

At the rear of the row of cabins, and elevated perhaps fifty feet
above, was the comparatively smooth face of a rock, several square
rods in extent. At the base was abundant footing for two persons,
Parson Brush and Nellie Dawson. The teacher had marked on the dark
face of the rock with a species of chalk, all the letters large and
small of the alphabet. They were well drawn, for the parson, like
others in the settlement, was a man of education, though his many
years of roughing it had greatly rusted his book knowledge.

Standing to one side of his artistic work, like a teacher of the olden
time, the parson, with a long, trimmed branch in his hand, pointed at
the different letters in turn and patiently waited for his little
pupil to pronounce their names.

It never would have done to make the child keep her feet like an
ordinary mortal. With great labor, three of the miners had carried a
stone of considerable size to the spot, which served her as a seat,
while receiving instruction. It is true that she never sat still for
more than three minutes at a time, but that was enough to establish
the indispensable necessity of a chair.

"You are doing very well, my dear," said the parson, encouragingly;
"you have received only a few lessons, but have mastered the alphabet.
I notice that the 'd's' and 'b's' and 'h's' and 'q's' puzzle you a
little now and then, but you have got them straight, and it is now
time that we took a lesson in spelling."

"Oh, I can't do that, Mr. Brush," protested the queen, rising from
the chair, adjusting her skirts and sitting down again; "I never can
spell."

"What is it to spell?"

"I don't know; what is it?"

"I can best answer your question by showing you. Have you ever seen a
cat?"

"Do you mean a pussy?"

"Yes; some folks call it that."

"Oh, yes; when we came from where we used to live,--I guess it must
have been three or four hundred years ago, we brought my pussy along.
Her name was Nellie, the same as mine."

"What became of her?"

"She died," was the sorrowful reply; "I guess she was homesick."

"That was too bad. Now will you tell me what letter that is?"

"Why, Mr. Brush, don't you know?"

"Yes, but I wish to find out whether you know."

"It is C; anybody knows that."

"And this one?"

"A."

"That is right; now this one?"

"T; I hope you will remember, Mr. Brush, because I don't like to tell
you so often."

The teacher continued to drill her, skipping about and pointing at the
letters so rapidly in turn that he was kept bowing and straightening
up like a jumping-jack. Then, allowing her to rest, he pronounced the
letters in their regular order, giving them the sounds proper to the
word itself. Nellie, who was watching closely and listening, suddenly
exclaimed with glowing face:

"Why, that's 'cat'!"

"Of course; now can you say the letters without looking at them?"

After one or two trials she did it successfully.

"There! you have learned to spell 'cat.' You see how easy it is."

"Does that spell 'pussy' too?"

"No,--only 'cat.' After a time you will be able to spell big words."

"Let me try something else, Mr. Brush."

The next word tackled was 'dog,' which was soon mastered. When this
was accomplished, the teacher paused for a moment. He was trying to
think of another word of three letters, but oddly enough could not
readily do so.

"Ah," he exclaimed, "here is another. Now give me the name of that
letter,"

"D."

"And that?"

"A."

"And that?"

"M."

"Now say them quickly, 'd-a-m;' what is the word?"

"Why, it's 'dam'; O, Mr. Brush, I heard you say that is a bad word."

The teacher was thunderstruck and stammered:

"I didn't think of that, but there are two kinds of 'dam' and this one
is not a bad word. It means a bank of earth or stones or wood, that is
put up to stop the flow of water."




CHAPTER VII

PUPIL AND TEACHER


Mr. Brush glanced nervously around, to learn whether any of his
friends were within hearing, shuddering to think what the consequences
might be. He believed that he could explain the matter to some of the
folks, but the majority were so radical in their views that they would
refuse to admit the distinction, and would take him to task for
teaching improper language to his young pupil. It caused him another
shudder at the thought that the same penalty that Wade Ruggles had
undergone might be visited upon him, though it is doubtful if the
issue would have been similar.

"Ahem, Miss Nellie, when we go back home, will you promise me to say
nothing about this part of your lesson?"

"You mean 'bout that bad word?"

"Yes,--let's forget all about it."

"I'll try, but mebbe I'll forget to forget it."

"Likely enough," gloomily reflected the parson; "suppose we try some
other words. Ah, we have a visitor."

At that moment Budge Isham climbed into view and sauntered smilingly
toward them. Brush added a whispered warning to the little one not to
forget her promise, though, since Isham was an educated man, there
ought not to have been anything to fear in his case, but the teacher
knew his waggish nature, and had good reason to fear the mischief he
would delight in creating.

"Good day," was his cheery greeting, as he came up; "I hope I am not
intruding, but I thought I should like to see how you are getting on,
Nellie."

"Oh, Mr. Brush says I am learning real fast; I can spell 'cat,' and
'dog,' and 'dam.'"

Budge raised his hands in horror.

"What in the name of heaven, parson, does she mean?"

"Mr. Isham," said the gentleman, severely, "are you aware that you are
using improper language in the presence of this young lady?"

"Explain yourself."

"It is wrong for you to appeal to heaven on so trifling a question; it
is such a near approach to profanity that the dividing line is
imperceptible. I am sorry you forgot yourself, but I will overlook it
this time."

Budge was really frightened, for though the distinction was quite
fine, he felt there was some justice in the position of the parson,
but he bluffed it out.

"I doubt whether a jury would find me guilty, and in the meantime
explain the remark just made by Nellie, if you please."

Thus cornered, the parson made a clean breast of it. Isham assumed a
grave expression.

"The only criticism I can make is upon your taste in selecting a word,
susceptible of a questionable meaning. You know as well as I that if
this should be submitted to a jury at the Heavenly Bower this evening,
the majority would sit down on you, and it would be hard work for you
to escape the penalty."

"I'm afraid it would," responded the parson; "it was a piece of
forgetfulness on my part----"

"Which is the plea that Bidwell and Ruggles made, but it didn't
answer. However, I'll say nothing about it, knowing you will be more
careful in the future, while I shall not forget to put a bridle on my
own tongue. The trouble, however," he added with a smile, "is to make
_her_ overlook it."

"She has promised she will do so."

"Since that promise was made just before I got here, she has shown how
readily she can forget it."

"I will give her a longer lesson than usual and thus drive all
remembrance out of her mind," said the parson resolutely.

Budge Isham folded his arms, prepared to look on and listen, but the
queen of the proceedings checked it all by an unexpected veto.

"Mr. Brush, I feel so tired."

Her face wore a bored expression and she looked wistfully away from
the blackboard toward the cabins below them.

"Does your head hurt you?" inquired the teacher with much solicitude,
while the single auditor was ready to join in the protest.

"No, but mebbe it will hurt me one of these days."

"It isn't wise, parson, to force the child; a great deal of injury is
done to children by cramming their heads with useless knowledge."

The teacher could not feel sure that this counsel was disinterested,
for there could be no danger of his taxing the mental powers of the
little one too severely, but her protest could not pass unheeded.

"You have done very well, my child; you are learning fast, so we'll
leave the spelling for to-morrow. Suppose we now try the commandments:
can you repeat the first one?"

Nellie gave it correctly, as she did with slight assistance, the
remaining ones. She was certainly gifted with a remarkable memory and
possessed an unusually bright mind. Budge Isham was impressed by her
repetition of the decalogue, whose meaning she was unable fully to
grasp. His frivolous disposition vanished, as he looked upon the
innocent child and watched the lips from which the sacred words
flowed. He quietly decided that it would be inexcusably mean to seek
any amusement at the expense of the parson, and it may as well be
added that he never afterward referred to the incident, while it
seemed to have passed wholly from the mind of Nellie herself. At the
conclusion of the lesson, Budge complimented teacher and pupil and
said he would be glad to certify that Mr. Brush was the best teacher
in New Constantinople, and that it was impossible for any one to take
his place. Then he bade them good day and walked thoughtfully away,
leaving them once more to themselves.

These were the most precious moments of all to the teacher, when the
formal lesson was completed, and he sat down for a little talk with
his pupil. He occupied the stone which served her for a seat, while
one arm loosely clasped the figure which stood between his knees. She
patted his cheek, played with his rough collar and shaggy whiskers,
while as he listened and replied to her prattle, felt as never before
the truth of the declaration that of such is the kingdom of heaven.

"Mr. Brush," she finally said, "do you know why I love you?"

"I suppose it must be because I am so handsome," he replied with a
smile.

"No; it isn't that, for you _ain't_ handsome."

"Whew! but you are not afraid to speak the truth, little one, and I
hope you will always do that. No; I don't know why you love me,
unless you are so good yourself that you can't help it."

This was not exactly clear to the little one, and she stood silent for
a minute, gently fingering his long beard. Then she thought it best to
clear up the mystery without further parley.

"I love you 'cause you're good."

Even though the avowal was delightful, it caused a pang, like a
knife-thrust from his accusing conscience.

"I am thankful to hear you say that, but, Nellie, I am not good."

"Yes, you is, but if you ain't good, why ain't you good?"

The logic of the reply of the adult was of the same grade as that of
the child.

"I suppose the true reason is because I am bad. I am sorry to say it,
but I have drifted far away from where I ought to be."

The dimpled hand continued to fondle the whiskers, and the little
brain was busy, but a wisdom that was more than human guided it.
Turning those lustrous blue eyes upon him she softly asked:

"Will you do what I ask you?"

He almost gasped, for he instinctively suspected what was coming, but
he answered without hesitation:

"If it is my power I will do it, though it kills me."

"Oh, I don't want it to kill you; this won't hurt you; will you do it,
Mr. Brush?"

"Yes, God helping me."

"Do like Mr. Ruggles."

"How's that?" asked the parson with a sinking heart.

"Don't drink any more of that red water, which makes men talk loud and
sometimes say bad words."

"Heavens!" thought the parson; "she little dreams what she is asking
me, but it is not she but some One who is thus calling me back to
duty. Yes, my child, I will do what you ask."

"You is as good and nice as you can be now, but then you will be a
good deal gooder and nicer," said she, warmly kissing him.

"I hope so," he added, rising to his feet, with the feeling that he
was not himself but some one else, and that that some one else was the
young man away among the distant hills of Missouri, before he wandered
to the West, and in doing so, wandered from the path along which he
had attempted to guide and lead others.

"I call myself her teacher," he mused, as he reached down and took the
tiny hand in his own, "but she is the teacher and I am the pupil."

They had started in the direction of the cabins, when they heard
curious shouts and outcries in that direction. "There's something
strange going on down there," he said, peering toward the point; "I
wonder what it can be; let us hurry and find out."

Firmly clasping her hand, the two hastened down the incline, wondering
what it was that caused all the noise and confusion.




CHAPTER VIII

THE PASSING YEARS


THE excitement in New Constantinople was caused by the arrival of Vose
Adams, the mail carrier and messenger, with his budget of letters and
freight for the Heavenly Bower.

These periodical journeys never occupied less than two weeks, and in
the present instance he had been absent several days beyond that
period, so that some anxiety was felt for him, since every trip was
attended with more or less danger. He was exposed to the peril of
storms, snowslides, wild animals and hostile Indians. The elemental
disturbances in the Sierras are sometimes of a terrific nature. Twice
he had lost a mule, and once both animals went spinning down a
precipice for a thousand feet, in an avalanche of snow and were never
found again. Vose's only consolation in the last instance was that it
occurred when on his way to Sacramento, while in the former case he
saved one of the precious kegs, which he insisted was the means of
saving him in turn from perishing in the Arctic temperature.

The shadowy trail wound in and out among the gorges and canyons,
beside towering mountain walls, at a dizzying elevation, over ridges
above the snow line, across table lands, through forests of pine and
cedar and tumultuous mountain torrents, where he took his life in his
hands every time he made the venture.

The unerring marksmanship of Vose and his alertness reduced the danger
from the fierce grizzly bears and ravening mountain wolves to the
minimum, but the red men were an ever present peril. He had served as
the target of many a whizzing arrow and stealthy rifle shot, but thus
far had emerged with only a few insignificant hurts. He was ready at
the stated times to set out on his journey, and appeared indeed to
welcome the change in the existence which otherwise became tiresome
and monotonous. It mattered not that his friends often intimated that
he was starting on his last venture of that nature, for he believed
that his "time" had been set and it mattered naught what he did, since
it could not be changed.

Vose explained that the cause of his last delay was the old
one--Indians. They had pursued and pestered him so persistently that
he was compelled to hunt out a new trail, longer and more difficult
that the old one, and which came within a hair of landing him into the
very camp of his enemies. However, everything had turned out well, and
he brought with him the most prized cargo that ever arrived in New
Constantinople.

First of all, were the two casks of freight, which had suffered so
slight leakage, that Landlord Ortigies complimented the vigilance of
the messenger. Then he brought with him fully a hundred letters and
newspapers. Each citizen received one, and many had several. In every
instance, the grateful recipient paid Vose a dollar for his mail, so
that the reward was generous, including as it did a liberal honorarium
from the proprietor of the Heavenly Bower.

In addition to the mail and freight, there were a number of articles
to which no special reference is needed. In one package, however,
every one was deeply interested, and Nellie Dawson more than the
others. Unknown to the father, a goodly sum had been entrusted to
Adams, with which to purchase such articles as it was believed the
child needed. These included material for numerous new dresses of
gorgeous pattern, stockings, shoes, slippers, ribbons, hats and even
gloves, trinkets and playthings beyond enumeration.

When these were spread out before the little one, she clapped her
hands and danced with delight. She had never dreamed of or seen such
bewildering wealth, and the miners were repaid a hundred fold, while
the grateful parent thanked them for their thoughtful kindness.

With no other person of her sex in the settlement, it would naturally
be thought that she lacked in many of the little attentions which only
a mother or adult female friend can give, but such was not the case.
There was not a man among them all, who had not been taught in the
hard school of necessity to become his own tailor and conservator of
clothing. Many had natural taste, and had not wholly forgotten the
education and training received in the homes of civilization, before
they became adventurers and wanderers. A consensus of views, all moved
by the same gentle impulse, resulted in Nellie Dawson being clothed in
a garb which would hardly have caused criticism in the metropolis of
our country. Not only that, but she was abundantly provided against
all kinds of weather, and with Vose Adams making his regular trips
westward, there was no possibility of her ever knowing the want of
thoughtful care.

The education of the little one was never neglected. Enough has been
told to show her brightness, and even had not her teacher been
inspired by his affection for the little one, the task of imparting
knowledge to such an apt pupil must have been a constant pleasure.
This work, as we have shown, fell by common consent to the parson,
Felix Brush, though his choice at first was not unanimous. Wade
Ruggles was so insistent that he should have a part in the work, that
he was allowed a trial, but it cannot be said the result of several
days' effort was satisfactory. A stealthy inspection of the blackboard
by Budge Isham and the parson disclosed that Ruggles had constructed
the alphabet on a system of his own. Some of the letters were
reversed, several inverted, while the forms of others prevented any
one from identifying them except the teacher himself.

An examination of the pupil developed the same startling originality
in Ruggles's system of orthography, which seemed to be a mixture of
the phonetic and the prevailing awkward method. Thus he insisted that
"purp" was the right way to spell the name of a young dog, whose
correct title was "dorg." Ruggles was finally persuaded to resign,
though he displayed considerable ill feeling and intimated that the
movement was inspired by jealousy of his success.

Budge Isham not only refrained from referring to the slip which the
parson made in his spelling lesson, but spoke in such high terms of
his success with Nellie, that every one conceded the right teacher had
been selected, and it would be a misfortune for any one to assume to
take the place of the parson.

Not until the final summing up of all accounts, will the full measure
of the influence of the little one be known. It was gentle, subtle,
almost imperceptible. Wade Ruggles never broke his resolve not to
touch liquor. Inasmuch as an appetite nourished for years, cannot be
wholly extirpated in a day, he had his moments of intense yearning for
stimulants, when the temptation was powerful, but his will was still
more so, and the time came when the terrific thirst vanished
entirely, though he knew it was simply "asleep" and could be roused
into resistless fury by indulgence in a single glass.

The parson had a severer struggle. After holding out for days, he
yielded, and by his inordinate dissipation brought back matters to a
fair average. Then he set about manfully to retrieve himself. A second
time he fell, and then, thank heaven! he gained the mastery.
Henceforward he was safe.

Maurice Dawson himself had been an occasional tippler for years, but
he felt the influence of example and experienced no trouble in giving
up the habit. Several others did the same, while more tried but "fell
by the wayside."

Landlord Ortigies noticed the diminution in his receipts, but, strange
as it may sound, down in his heart he was not sorry. Like nine out of
ten engaged in his business he was dissatisfied, and like the same
nine out of ten, he longed for the chance to take up some other
calling which would bring him bread and butter and no accusing pangs
of conscience.

Before the coming of Nellie Dawson, brawls and personal encounters
often occurred. The walls of the Heavenly Bower contained several
pounds of lead. Blood had been shed, and the history of the settlement
showed that three persons had died with their boots on, but those
stirring days seemed to have departed forever.

Parson Brush did a good deal of thinking. When through with his pupil,
he was accustomed to take long walks into the mountains, his hands
clasped behind his back and his head bowed in meditation. It is safe
to conclude that Conscience was getting in its work with him.

And so the seasons came and went and the years rolled on. Varick
Thomson, an old miner, who had spent years of fruitless toil in the
diggings of Australia, lay down and died, and the parson officiated at
his funeral. Two other miners grew weary of the poor success in Dead
Man's Gulch and went off on a prospecting tour deeper into the
mountains. A year later another prospecting party came upon two
skeletons, near a small stream of water, which after careful
examination, were pronounced to be those of their former friends,
doubtless victims of the ferocity of the red men. Three vagrant miners
straggled into New Constantinople one night and were hospitably
entertained at the Heavenly Bower. Their appearance was against them,
and, when they announced their intention of making their home at Dead
Man's Gulch, the suggestion to them to move on was made in such terms
that they acted upon it and were never seen there again. Thus it came
about that New Constantinople, instead of increasing in population
and making a bid for the chieftaincy among the new towns in the West,
was actually shrinking in numbers.

And all this time, Nellie Dawson was growing fast. Her beautiful mind
kept pace with the expansion of her body. Her natural grace and
perfection of figure would have roused admiration anywhere. Her
innocence and goodness were an ever present benison to the rough
miners, who had long since learned to check the hasty word, to
restrain the rising temper and to crush the wrongful thought in her
presence.

After a time, Maurice Dawson took possession of one of the deserted
cabins which he fitted up, or rather the community fitted up the
principal apartment for the young queen, whose rule was supreme. No
one else was permitted to share the building with them, though
visitors were constant and Nellie herself continually passed to and
fro among her friends.

But those who watched Dawson saw that a change had come over him.
Formerly there was a quiet waggery in his nature, much like that of
Budge Isham, which led him to enjoy the rough pleasantries of his
companions, though he rarely took part in them, except as an inciting
cause. One of his greatest pleasures had been to sit in the Heavenly
Bower and exchange reminiscences with his friends, but all that came
to an end. Night after night passed without his face being seen in
the place. Those who called at the cabin were treated hospitably, but
he was reserved and moody, and often failed to hear the words
addressed to him. It was evident that there was something on his mind,
though he showed no disposition to make a confidant of any one.




CHAPTER IX

THE CLOUD OF WAR


"I KNOW the cause of Dawson's trouble," remarked Vose Adams, late one
night at the Heavenly Bower.

"What is it?" asked Wade Ruggles, while the rest listened intently.

"On my last trip to Sacramento, two months ago, I brought him a thick
letter: that's what is raising the mischief with him."

"But what was in the letter to make him act so queer?"

"How should I know? do you expect me to open and read all the letters
I bring through the mountains?"

"Bein' as you couldn't read the big letters the parson has painted on
the side of the rock a foot high," said Al Bidwell sarcastically,
"there ain't much danger of your doin' that, which the same is lucky
for them as gits love letters like myself regular by each mail."

"Which the same you won't git any more onless you sling your remarks a
little more keerful," warned the mail carrier.

"And the same being that you can't read the directions writ onto
them, I don't see how you're going to help yourself."

"The postmaster at Sacramento is very obligin'," was the significant
comment of Vose.

Bidwell saw the dangerous ground on which he was treading, and made it
safe by a jesting remark and an invitation to Adams and the rest to
join him at the bar.

"We was on the subject of Dawson," remarked Ruggles from his seat, for
all had learned long before of the uselessness of inviting him to
drink; "and it's the opinion of Vose, I understand, that it was the
letter that has made the change in him."

"There ain't any doubt about it," said Adams; "fur the attack took him
right after; I noticed the difference in him the next day. He sets by
himself these evenings after the little gal has gone to bed, smoking
his pipe, without any light in his shanty, and thinking hard."

Wade smoked thoughtfully a minute and then remarked:

"I wonder whether it wouldn't be a good idee to app'int a committee to
wait on Dawson and ask him what the blazes is the matter and whether
we can't do nothin' to make a man of him agin."

Since Ruggles had become accustomed to act as chairman at the
discussions in the Heavenly Bower, he had developed a strong faith in
committees.

"That's a piece of the most onspeakable foolishness that I've run
aginst since I settled in New Constantinople," observed the landlord
with a contemptuous sniff; "the minute the committee arrove and stated
their bus'ness, Dawson would kick 'em out of his shanty and clean
across the street, and he'd be lacking in the instincts of a man if he
didn't do that same thing."

"Mr. Ortigies forgits that I didn't mean to suggest that _he_ was to
be a member of the committee; I meant they should be _gentlemen_;
consequently that bars him out and there wouldn't be no trouble."

"I understand your sarcasm, Wade, but your words would leave you off
the committee likewise; but may I ask what the members would ask him
when they knocked at his door?"

"Any gentleman wouldn't be at a loss what to say, fur he would only
hev to remark sorter careless like that he had observed the man was
acting so queer that we was afeard he was troubled with remorse over
some crime he'd committed, and about which he had got notice that the
officers was lookin' fur him, but that if he'd trust us and give a
description of the officers, so there wouldn't be any mistake, we'd
watch fur 'em up the trail and pick 'em off afore they could profane
New Constantinople with their presence."

This was a prodigious sentence for Wade, and he leaned back and smoked
his pipe with considerable self-complacency, but it impressed none of
his hearers as he expected. Parson Brush shook his head.

"It isn't a very wise way of introducing yourself to a man by assuming
that he is a fugitive from justice. In the first place, I am sure
there is nothing of the kind in the case of Dawson. He has probably
heard some news from the East that troubles him."

"That's just what I was sayin'," broke in Ruggles.

"But not of the nature intimated by you."

"What else can it be?"

"It might be one of a dozen things; I know you are all wrong in your
guesses."

Every eye was fixed upon the parson, for all were anxious to learn at
what he was hinting. His face was unusually grave, but he stopped
speaking, as if he deemed it indiscreet to say anything more. He
noticed the looks and whetted the curiosity by adding:

"I have been so disturbed over the change in Dawson that I called on
him last night and had a talk with him."

"And what did you learn?" asked Budge Isham, the moment Brush showed
an inclination to stop talking.

"Well, it was hard work to draw him out, but finally he told me he had
received a letter from the East, which made him think he would have to
leave us. That isn't the worst."

All were breathless, afraid to give utterance to the dread that until
then was vague and indistinct in their minds.

"He thinks he must take his daughter Nellie with him."

"What! Take her away from us? That can never be allowed."

None felt the anguish of the announcement keener than the man who made
it, but he looked calmly into the angry faces and said:

"You forget, my friends, that she is his child and he has the moral
and legal right to do what he thinks is best for her."

"But where are _our_ rights?" demanded Wade Ruggles; "they mustn't be
forgot."

"We haven't any,--not a single one. But I am satisfied that one cause
of Dawson's distress of mind is the very question you have asked. He
can never cease to be deeply grateful to all of us for what we have
done for him and his child. He doesn't wish to take her away for it
will be as painful to her as to us. But friends," continued the
parson, with a sense of right that was creditable to him, "Dawson's
first duty is to his child. She is now twelve years old, quite a large
girl and is growing fast. She has never seen girl or woman since she
was brought here; she will soon be a young woman; she requires
association with others of her own sex; her welfare demands this; her
education and proper training can never be obtained in this mining
settlement."

"Eddycation!" exclaimed Vose Adams; "what have you been doing with her
all this time? She must be as far along in her studies and eddycation
as me and Ruggles."

"It is to be hoped so," replied the parson with a smile; "I doubt
whether she will meet any one of her age as proficient in book
learning as herself, but there remains music, etiquette, and above
all, the social customs and accomplishments which can be acquired
nowhere except in the abode of civilization. There is none upon whom
this blow will fall more heavily than myself, but I have no right to
interpose when a man is doing his duty."

An exploding bomb could not have caused more consternation than the
news brought by the parson. Every one felt the truth of his words and
respected him for their utterance, but it was like asking them to
consent to the blotting of the sun from the heavens.

"I see a way out of it," finally remarked Wade Ruggles with a
brightening face; "we can compermise."

"In what way?"

"Why, if Dawson feels that he and the gal must go, let him split the
difference atween us; he can go and leave her; that will satisfy
everybody."

"It will hardly satisfy him, since the whole question is that of
taking her with him. He must be left free to do whatever he chooses."

The parson looked into the gloomy faces turned toward him.

"Boys, you have all heard the news brought by the last papers. Fort
Sumter has been fired on; President Lincoln has called for volunteers;
the Southern Confederacy has been declared and civil war has begun. It
is the intention of Dawson to offer his services to the cause of the
Union."

"And I shall enlist too," declared Wade Ruggles, compressing his lips,
"but it will be on the other side."

"I'm with you," added Budge Isham; "I am from Alabama, and if she
secedes, as she is sure to do, I am ready to lay down my life in her
defence."

"Sorry, pards, but that shoves me into the Union army," remarked Al
Bidwell, puffing quietly at his pipe; "we must keep the balance right,
but we'll part friends here and we'll be friends till we shoulder our
muskets. Then we'll do all we can to kill each other."

Further discussion disclosed that the citizens of New Constantinople
were about equally divided in their allegiance, but all of them were
not yet ready to take up arms in support of the cause with which they
sympathized. There were eight who announced their intention of making
their way to San Francisco, there to find the most available route to
the points necessary to reach. It was typical of that stupendous
struggle, the greatest of modern times, that four of these recruits
were ardent supporters of one cause and four equally eager to risk
their lives for the other. They were the warmest of friends and had
been for years, willing to face any danger for the sake of the
remainder. It would be the same until they parted, and then, as one of
them had already expressed it, they would devote every energy to
trying to kill one another.

None of the volunteers faltered until Maurice Dawson decided to leave
his daughter at the settlement until his return, if so be he should be
permitted to return. He knew of no better or safer place for her, nor
of any friends to whose care he would more cheerfully commit her, in
case it should be his lot to fall on the field of battle.

It had been Parson Brush's intention to be Dawson's comrade in his
perils, but when the father begged him to stay behind to look after
his child he consented. And so the programme, so fraught with
momentous consequences, was arranged.




CHAPTER X

THE BLUE AND THE GRAY


The four years of stupendous war came to an end. The sun of the
Southern Confederacy went down in gloom and defeat behind the hills of
Appomattox, never to rise again, and blessed peace brooded over a
reunited nation, which shall endure through the coming ages to the end
of time.

It was only the faint echoes of the mighty struggle that, faintly
reverberating across prairie and mountain, reached the little mining
settlement nestling among the solitudes of the Sierras. Vose Adams
made more frequent journeys to Sacramento, in order to gather news of
the terrific events, which were making history at an appalling rate.
Upon his return, the miners gathered round Parson Brush, or some other
one with a good voice, who stood up, with every eye centred on him and
every ear keyed to the highest point and they listened with breathless
interest until the thrilling story was read through to the end.

The same diversity of sentiment that appeared at first continued to
the last, but the parson's earnest words and his insistence that no
quarrels should take place among the neighbors prevented any
outbreak, though more than once the point was perilously near.

"If your sympathies are with the Union or with the South," he said
impressively, "there is nothing to prevent your taking up arms, but it
must be on the battle field and not here."

And this wise counsel prevailed. Now and then some ardent partisan
shouldered his rifle, bade his friends a hasty good-by and hurried
away. One by one, they went until the new recruits numbered five. Thus
the population of New Constantinople dwindled to about one-half, and
retaining its exclusive tastes, permitted no new comers to join them,
so that the boom which in its early days was so confidently looked for
sank to zero and vanished. In truth it looked as if New Constantinople
was doomed to die of dry rot.

Strange news came now and then from the men who had gone to the war.
Maurice Dawson wrote often to his daughter Nellie, whose letters, it
can well be understood were the bright spots in his life of adventure
and danger. She had improved wonderfully under the careful tuition of
Parson Brush, who, gaining experience, as he saw the brightness of her
mind, found his work of the most pleasant nature conceivable. She
displayed a thirst for knowledge and made advances which astonished
him. The books needed for her instruction were procured by Vose Adams
in Sacramento, and she valued such presents more than anything else.
The teacher declared many a time, with a certain pride, that she put
him upon his mettle to make clear the abstruse problems with which he
wrestled when in college.

"How she will surprise the boys and her father when they come back,"
reflected the parson; "it won't take her much longer to reach the
point beyond which I cannot lead her."

To her friends who remained, the growth and improvement of the girl
were astonishing. Probably no one of her sex ever gave nature itself a
better chance to show what she can do with a healthy frame, when
untrammeled by the fashions and requirements of modern usages. Her
lithe, comely figure was perfect. She never knew an hour's illness.
The cheeks had the rose tint of health, the eyes were clear, the teeth
perfect and her spirits buoyant. As one of the men expressed it, she
was like a burst of sunshine in the settlement.

But Parson Brush was thoughtful. He saw that she was crossing the line
into young womanhood, and that her own interests demanded that she
should go out into the world of which he had told her so much; that
she should meet those of her own sex and learn the mysteries of her
own being. The affection of her friends could not make up for this
lack. It cost the honest fellow many a pang when he thought of this,
but his consolation lay in the inevitable conclusion that nothing
could be done until the return of her parent or until his wishes were
made known.

"If it so happens that he shall fall in battle, then a grave problem
must be met. It will not do for her to remain here; I will talk it
over with the others and we shall make some arrangement for her good,"
and with this conclusion he was content to await the issue of events.

Occasionally the parson received a letter from the father. The
missives were models in their way, telling of his experiences in the
service of the battles, of the prospect of victory and his faith in
the final triumph of the great struggle. He thanked the teacher for
his interest in his child and assured him that his kindness would
never be forgotten by father or daughter.

Vose Adams continued his frequent journeys to Sacramento, for those
were stirring times and he was as anxious as his friends for news.
Always on his return he was met by Nellie some distance down the
winding trail, and, as soon as she was in sight, he held up the plump
letter for which she yearned, and over which she was made happy beyond
expression, and he never failed to carry back with him the reply of
the child, who knew how much it cheered the brave soldier in the
distant East and South fighting the battles of his country.

For two years and more there was not a break in this correspondence.
Dawson must have been a good soldier, for, though he enlisted as a
private, he was soon promoted, and before the close of the two years,
was a full fledged captain, with the brevet of major. It was about
this time that one of his letters gave the story of Gettysburg. In the
hell-blast of Pickett's charge two of his old friends, who had left
New Constantinople to fight for the South, were riddled, and another,
marching at the captain's side, had his head blown off by an exploding
shell. Thus in one engagement three of the old residents of the mining
settlement were wiped out.

Only once or twice was any news received of Al Bidwell. It was known
that Ruggles was with the Army of Northern Virginia, but no tidings
came of Budge Isham and Ike Hoe. The continued silence was accepted as
almost certain proof of their death, and yet both were well and
unharmed.

One day in early summer, two sunburned, shaggy men rode down the
mountain side and drew up their horses in front of the Heavenly Bower.
They had ridden from the East and had come through many hardships and
dangers. One of them wore a partial uniform of blue, while the other
was of a faded, butternut tinge. The two had been engaged for years in
trying to slay each other, inclusive of their respective friends, but
failing in the effort, gave it up when the final surrender took place
at Appomattox. Both were from New Constantinople, and they now turned
their faces in that direction. Starting from widely separated points
their lines of travel converged and finally joined. When they met,
there was a moment of mutual sharp scrutiny, then an exclamation of
delight, a fervent handclasp and a moistening of the eyes, as both
exclaimed:

"God bless you, old boy! There's no one in the world I would rather
meet than you! Shake again!"

And they did, and henceforward they followed the same trail and "drank
from the same canteen." They shared their rations with each other, and
in the regions of the West, where danger lurked in the air, one
watched while the other slept, ready to interpose his body as a shield
between peril and his comrade.

And what splendid soldiers the Civil War made! How those veterans
could fight! What pluck, what coolness, what nerve, what daring they
displayed! There was one stormy night beyond the Mississippi, when a
band of jayhawkers, believing the two men carried a few hundred
dollars, formed a plan for shooting both for the sake of the plunder.
There were six of the outlaws at the opening of proceedings, but at
the close just half the number was left, and one of them carried away
a wound with him, from which he could never recover, while the
defenders did not receive a scratch.

"When I heard that rebel yell of yours," remarked the veteran who wore
the blue, "it tingled through my veins as it did at Chancellorsville,
Antietam and various other scenes of unpleasantness. I couldn't help
sailing in."

"I didn't mean to let out the yawp," returned his companion, "but when
the shooting began, it was so like old times I couldn't help it. It
was real enjoyable."

"Yes," was the dry response, "but rather more so for us than for the
other fellows."

Three days later a band of Indians concluded to try their hand upon
the veterans, but the trouble was that the red men could not get a
fair chance. Before they arrived within effective striking distance,
the veterans began shooting, and whenever they shot somebody fell. The
thing became so monotonous that the hostiles gave it up in disgust and
drew off. Thenceforward the old soldiers had comparatively an easy
time of it.

And so, after a ride of more than two thousand miles on horseback,
these two men entered Dead Man's Gulch and drew rein in front of the
Heavenly Bower. Their coming caused a sensation, for their looks
showed they were veterans of the war and were certain to bring
important news. The couple smiled and whispered to each other, for
they saw that no one suspected their identity.

Among the wondering group that gathered round was Nellie Dawson. She
was profoundly interested, for Vose Adams had made two journeys to and
from Sacramento without bringing a letter from her father. Doubtless
these men could tell her something, and she stood on the edge of the
group, waiting for them to speak and for the opportunity to question
them.

"Do you see her?" whispered one of the men.

"Yes; gracious! hasn't she grown? Why, she was a little girl when we
left and now she's a young woman."

"Blessed if she isn't! She wears such long dresses that you can see
only the tiny toes of her shoes; we've obsarved a good many purty
women since we left these parts, but nothing that could come up to
her."

"You can bet your life! She hasn't any idee of who we are, nor
have the boys, but it looks to me as if the parson is a little
suspicious."

Although the patronage of the Heavenly Bower had shrunk a good deal,
Landlord Ortigies was as genial and hospitable as ever. The new
arrivals had time only for a few secret comments, when he came
forward:

"Strangers, you're welcome to the best we have, which isn't anything
to boast of; look as if you had rid a good many miles and you must be
as tired and thirsty as your animals. If you'll turn 'em over to Vose
Adams, he'll 'tend to them, and, if you'll allow me, you shall have a
good meal, which before the same, I beg to tender you some distilled
home brewed Mountain Dew."

Thanking the landlord for his offer, the men dismounted and waited
outside, while he brought forth two glasses, half-filled with the
fiery stuff of the poetical name. One of the men took his and eagerly
swallowed it. The other held his aloft, where under the bright
sunlight it glowed crimson like blood. With his hand motionless for a
moment, he slowly inverted the glass and allowed the liquid to run out
on the ground.

"Max, I reckon you haven't forgot when I done something like that some
four years ago," said the man, turning toward the astonished host.




CHAPTER XI

WAITING


"Wade Ruggles, as I'm alive!" exclaimed the delighted landlord,
rushing forward and grasping his hand. Instantly the group closed in,
and there was such laughing and handshaking that for a time nothing
was clearly distinguished.

"I was suspicious," remarked the parson; "but, though you both had
beards when you went away, these have grown so much that they have
greatly altered your appearance."

He scanned the other man closely, but before the parson had identified
him, several others had done so.

"It's Al Bidwell!"

"Yes," replied the laughing Ruggles; "that's the fellow, but I'm sorry
to say that since they made a major-general of him, he's become a
reg'lar dude. He doesn't go out when it rains for fear of soiling his
uniform, and the noise of powder makes him sick, so be careful how you
handle the delicate fellow."

"Well, you do not need to be told," was the hearty response of the
parson, "that no one could be more welcome than you; let's shake hands
all around again."

It was some minutes before the flurry was over, for the delight on
both sides was unbounded and the joy of the reunion great.

One member of the group lingered in the background. Her face was
flushed with delighted expectancy, but with a coyness unknown in her
earlier years, she hesitated on the outer edge of the circle. She
could not mingle with the rush and waited until the flurry was over.
The men were scarcely less embarrassed than she, and while not
appearing to see her, both were watching her every movement. When the
time came that the meeting could no longer be delayed, Ruggles walked
to her and extended his hand.

"Well, Nellie, aren't you glad to see me?"

The crinkling of the whiskers at the side of the invisible mouth
showed that he was laughing, and indeed his white teeth gleamed
through his wealth of beard. Nellie promptly advanced and met him half
way.

"Mr. Ruggles, I can't tell you how glad I am to meet you again."

He had been asking himself whether it would do to kiss this vision of
loveliness. He wished to do so, but was afraid. However, the question
was settled by the girl, who, instead of taking the hand, flung her
arms about his neck and saluted him fervently, that is as well as she
could under the conditions.

Al Bidwell came forward and was received in the same manner. Then, as
the two men stepped back and looked admiringly at her, she said:

"I can see you are the same and yet those beards make you look
different; I love to think of you as you were when you bade us good-by
and rode off four years ago."

"We shall be glad to fix up our faces in the old style," said Ruggles,
while his companion nodded assent. If she had asked them to cut off
their heads they would have unhesitatingly agreed to do it.

"No doubt we've changed somewhat," said Bidwell, "but not one half so
much as you."

"As I!" she repeated in astonishment; "why, I am just the same," and
she looked down at her dress, as if seeking the explanation of his
remark; "I haven't changed a bit."

"Not in goodness and all that sort of thing, but we left a little girl
and now I'm blessed if we don't find a young woman, and yet it's the
same little girl after all."

The maidenly blush darkened her face and she laughed.

"You couldn't expect me to stand still all these years."

"No; though we would have been glad if you had done so."

The three were standing apart, the others with commendable delicacy
leaving them to themselves. Nellie laid her arm on the sleeve of
Ruggles, and looking up yearningly in his face she asked:

"Can you give me any news of father?"

"Being as him and me was on different sides, I haven't seen or heard a
thing of him since we parted in San Francisco, but I hope all has gone
well with him."

She turned to Bidwell, who said:

"Me and him was thrown together once or twice and I met him after
Gettysburg, where neither of us got a scratch, which is more than tens
of thousands of others can say. Then I seen him in front of
Petersburg, where we had the same good luck agin, but in the fighting
round there we lost track of each other. Are you worried about him,
little gal?"

"Very much," she mournfully replied; "never once did Vose Adams come
back from Sacramento without one or two letters from him, but he has
now done so twice, and I haven't heard a word. I fear father is dead;
if he is, my heart is broken and I shall die too."

What could they say to cheer her, for Vose Adams made still another
journey westward with the same dismal emptiness of the mail bag, so
far as she was concerned. Every one did his utmost to cheer her, but
none succeeded. The ground taken was that the parent had set out on
his return, but had been hindered by some cause which would be
explained when he finally arrived. When not one of the men himself
believed the story, how could he hope to make the mourning daughter
believe it?

Felix Brush took a different stand from the others. He early settled
into the belief that Captain Dawson was dead, and that it was wrong to
encourage hope on the part of the child when the disappointment must
be more bitter in the end.

"If you are never to see him again in this world," he said, at the
close of a sultry afternoon, as the two were seated on a rocky ledge
near the cabin in which she had made her home all alone during her
parent's long absence, "what a blessed memory he leaves behind him!
Died on the field of battle, or in camp or hospital, in the service of
his country,--what more glorious epitaph can patriot desire?"

"If he is dead then I shall die; I shall pray that I may do so, so
that I shall soon see him again."

"My dear child, you must show some of the courage of your parent and
prove that you are a soldier's daughter. Your blow is a severe one,
but it has fallen upon thousands of others, and they have bravely met
it. You are young; you have seen nothing of the great world around
you--"

"I do not care to see anything of it," she interrupted with a sigh.

"You will feel different when you have recovered from the blow. It is
an amazing world, my dear. The cities and towns; the great ocean; the
works of art; the ships and steamboats; the vast structures; the
railways; the multitudes of people; the lands beyond the seas, with
still more marvelous scenes,--all these will expand like fairy land
before you and make you wonder that you ever should have wished to
leave such a realm of beauty and miracles while in your youth."

Nellie sat for some time in silence, and then rose to her feet with a
weary sigh. Without speaking, she turned to walk away, but not in the
direction of her own home.

"Where are you going?" he asked.

"To look for him," was her sorrowful reply.

It was what he suspected and feared. He knew she had done the same
thing night after night for weeks past, even when the rains fell and
the chilling blasts made her shiver with discomfort. He could not
interpose, and with the reflection that perhaps it was as well, he
turned mournfully aside and walked slowly toward the cabins.

Meanwhile, Nellie Dawson passed beyond the limits of the settlement
until all the houses were behind her. She did not sit down, but
folding her arms, after gathering her shawl about her, bent her gaze
upon the trail, which wound in and out at the bottom of the canyon
below, for a fourth of a mile, when a mass of projecting rocks hid it
from sight.

Night was closing in. Already the grim walls, thousands of feet in
height, were wrapped in gloom, and few eyes beside hers could have
traced the devious mule path for more than a hundred yards from where
she stood. The clear sky was studded with stars, but the moon had not
yet climbed from behind the towering peaks, which would shut out its
light until near the zenith.

The soft murmur of the distant waterfall, the sound of voices behind
her, the faint, hollow roar, which always is present in a vast
solitude, filled the great space around her and made the stillness
grander and more impressive.

All this had been in her ears many a time before, and little heed did
she give to it now. Her musings were with that loved one, who had been
silent for so many weeks, and for whose coming she longed with an
unspeakable longing. She knew the course of the trail so well, though
she had never been far over it, that she was aware at what point he
must first appear, if he ever appeared, and upon that point she
centered her attention.

"Something tells me that when father comes it will be in the night
time," she said; "I know he has tried hard to reach me, and what
could it be that held him back? I will not believe he is dead
until--"

Her heart gave a quicker throb, for surely that was a faint sound in
the path, though too far off for her to perceive the cause. She could
not tell its precise nature, but fancied it was the footfall of some
animal. She took several quick steps forward on tiptoe, with head
extended, peering and listening, with all her senses at the highest
tension.

Hark! she heard it again. Surely it was the noise of hoofs, for it was
repeated and the sounds ran into each other as if the animal were
trotting or galloping, or mayhap there was more than one of them.

Yes; some one was drawing nigh on the back of horse or mule. There was
no mistaking the hoof beats, and in the gloom the figure of an animal
and his rider assumed vague form, growing more distinct each moment.
Nellie broke into a run, her arms outstretched and her hair flying.

"Father! father! I know it is you! It is I--Nellie, your own Nellie,
who has waited so long for you! You have come at last!"




CHAPTER XII

HOME AGAIN


The horseman coming up the trail had assumed definite form. Checking
his animal he sat transfixed until the flying girl was beside him.
Then he bent forward and in a choking voice, answered:

"Yes, Nellie, it is your father! God be thanked for permitting me to
come to you again. And you are Nellie! But how grown!"

Captain Dawson leaned over the side of his horse and, passing his
strong arm around the waist of his daughter, lifted her up in front of
him. Then he pressed his lips to hers, and half-laughing and
half-crying asked:

"Who's the happier, you or I?"

"You can't be any happier than I; but, father," she added in
amazement, "where is your other arm?"

"Buried in Southern Virginia as a memento of my work for the Union,
but, my dear child, _I_ am here; isn't _that_ enough?"

"Yes, bless your heart!" she exclaimed, nestling up to him; "it all
seems like a dream, but it _isn't_, for I can feel you. I am so
sorry," she added, noticing the sleeve pinned to his breast; "how you
must have suffered."

"Nonsense! it isn't anything to lose an arm; it's not half so bad as
having your head blown off or both legs carried away. After going
nearly through the war without a scratch, I caught it just before
Appomattox, but thousands were less fortunate and I am thankful."

"But why did you not write to me and tell me all this? Mr. Brush was
sure you were dead, and I know the rest thought so, too, though they
didn't talk that way."

"I did have a close call; I got the fever while in the hospital and
didn't know so much as my own name for several weeks. Then, when well
enough to write, I concluded to come myself, believing I could keep up
with any letter and you would be gladder to see me than to receive
anything I might send."

While these words were passing the steed remained motionless, but
Nellie had observed from the first that her parent had a companion.

"Father," she whispered, "you have some one with you."

"Yes, my child, I had forgotten it in my delight at meeting you."

A horseman was sitting as motionless as a statue in the trail behind
them, the form of himself and animal clearly outlined in the
obscurity. He had not spoken nor stirred since the coming of the girl.
The head of the steed was high, but beyond and above it loomed the
head and shoulders of the man sitting upright, like an officer of
dragoons. The gloom prevented a fair view of his countenance, but
Nellie fancied he was of pleasing appearance and wore a mustache.

Captain Dawson turned his head and looked over his shoulder, as if to
locate the man.

"That is Lieutenant Russell; he served under me during the latter
part of the war; he is my friend, Nellie, for he saved my life.
Lieutenant," added the captain, elevating his voice, "this is my
daughter Nellie of whom you heard me speak so often."

The young officer lifted his cap, the graceful gesture being plainly
seen and replied with a pleasant laugh.

"Miss Dawson, I am glad to become acquainted with you and hope I shall
soon be favored with a better view."

"And I hope to see more of the one that was the means of saving my
dear father," she was quick to reply.

"Well, I guess that was equal on both sides, for I should never have
reached this place but for him."

"Father, what is _that_?" abruptly asked Nellie, shrinking closer to
him; "have you a bear following you?"

That which caused the startled question was a huge animal, which came
slowly forward from the gloom in which he had been enveloped. The
horses showed no fear of him, and he sniffed at the skirts of the
girl.

"Don't be alarmed," replied her father; "you may consider him a lion
or tiger or both combined. He is Lieutenant Russell's dog Timon, one
of the biggest, fiercest, but most intelligent and affectionate of his
kind. We three are comrades, so you must accept him, too, as your
friend."

The two now gave rein to their horses and within briefer time than
would be supposed, every man in New Constantinople knew of the arrival
of the couple and had given them right royal welcome. It was the most
joyous incident in the history of the little mining settlement. Every
one knew of the corroding grief of Nellie Dawson, and there was not a
heart that did not go out in sympathy to her. All were gathered around
and within the crowded quarters of the Heavenly Bower, where the two
men and Nellie ate their happy evening meal. Then the pipes were
lighted, and with the girl perched upon her father's knee, the rest
listened to his story, which he summarized, leaving the particulars
for a more convenient occasion.

"I am sorry my long silence caused misgiving," said he looking round
in the faces of his friends, "but it could not be very well helped.
You have noticed that whereas I left New Constantinople with two arms,
I am now one short. As I told Nellie, that happened in the very last
days of the war. It was quite a loss, but you have little idea of how
soon a man can become accustomed to it. The fact is," added the
soldier, with a grim smile, "things are moving so well with me that I
wouldn't give much to have the old limb back again. I have no doubt
General Howard feels the same way."

"The pruned oak is the strongest," observed Parson Brush.

"Provided it isn't pruned too much. With my wound came an attack of
fever, which brought me nearer death than I ever was in battle, but I
came out of it all and here we are."

"What route did you take, captain?" asked Wade Ruggles.

"By steamer to the Isthmus, then up the coast to San Francisco.
There the lieutenant and I joined a party to Sacramento and each
bought a good strong horse. He had brought his dog Timon all the
way from Virginia, where he was given to him by an old friend who wore
the gray. We were hopeful of meeting Vose Adams in Sacramento, but
he had not been there for weeks. Instead of him, whom should we come
across but Ike Hoe, who was also getting ready to start for this
place. We three set out nearly ten days ago, but Ike is still in the
mountains."

This was said with so grave a face that all knew what it meant.

"I never heard of the Indians being so troublesome. For three days and
nights it was little else than fighting. In the darkness we would
steal off and hunt for some new way through the mountains, but it
mattered not where we went, for we were sure to run against some of
them."

"How was it that Hoe met his death?" asked the parson.

"It was on the third night. We hadn't seen a thing of the Indians
since the noon halt and were hopeful they had given up the hunt for
us. We hadn't eaten a mouthful for twenty-four hours and were hungry
enough to chew our boots. Ike found a place among the rocks, where a
camp fire couldn't be seen for more than a few rods and started a
blaze. The lieutenant had brought down an antelope, and if we could
get a chance to cook the steak, we were sure of the right kind of a
meal. Well, we broiled enough to give each all he wanted. Ike leaned
back with a pleasant smile on his face and remarked that it was worth
all the risk to get such a feast, when I caught the flicker of
something like the dart of a small bird between him and me. Before I
could make out what it was, Ike gave a groan, and rolling over
backward, never spoke or stirred. I saw the feathered end of an arrow
sticking up above his breast. The head had gone clean through him and
it must have split his heart in two."

"But was neither you or the lieutenant harmed?"

"That is the remarkable part of it. The lieutenant saw the arrow
before I did and warned me. We darted back in the darkness with our
guns ready, but saw and heard nothing more of the Indians. What was
remarkable about it was that only the single arrow should have been
launched at Ike."

"It looks as if there was but the single Injin," suggested Bidwell.

"That is the way we interpreted it."

"And that was the end of your troubles with the Indians?"

"Not quite, but they bothered us only once more and then they managed
to get us into a corner, where it would have been the last of me had
it not been for the lieutenant and Timon. I tell you----"

The captain stopped short and smiled. He had seen the protesting
expression on the face of the young officer, and said:

"We'll keep that story till some time when he isn't present. But there
is another fact which I observed. There are more white men in the
mountains than ever before and the numbers will increase. The close of
the war has released nearly a million soldiers, who must make a living
somehow. Some will come westward. You have preserved this place as an
exclusive residence for yourselves, but you won't be able to do it
much longer."

All saw the truth of these words, and knew trouble would inevitably
follow the mingling of uncongenial spirits, but they concluded it
would be time enough to meet it when it came, without allowing the
fear to disturb the pleasure of the present communion. Lieutenant Fred
Russell could not fail to be an individual of keen interest to those
who had never before seen him. While the captain was talking, he sat
modestly in the background, smoking his brierwood, listening as
intently as if everything said was new to him. It was noticed that
like several of the rest, he did not drink at the bar, though he
received numerous invitations. Truth to tell, he had been quite a
drinker, but during that eventful journey through the mountains, when
Captain Dawson was talking of his daughter, as he loved to do, he
named those who had reformed as the result of Nellie's influence. The
young officer made no comment, but it struck him that if those rough,
hardy men could abstain, it ought not to be difficult for him to do
the same, and he did it.

Few men were more prepossessing than the lieutenant. He was educated,
about twenty-four years of age, and undeniably handsome. His campaigns
of exposure, hardship and fighting had hardened his frame into the
mould of the trained athlete. The faded uniform which he still wore
became him well. The ruddy cheeks had grown swarthy and browned, but
when he removed his cap, the upper part of his forehead showed as
white and fair as that of a woman.

His nose was slightly aquiline, just enough to give character to his
countenance, the hair which was rather scant, was dark like the
mustache and the small tuft on his chin. He wore fine, high cavalry
boots, reaching above the knees, a sword and like the captain was
armed with revolver and Winchester rifle.

Crouched at his feet was his massive dog Timon, an object of as much
interest as his master; for, curious as it may seem, he was the only
canine ever owned in New Constantinople. He was of mixed breed, huge,
powerful and swift, seeming to combine the sagacity and intelligence
of the Newfoundland, the courage of the bull dog, the persistency of
the bloodhound and the best qualities of all of them. Seeming to
understand that he was among friends, he rested his nose between his
paws and lay as if asleep, but those who gazed admiringly at him,
noted that at intervals he opened one of his eyes as if to say:

"Strangers, I guess it is all right, but I'm taking no chances."

Coming with the credentials that no one else ever bore, Lieutenant
Fred Russell was sure of a warm reception at New Constantinople. The
depletion of the population had left more than one cabin vacant and
the best of these was turned over to him. In it he found cooking
utensils, rough but serviceable bedding and accommodations and much
better comforts than he was accustomed to during his campaigning.
Having no immediate relatives, he had followed the discreet course of
Captain Dawson, who deposited nearly all of his accumulated pay in a
savings institution in the East, reserving only enough to insure their
arrival on the Pacific coast.

Russell, like so many turned from consumers into producers by the end
of hostilities, was obliged to decide upon the means of earning a
livelihood. He had begun the study of law, at the time he answered the
call for volunteers, and would have had no difficulty in taking it up
again; but, somehow or other, he did not feel drawn thitherward. He
disliked the confinements of office work and the sedentary profession
itself. He wanted something more stirring, and active, and calling for
out door life. It was when he was in this mood, that Captain Dawson
urged him to accompany him to the gold diggings in the Sierras.

"So far as I can learn," explained the captain, "the mines haven't
panned out to any great extent, but there is no doubt that there are
millions of dollars in gold in the mountains, and if it isn't at New
Constantinople, it is not far off."

"I shall accept your invitation," replied the junior officer, "with
the understanding that if the prospect is not satisfactory, I shall
feel at liberty to go somewhere else."

"That's the constitutional right of every American citizen."

"I am not as far along in years as you, but I am old enough to feel
that no person ought to fritter away the most valuable years of his
life."

And thus it was that the lieutenant went to New Constantinople and
received the heartiest welcome from every one there. And yet among
these citizens were two that had lately become partners and sharers of
the same cabin, and who were oppressed with misgiving.

"I tell you," said the parson late at night, when he and Wade Ruggles
were smoking in their home, with no one near enough to overhear them;
"Captain Dawson has made the mistake of his life."

"How?"

"In bringing Lieutenant Russell to New Constantinople."

"I don't quite foller your meaning, parson."

"Yes, you do; you understand it as well as myself."

"I have a suspicion of it, but are you afraid to trust me?"

"You ought to know better than to ask that."

"Go ahead then and give me the partic'lars."

"In the first place then, the lieutenant is young and good looking."

"Unfortinitly there can't be any doubt of that."

"Nellie Dawson has never seen a handsome young man----"

"Exceptin' you and me, and we ain't as young as we once was."

"She is now a young woman and ready to fall in love, and just at the
right hour, or rather the very worst hour, the captain brings the man
here."

"You have spoke the exact thoughts I had in mind all along; you're
right, parson."

He would have been better pleased had Ruggles contradicted him. He did
not wish to believe that which he could not help believing.

"We must treat him well because the captain brings him and he has
saved the captain's life, but, Wade, _we must watch them both
close_."

"I agree with you agin, but what shall we do if we find him making
love to the little gal?"

The parson's fierce reply showed how deeply his feelings were
stirred.

"Warn him just once!"

"I feel as bad about it as you do, but, parson, I haven't forgot that
afore the war broke out, and we was afeard the captain meant to take
the gal away to have her eddycated, you told us it was none of our
bus'ness and he had the right to do as he thought best with his own
child."

"All that was true at the time, but the conditions have changed."

"_Now_ I can't foller you. 'Spose the captain is agreeable?"

"He _won't_ be!" exclaimed Brush, who in the depth of his excitement
added an exclamation which sounded perilously like profanity. But for
the parson's intense earnestness, Ruggles would have quizzed him, but
he pitied the man and at the same time was distressed himself.

"I hope you're right, but I doubt it. We've all felt for a good while
that sooner or later, we must lose the little one. Now that she's
growed up, the captain may feel more than ever that she must be took
off to some town where all the men ain't savages, and she can see some
of her own kind."

"If he puts it that way, we shall have to submit. He can take her
where he wills, for my position is the same as four or five years ago,
but nobody else must take her from among us."

Ruggles's mood was now quite similar to that of his partner.

"If I see anything wrong in the doings of that pretty faced young
officer, I'll shoot him down like a mad dog."

"So will I."

The two were in the ugliest temper conceivable. They continued to
smoke, but their meditations were tumultuous and revengeful. Each
breast contained a strange disturbing secret that either would have
died before confessing, but nevertheless, it was there and had taken
ineradicable root within the past days and weeks.

Felix Brush, as the reader knows, had been the instructor of Nellie
Dawson from infancy. He was the medium through which she had gained an
excellent book education. He had held many long confidential talks
with her. She, in her trusting innocence, had told him more of her
inmost thoughts, her self communings, her dim, vague aspirations, than
she imparted to anyone else.

And he could not but notice her wonderful budding beauty. Surely, he
thought, such a winsome creature was never born. He had begun to ask
himself in a whispered, startled way: "Why may I not possess this
mountain flower? True, I am much her senior, but I will nourish,
protect and defend her against the world, as no younger man could or
would. She believes in my goodness, far more than I deserve. I will
cultivate the affection within her of whose nature she has as yet no
comprehension. By and by, when she is a few years older, perhaps I may
claim her. More extraordinary things have happened and are happening
every day. I have but to keep her uncontaminated from the world, of
which I have told her so much, so that when she goes forth, she shall
be under my guardianship--the most sacred guardianship of all for it
shall be that of husband."

"Aye," he added, his heart throbbing with the new, strange hope, "all
this, please heaven, shall come to pass if things go on as they are,
and no younger man with better looks crosses my path."

And now that younger and better looking man had crossed his path.

The knowledge seemed to rouse all the dormant resentment of his
nature, and to undo the good that the girl herself had done in the
years that were gone. He felt that if he lost her, if his cherished
dream was to be rudely dissipated, he would go to perdition.

And somewhat similar in range and nature were the communings of Wade
Ruggles, who until this eventful evening, had cherished a hope, so
wild, so ecstatic, so strange and so soul-absorbing that he hardly
dared to admit it to himself. At times, he shrank back, terrified at
his presumption, as does the man who has striven to seize and hold
that which is unattainable and which it would be sacrilege for him to
lay hands upon.

"I'm three months younger than the parson," he would reflect when the
more hopeful mood was upon him; "neither of us is in danger of being
hung for our good looks, but I've got the bulge on him dead sure. I
had too much in the way of whiskers to suit the little one, when I
came back from the war; she wanted to see me as I was when I left;
_why was that_?"

After pausing for a reply, he continued:

"So accordin' I trimmed 'em off and she says I'm better looking than
ever, and what she says in Dead Man's Gulch and New Constantinople,
goes. She meant it, too, as I could see by the sparkle of her eyes.

"I went all through the war without swallerin' a mouthful of strong
drink, even when the doctor ordered it. I've contrived, sort of
accerdental and off hand like, to let her know them circumstances and
I've seen it pleased her immense. I've been layin' out some of my
money for clothes, too, since I got back. Vose bought me a coat in
Sacramento, blue with brass buttons. I've had a necktie that has been
laid away till the proper time comes to put it on. There are three or
four yards of silk in it and it will knock a rainbow out of sight. I
didn't want to overwhelm her too sudden like, and have been layin'
back for the right occasion.

"It's arriv! I must knock that leftenant out, and that necktie will do
it! I'm mighty glad the parson hain't got any foolish dreams 'bout
the gal. The leftenant is the only galoot I've got to look out for, or
rather," added the miner grimly, "I'm the one he's got to beware of.
I'm in dead earnest this time."




CHAPTER XIII

YOUNG LOVE'S DREAM


That which in the nature of things was inevitable came to pass.
Lieutenant Russell, in the same moment that his eyes rested upon
Nellie Dawson, was smitten, as hopelessly as ever ardent lover was
smitten by the lady whom he worshiped. The many things which the
father had told him about his daughter naturally excited interest in
her, but the young officer never dreamed of looking upon such
marvelous beauty as that which met his gaze in that secluded canyon of
the Sierras. It required all his self-control from drawing attention
to himself by his admiration of her.

"I never saw such a perfect combination of face, feature and figure,"
he reflected when alone. "It is an illustration of what nature can do
when left to herself. Then, too, she has a fund of knowledge that is
amazing, when all the circumstances are considered. I haven't had much
chance to converse with her, but I heard enough to know that she would
shine by virtue of her mind among the most accomplished of her
sisters, who have had every advantage that civilization can give. She
is a flower nourished on a mountain crag, exhaling all its fragrance,
untainted by a poisonous breath from the outer world. Who would have
dared to say that amid this rough, uncouth people, such loveliness
could take root and nourish? And yet it is that loveliness which has
permeated and regenerated the miners themselves. But for her these
nights would be spent in drinking, roistering, fighting and carousing.
It is her blessed influence, which unconsciously to herself has
purified the springs of life. Like the little leaven she has leavened
the whole lump."

The passing days increased his interest in her, until very soon he
confessed to himself that he was deeply in love with Nellie Dawson.
She had become dearer to him than his own life. He could not live
without the hope of gaining and possessing her. He would remain in New
Constantinople and starve, even though a Golconda was discovered a few
miles away. He would linger, hopeful, buoyant and believing that the
dream of his existence was to be crowned with perfect fruition.

But the sagacious lieutenant had learned to be observant and to note
the most trifling things that escape the eyes of the majority of
persons. Thus it was that the secret which Wade Ruggles and Parson
Brush believed was hidden, each from everyone except himself, became
as clear as noonday to him. He pitied them and yet he extracted a grim
amusement from the fact.

"They are hopelessly infatuated with her; they are excessively jealous
and would rather shoot me than have me win. They are more than double
her age, and yet they can see no incongruity in hoping to win her.
They will hope on until the awakening comes. Then they will be my
deadliest enemies. I shouldn't be surprised if I receive a call and
warning from them, but neither they nor the whole world shall turn me
from the prize which is more than all the gold, mined or unmined, in
the Sierras."

No one could have been more circumspect than the young man. He treated
Nellie Dawson with the chivalrous respect of a Crusader of the olden
time. He was always deferential, and, though he managed frequently to
meet and chat with her, yet it invariably had the appearance of being
accidental. Fortunately his feeling of comradeship for Captain Dawson
gave him a legitimate pretext for spending many evenings in his cabin,
where it was inevitable that he should be thrown into the society of
the daughter.

Wade Ruggles and the parson noted all this with growing resentment.
When it had continued for several weeks, the two friends had a
conference over the situation.

"I tell you, parson, it won't do to wait any longer," observed
Ruggles, puffing away at his pipe; "things is getting dangerous."

"Do you think so?" asked his companion, who held precisely the same
opinion, but disliked to admit it.

"There isn't a particle of doubt of it."

"Let me see,--we agreed to give him warning didn't we?--just once."

"Yes,--it's only fair that you should let a man know afore you hit
him, so he can brace himself for the shock, as it were."

"Well, if we are going to do it, there is no use of waiting."

"No use! It'll git worse every day. Let's go over to his place now."

"It isn't likely we'll find him there; he spends nearly every evening
in the cabin of Captain Dawson."

Neither fancied the task, and, had not their feelings been so wrought
up, they never could have been induced to undertake it, but because of
their misgivings, nothing could have dissuaded them from their
purpose.

"When he comes to think soberly of it," added Ruggles, "he'll thank us
for giving him warning in time. If we wait much longer, it might be
too late; we couldn't scare him off the track, but now he'll show his
sense by stopping at once."

The two passed out of the house and walked to the cabin of Lieutenant
Russell. Relieved, and yet in a certain sense dismayed, they found the
young officer at home engaged in reading. The instant he saw and
admitted them, he knew the errand on which they had come. Except for
the grave question involved, that which followed would have been a
delicious comedy. The lieutenant could not have treated a brother with
greater cordiality and never did host shine more brilliantly. He fell
to talking of war times, drew out Ruggles, interested the parson and
gave some of his own stirring experiences. They remained two hours and
went away charmed, without having once referred to Nellie Dawson. They
voted the young man a good fellow, concluded they were mistaken about
his admiring the young lady, and thought it lucky they had not made
fools of themselves.

When they were clear of the house, Lieutenant Russell laughed
heartily.

"Their faces gave them away; they were loaded and primed, but I drew
their charges; to-night they will vote me one of the best fellows that
ever lived; to-morrow they will begin to doubt, and by and by the
sweetest privilege they can ask will be to shoot me."

Perhaps the most curious feature of the tragical incidents that
followed was the obtusiveness of Captain Dawson. What every one else
saw was veiled from him, until at times he almost seemed wilfully
blind. The two men had gone through many perilous experiences
together, and sometimes alone. It had been the fortune of the younger
officer to serve the elder, more than once when in imminent danger
and none could be more grateful than the captain.

As for Nellie Dawson herself, it is unlikely that for a time she
suspected the truth in all its fulness. She knew that hers was a
peculiarly sweet enjoyment, while her deft fingers were busy with some
needlework, to listen to the reminiscences of the two. Sometimes she
started with a shock of alarm, when the father pictured in his graphic
way a situation from which it seemed no escape was open to him.
Forgetful for the moment of the fact that he was there before her,
alive and well, she fairly held her breath, until the _denouement_
came. Not until then were her fears wholly relieved.

And when the parent rendered such glowing tributes to the bravery of
the young officer, recalling events of so thrilling a nature that the
lieutenant never would have dared to describe them in similar terms,
how could the daughter help the kindling of admiration for the
handsome young man? How could she avoid feeling grateful, when she
knew that he had risked his life for her parent, even on their late
journey through the mountains? In truth, everything tended to fan the
flame that had already been kindled in both hearts.

It was late one night, after the tired Nellie had withdrawn, that the
visitor made her the subject of the conversation, the approach being
so tactful, that the captain had no suspicion of its object.

"Do you intend to spend all your life in this out of the way corner of
the world?" was the question of the lieutenant.

"Probably I shall. Just before I went to war, I became convinced that
my duty to my daughter demanded I should move to the East, in order to
give her the education she can never receive here. However, when I
went to the war, there was no place except this where I could leave
her. When I come back, I find her a young woman, with excellent book
knowledge, thanks to Brush and the kind attention of the others.
Sometimes I think that she is so innocent and ignorant of evil, that
it will be better for her to spend the rest of her life here."

"It is a serious matter, but neither you nor she should be content to
remain in this place for the rest of your lives."

"Why not? Does that which she can learn elsewhere outweigh that which
she will never learn in this secluded settlement? Is not the man or
woman fortunate who never comes face to face with the ingratitude, the
treachery, the selfishness, the baseness and the sin which are the
accompaniments of civilization? In this untainted mountain air, her
nature will retain its freshness and purity; her life will be a well
spring of happiness and goodness to all with whom she comes in
contact; I shall never marry, and mean to keep her by me until in the
order of nature I am called away. That is the only boon that I ask
from heaven."

"But may not all this be hers and yours if the flower is transplanted
from the wilderness into a more congenial soil? Has she not already
acquired that rugged strength which renders her nature secure against
evil? Is she not doubly panoplied in goodness by the training of her
infancy and girlhood?"

"I would like to think so, but, lieutenant, I have lived a few years
longer than you. She _might_ not be safe there; I _know_ she is
here."




CHAPTER XIV

THE THUNDERBOLT


Lieutenant Russell was treading on delicate ground, where the utmost
caution was necessary. He must not alarm his friend. He smoked a few
minutes in silence.

"It is not for me to give counsel to my captain, but is it not a fact
that selfishness grows upon us with advancing years?"

"Very likely."

"Has it occurred to you that in concluding to pass the remainder of
your days in this mining settlement, you are thinking more of yourself
than of your child?"

"What have I said that warrants that question?" asked the captain
sharply.

"No higher motive than to protect a daughter from harm can inspire a
father, but if she should be allowed to close your eyes, when you come
to lie down and die, it will be hers to live: what _then_?"

"I shall leave her comfortably provided for. My pay amounted to a
goodly sum when the war ended, and it is placed where no one else can
reap the benefit of it. Then, too, as you know we have struck
considerable paying dirt of late. The prospects are that New
Constantinople, even if a small town, will soon be a rich one."

Lieutenant Russell groaned in spirit. Would the parent never
understand him?

"Then you expect her to remain here, sharing in all the vicissitudes
of the place? It cannot always stand still; it will either increase,
bringing with it many bad elements, or it will cease to exist and
these people will have to go elsewhere: what then of the child whom
you have left behind you?"

"Oh, by that time," airily replied the father; "she will be married to
some good honest fellow, like the parson, who seems to be fond of her,
as I know she is of him, but I will not allow her to think of marriage
for a long while to come," he added with emphasis.

Lieutenant Russell had heard all he wished. He had learned that the
father would not consent to the marriage of his daughter for a number
of years, and when that time came, he would select one of the shaggy,
uncouth miners for her life partner.

"He has never thought of _me_ in that capacity, but he will have to
entertain the thought before he is much older."

In her dreamings of the mysterious world, with its teeming multitudes
and all manner of men, Nellie Dawson was sure that none lived who
could compare with this young cavalier who had come out from that
wonderful realm into the loneliness of her mountain home, bringing
with him a sunshine, a glow, a radiance, a happiness, and a thrilling
life which she had never believed could be hers.

She often sat with her eyes upon his countenance, when, in his chair
opposite her father, he recalled those marvelous experiences of his.
To her no man could ever possess so musical a voice, and none so
perfect features and winning ways. It was young love's dream and in
her heart the sacred flame was kindled and fanned until her whole
being was suffused and glowed with the new life.

One of Lieutenant Russell's firsts acts of kindness to Nellie Dawson
was to present her with his massive dog Timon. She had shown great
admiration from the first for the magnificent brute, who became fond
of her. The maiden was delighted beyond measure and thanked the donor
so effusively that he was embarrassed. It is not probable, however,
that Timon himself was ever aware of the change of ownership, for it
brought no change of conditions to him. He had learned to divide his
time about equally between the home of the lieutenant and that of
Captain Dawson, while, like the young lady herself, he wandered about
the settlement at will. He was a dignified canine, who stalked
solemnly through New Constantinople, or took a turn in Dead Man's
Gulch, resenting all familiarity from every one, except from the only
two persons that had ever owned him.

The lieutenant reflected much upon his conversation with Captain
Dawson, the impression which he had received being anything but
pleasant. "He considers himself unselfish, and yet like all such he is
selfishness itself. He has determined to spend the rest of his days in
this hole and to keep her with him. He won't allow her to marry for
years, because it might interfere with his own pleasure; then he
intends to turn her over to that lank, shaggy-faced Brush, who
pretends to be a parson. The captain never thinks of _me_ as having
any claims upon her love. To carry out his plan would be a crime. If
she objects to Brush, he will probably give her a choice from the
whole precious lot, including Ruggles, Adams, Bidwell, or Red Mike,
the reformed gambler.

"Never once has he asked himself whether his daughter may not have a
preference in the matter, but, with the help of heaven, he shall not
carry out this outrage."

In the solitude of his own thoughts, the lover put the question to
himself:

"Am _I_ unselfish in my intentions?"

Selfishness is the essence of love. We resolve to obtain the one upon
whom our affections are set, regardless of the consequences or of the
future. It is _our_ happiness which is placed in the balance and
outweighs everything else.

"Of course," continued the young officer in his self-communing, "I
shall be the luckiest fellow in the world when I win her and she will
be a happy woman. Therefore, it is her good which I seek as much as my
own."

How characteristic of the lover!

"I shall not abduct her. If she tells me she does not love me; if she
refuses to forsake all for me, then I will bid her good-by and go off
and die."

How characteristic again of the lover!

And yet it may be repeated that Lieutenant Russell was the most
guarded and circumspect of men. He no longer argued with Captain
Dawson, for it was useless. He rather lulled his suspicion by falling
in with his views, and talked of the future of parent and daughter, as
if it were one of the least interesting subjects that could come
between them.

On one of Vose Adams's pilgrimages to Sacramento, he returned with a
superb mettled pony, the gift of Lieutenant Russell. With this pet she
soon became a daring and accomplished horsewoman. She was an expert,
too, with the small Winchester and revolver which her father brought
with him from the East. Perched like a bird upon her own Cap, as she
named him, she often dashed for a mile down the trail, wheeling like
a flash and returning at full speed.

"Have a care," said Parson Brush, more than once; "you ride like a
centaur and none knows better how to use firearms, but there are
Indians in these mountains and they sometimes approach nigh enough to
be seen from New Constantinople. Then, too, your father brought word
that other miners are working their way toward us. More than likely
there are bad men among them whom it is best you should not meet."

"But none would harm _me_," was the wondering reply of the miss; "are
not all of my own race my friends?"

"They ought to be, but alas! it is too much to expect."

She could not believe, however, that any danger of that nature
threatened her, but she deferred to the fears of her father,
Lieutenant Russell and the parson to that extent that she generally
had a companion with her on these dashes down the trail. Sometimes it
was Brush, sometimes Ruggles or her parent, and less frequently the
young officer. Timon always galloped or trotted behind her pony, and
she could not be made to believe that his protection was not
all-sufficient.

The winds of early autumn were moaning through the gorges and canyons
of the Sierras, bringing with them the breath of coming winter, which
was often felt with all its Arctic rigor in these depressions among
the towering peaks and ridges. The usual group was gathered in the
Heavenly Bower, though two of the most prominent citizens were absent.
They were Felix Brush and Wade Ruggles, who were seated in their
cabin, where a small fire had been kindled on the primitive hearth and
afforded the only light in the small apartment. They had eaten their
evening meal and as usual were smoking.

As neither cared to taste the Mountain Dew, so winsome to a majority
of the miners, the two often spent their evenings thus, especially
since the shadow caused by the coming of Lieutenant Russell had fallen
across their threshold.

"Things begin to look better than afore," remarked Ruggles, sitting
with one leg flung across the other and looking thoughtfully into the
fire.

"Yes, I always insisted that the soil about here is auriferous and we
had only to stick to it to obtain our reward."

Ruggles took his pipe from his mouth and looked at his partner with a
disgusted expression.

"What are you talkin' 'bout, parson?"

"Didn't you refer to the diggings?" he innocently asked in turn.

"Come now, that won't do; you know my references to allusions was the
leftenant and the young lady. I say things look better as regards the
same."

"In what way?"

"In the only way there could be. They don't care partic'lar for each
other."

"There is no doubt they did some time ago."

"Of course, but I mean _now_."

"How do you explain the change, Wade?"

"The chap ain't a fool; he's took notice of our warnin's."

"I wasn't aware that we had given him any."

"Not 'zactly in words, but every time I've met him with the gal, I
give the leftenant a scowl. Once I come purty near shakin' my fist at
him; he's obsarved it all and is wise in time."

"I think there is ground for what you say," remarked the parson,
anxious to be convinced of the hoped-for fact; "what I base my belief
on is that the leftenant doesn't accompany her on her little riding
trips as often as her father or you or I: _that_ is a sure barometer,
according to my judgment. Still I have sometimes feared from the way
she talks and acts that she thinks more of him than is right."

"Nothing of the kind! She treats him as she does everybody else; the
leftenant is the friend of the cap and the leftenant give her the dog
that is the size of a meetin' house and the pony hardly as big as the
dog, but she doesn't think half as much of him as of you and me; how
can she?" demanded Ruggles, sitting bolt upright and spreading his
hand like a lawyer who has uttered an unanswerable argument; "hain't
she knowed us a blamed sight longer than him?"

"You are correct; I didn't think of that."

How eagerly we accept the argument, flimsy as it may be, which accords
with our wishes!

"When I feel sorter ugly over my 'spicions," continued Ruggles; "I
jest reflect that we've knowed the gal ever since she was a baby and
her father tumbled down a hundred feet onto the roof of the
Heavenly Bower, with her in his arms in the middle of that howlin'
blizzard,--when I think of that I say----"

The door of the cabin was hastily shoved inward and Captain Dawson,
his face as white as death, strode in.

"Have you seen anything of Nellie?" he asked in a husky whisper.

"No; what's the matter?" asked the startled miners.

"She has gone! she has left me!" gasped the father dropping into the
only remaining chair, the picture of despair and unutterable woe.

"Why do you think that?" asked the parson, sympathetically.

"Lieutenant Russell has gone too! They have fled together!"




CHAPTER XV

COMRADES IN SORROW


Wade Ruggles and Parson Brush sprang to their feet and confronted the
white-faced Captain Dawson, who stared at them and breathed fast. For
a full minute they gazed into one another's faces, dazed, motionless
and speechless. The partners stood, each with pipe in hand, the faint
smoke curling upward from the bowls, their slouched hats still on
their frowsy heads, the revolvers at their cartridge belts spanning
their waists, their trousers tucked in the tops of their boots, and
with their heavy flannel shirts serving for coats and vests.

Captain Dawson was similarly attired. He had dashed out of his own
cabin and into that of his friends, his long locks flying, and even
the strands of his heavy beard rigidly apart, as if from the
consternation that had taken possession of his very soul.

In those seconds of tomb-like stillness, an ember on the earthen
hearth fell apart and a twist of flame threw a yellow illumination
through the small room, grim and bare of everything suggesting
luxury.

It was the parson who first found voice, but when he spoke the tones,
even to himself, sounded like those of another person.

"Captain, it is possible that there is some mistake about this."

"Would to God there might be!"

"Let us hope there is."

"Mistake!" he repeated in a husky, rasping voice; "can there be any
mistake about _that_?"

He threw out his single arm as he spoke, as if he would drive his fist
through their chests. But he held a crumpled bit of paper in the face
of the parson, who silently took it from him, crinkled it apart and
turning his side so that the firelight fell on the sheet, began
reading the few words written in pencil and in the pretty delicate
hand which he knew so well.

"Read it out loud, parson," said Ruggles, speaking for the first
time.

Felix Brush did so in a voice of surprising evenness:

  "MY DEAREST FATHER:--I have decided to go with Lieutenant Russell.
  We love each other and I have promised to become his wife. Do not
  think I love you any less for that can never be. I cannot remain
  here. You will hear from us soon and then I pray that you will
  come to your own

                                                            NELLIE."

"Have you been to his shanty?" asked Ruggles, who hardly comprehended
the meaning of his own words.

"Why would he go there?" angrily demanded the parson.

"Mebbe the villain changed his mind."

"But, if he had, _she_ would not be there."

"Yes; I went to his cabin," bitterly answered Captain Dawson; "he has
not been in the place for hours; all is dark and deserted; if I found
him, I would have killed him."

The three were laboring under fearful emotion, but with surprising
power forced themselves to seem comparatively calm.

"Captain, tell us about it," said the parson, carefully folding the
bit of paper upon itself and shoving it into his pocket, unobserved by
the others.

Despite his apparent calmness it took a few moments for the father to
gain sufficient self-control to speak clearly. Seated in the chair, he
looked into the embers of the fire on the hearth, compressed his lips
and breathed hard. His two friends had also seated themselves, for it
seemed to them it was easier to master their agitation thus than while
upon their feet.

"What have I to tell, but my everlasting woe and shame? The lieutenant
and I have been working for several days by ourselves on a new lead. I
had noticed nothing unusual in his manner nor indeed in that of my
child. At lunch time to-day he complained to me of not feeling like
work, and told me not to expect him back this afternoon. I would have
returned with him, had not the indications of the new lead been so
good. And actually he invited me to do no more work until to-morrow,
though why he should have done it, when it would have spoiled their
whole scheme, is more than I can explain.

"It was part of his plan to deceive you."

"I don't see how it could do that, for there was no need of his
inviting me,--but let it go. It came about that I worked later than
usual, so that it was dark when I got home. I was surprised to see no
light and to find no fire or Nellie. I thought nothing of that,
however, for who would have believed it possible that there could be
anything wrong? I supposed she was with some of the folks and being
tired I sat down in my chair and fell asleep.

"When I awoke, the room was cold, silent and as dark as a wolf's
mouth. I felt impatient and decided to give her a scolding for being
so neglectful. I groped around until I found a match, intending to
start a fire. I had just lit the lamp and set it down on the table,
when I caught sight of a folded piece of paper with my name in her
handwriting on the outside. It gave me a queer feeling and my hands
trembled when I unfolded and read it.

"I don't clearly remember the next few minutes. The room seemed to be
spinning around, and I think I had to sit down to keep from falling,
but what saved me from collapse was my anger. I have been consumed
with indignation once or twice in my life, but was never so furious,
so uncontrollable, so utterly savage as I was after reading that note.
If I could have found Russell, I would have throttled him. It may
sound strange, but I hardly once thought of Nellie; it was _he_, the
villain, whom I yearned to get my hands on."

"Of course," said Ruggles, "that's the way you oughter feel."

"I don't know what possessed me to do so, but I rushed out and made
straight for his cabin, as if I would find him there. Of course that
too was empty, and then I came here. Fool that I have been!" exclaimed
the parent, leaping to his feet and striding up and down the room;
"not to see all this, but," he added pathetically, "I believed that
Nellie loved me."

The flaming wrath of the two melted into pity for the stricken father.
Parson Brush laid his hand on his shoulder and compelled him to resume
his seat. Then he spoke with the tenderness of a woman:

"That child _does_ love you more than she loves her own life, but she
is blinded by her infatuation for that smooth-tongued scoundrel. It is
the nature of her sex to feel and act thus; but, as I said, it does
not mean that her love for you is less--"

"Don't talk of her love for me," fiercely interrupted the parent; "we
only judge of a person by his actions."

"But you and I have made mistakes--"

"Nothing like this; why did she not ask me? why did _he_ not tell me
that he wished to marry her?--that is if he does," added the father,
as if determined to make his own cup as bitter as possible.

"He did not ask you, because he knew you would refuse; for from the
first time he entered this community, he was determined to have her."

"How do you know that?"

"Because Ruggles and I read him; we did what no one else did,--we
measured the man. Am I right, Wade?"

The miner nodded his head.

"Every word is as true as gospel; we noticed his sly looks at her,
that first night you and him entered the Heavenly Bower and she was
there. We couldn't make any mistake about it."

"And you didn't warn me! You two are as bad as he, because you kept
the secret when you ought to have put me on my guard, so that I might
have strangled him at the first advance he made."

Sympathy for the man prevented his listeners taking offence at
the words which, from any one else, would have brought serious
consequences. The parson said soothingly:

"If you were not so wrought up, captain, you would not be so
unreasonable; suppose Wade and I had gone to you with the statement
that the man who, according to your own words, had saved your life but
a short time before in the mountains, was a villain, who contemplated
robbing you of your child; what would you have done?"

"Thanked you and been on my guard."

"You would have done nothing of the kind; you would have cursed us and
told us to mind our own business."

"No matter what I would have done, it was your duty to tell me,
regardless of the consequences to yourselves. I might have resented
it, but my eyes would have been opened and this blow saved me."

"Nothing could have opened your eyes, for you were blind," said the
parson, who felt that though the man was intensely agitated, he ought
to hear some plain truths; "even had you suspected there was ground
for our fears, you would have gone to Lieutenant Russell and demanded
an explanation. He would have denied it, and you would have believed
him with the result that he would have been put on his guard and would
have deceived you the more completely."

"Likewise, as aforesaid," added Ruggles, "the villain would have come
to us and made us give our grounds for our charges. What ridic'lous
fools we would have been, when all we could answer was that we
thought he looked as if he meant to run away with your darter."

"There may be some justice in what you say," replied the captain more
composedly; "It was I who was blind, but I can't understand it. Never
until I read that piece of paper, did I suspect the truth."

"Howsumever, the parson and me haven't been idle; we often talked it
over and fixed on a line that we thought would work better than going
to you. We showed the leftenant that we was onto his game; I give him
a scowl now and then, as it fell convenient, that said 'Beware!' We,
that is the parson and me, made up our minds to watch close, and, at
the first sign that was dead sure, we'd fall onto him like a couple of
mountains."

"And why didn't you?"

"He fooled us as he did you. We was talkin' over matters the very
minute you busted into the door and was satisfied that he had larned
he was playin' with fire and had concluded to drop it. We was as big
fools as you."




CHAPTER XVI

NOW


It was the parson who now broke in.

"Why do we sit here, lamenting that which cannot be helped? Do you
mean to give up, captain, and let her go? Will you settle down to
toil in the diggings, giving her no further thought, while this
pretty-faced lieutenant is chuckling over the clever manner by which
he fooled you as well as us--"

"No!" fairly shouted the roused parent; "I will follow them to the
ends of the earth! They shall not find a foot of ground that will
protect them! She has never seen me angry, but she shall now!"

"We are with you," coolly responded Brush, "but only on one
condition."

"What's that?"

"That this account is to be settled with _him_ alone; you musn't speak
so much as a cross word to Nellie; she will shed many a bitter tear of
sorrow; she will drain the cup to its dregs; _he_, the cause of it
all, is to be brought to judgment. When do you wish to take up the
pursuit?"

"Now!"

"And we are with you."

There was something wonderful in the way Parson Brush kept control of
himself. Externally he was as calm as when standing in front of the
adamantine blackboard, giving instruction to Nellie Dawson, while down
deep in his heart, raged a tempest such as rouses into life the
darkest passions that can nerve a man to wrong doing. Believing it
necessary to stir the father to action, he had done it by well chosen
words, that could not have been more effective.

For weeks and months the shadow had brooded over him. Sometimes it
seemed to lift and dissolve into unsubstantiality, only to come back
more baleful than before. And the moment when he had about persuaded
himself that it was but a figment of the imagination, it had sprung
into being and crushed him. But he was now stern, remorseless,
resolute, implacable.

It was much the same with Wade Ruggles. He strove desperately to gain
the remarkable control of his feelings, displayed by his comrade, and
partly succeeded. But there was a restless fidgeting which caused him
to move aimlessly about the room and showed itself now and then in a
slight tremulousness of the voice and hands, but his eyes wore that
steely glitter, which those at his side had noticed when the rumble
and grumble told that the battle was on.

Captain Dawson went from one extreme to the other. Crazed, tumultuous
in his fury, and at first like a baffled tiger, he moderated his voice
and manner until his companions wondered at his self-poise.

"They have started for Sacramento and are now well advanced over the
trail," he remarked without any evidence of excitement.

"When do you imagine they set out?" asked Brush.

"Probably about the middle of the afternoon; possibly earlier."

"Then," said Ruggles, "they have a good six hours' start. They haven't
lost any time and must be fifteen or twenty miles away."

"The trail is easy traveling for twice that distance, as I recollect
it," observed the captain; "after that it grows rougher and they will
not be able to go so fast."

"This must have been arranged several days ago, though it is only
guesswork on our part. Of course she has taken considerable clothing
with her."

"I did not look into her room," said the captain; "there's no use; it
is enough to know they made their preparations and started,
accompanied by that dog Timon."

No time was wasted. They knew they would encounter cold weather, for
the autumn had fairly set in, and some portions of the trail carried
them to an elevation where it was chilly in midsummer. Each took a
thick blanket. The captain donned his military coat, with the empty
sleeve pinned to the breast, caught up his saddle and trappings, his
Winchester and revolver, and buckled the cartridge belt around his
waist. Then he was ready. Neither of the others took coat or vest. The
blanket flung around the shoulders was all that was likely to be
needed, in addition to the heavy flannel shirt worn summer and
winter.

Thus equipped, the three stood outside the cabin, with the moon high
in the sky, a gentle wind sweeping up the canyon and loose masses of
clouds drifting in front of the orb of night. Here and there a light
twinkled from a shanty and the hum of voices sounded faintly in their
ears. Further off, at the extreme end of the settlement, stood the
Heavenly Bower, with the yellow rays streaming from its two windows.
They could picture the group gathered there, as it had gathered night
after night during the past years, full of jest and story, and with
never a thought of the tragedy that had already begun.

"Shall we tell them?" asked Ruggles.

"No," answered Brush; "some of them might wish to go with us."

"And it might be well to take them," suggested Captain Dawson.

"We are enough," was the grim response of the parson.

Like so many phantoms, the men moved toward the further end of the
settlement. Opposite the last shanty a man assumed form in the gloom.
He had just emerged from his dwelling and stopped abruptly at sight of
the trio of shadows gliding past.

"What's up, pards?" he called.

"Nothing," was the curt answer of the captain, who was leading and did
not change his pace.

"You needn't be so huffy about it," growled the other, standing still
and puffing his pipe until they vanished.

"That was Vose Adams," remarked the captain over his shoulder; "he'll
tell the rest what he saw and it will be known to everybody in the
morning."

The little party was carefully descending the side of the canyon, with
now and then a partial stumble, until they reached the bottom of the
broad valley where the grass grew luxuriantly nearly the whole year.
It was nutritious and succulent and afforded the best of pasturage for
the few horses and mules belonging to the miners.

Captain Dawson and Lieutenant Russell had ridden up the trail, each
mounted on a fine steed, which had brought them from Sacramento. When
the saddles and bridles were removed, the animals were turned loose in
the rich pasturage, which extended for miles over the bottom of the
canyon. There, too, grazed the pony of Nellie Dawson, the horses of
Ruggles and Bidwell and the three mules owned by Landlord Ortigies
and Vose Adams. The latter were left to themselves, except when needed
for the periodical journeys to Sacramento. The little drove
constituted all the possessions of New Constantinople in that line.
Consequently, if any more of the miners wished to join in the pursuit,
they would have to do so on foot or on mule back,--a fact which was
likely to deter most of them.

In the early days of the settlement, before the descent of that
terrible blizzard, fully a dozen mules and horses were grazing in the
gorge, subject to the call of their owners, who, however, did not
expect to need them, unless they decided to remove to some other site.
But one morning every hoof had vanished and was never seen again. The
prints of moccasins, here and there in the soft earth, left no doubt
of the cause of their disappearance. Perhaps this event had something
to do with the permanence of New Constantinople, since the means of a
comfortable departure with goods, chattels, tools and mining
implements went off with the animals.

After that the miners made no further investments in quadrupeds,
except to the extent of three or four mules, needed by Vose Adams,
though he was forced to make one journey to Sacramento on foot. Thus
matters stood until the addition of the horses. There was always
danger of their being stolen, but as the weeks and months passed,
without the occurrence of anything of that nature, the matter was
forgotten.

The three men were so familiar with the surroundings that they made
their way to the bottom of the canyon with as much readiness as if the
sun were shining. Pausing beside the narrow, winding stream, which at
that season was no more than a brook, they stood for several minutes
peering here and there in the gloom, for the animals indispensable for
a successful pursuit of the eloping ones.

"There's no saying how long it will take to find them," remarked the
captain impatiently; "it may be they have been grazing a mile away."

"Have you any signal which your animal understands?"

"Yes, but it is doubtful if he will obey it."

Captain Dawson placed his fingers between his lips and emitted a
peculiar tremulous whistle, repeating it three times with much
distinctness. Then all stood silent and listening.

"He may be asleep. Once he was prompt to obey me, but he has been
turned loose so long that there is little likelihood of his heeding
it."

"Try it again and a little stronger," suggested Ruggles.

The captain repeated the call until it seemed certain the animal must
hear it, but all the same, the result was nothing.

It was exasperating for the hounds thus to be held in leash when the
game was speeding from them, with the scent warm, but there was no
help for it.

"We are wasting time," said Dawson; "while you two go up the gorge, I
will take the other direction; look sharp for the animals that are
probably lying down; they are cunning and will not relish being
disturbed; if you find them whistle, and I'll do the same."

They separated, the captain following one course and his friends the
other.

"It'll be a bad go," remarked Ruggles, "if we don't find the horses,
for we won't have any show against them on their animals."

"Little indeed and yet it will not hold us back."

"No, indeed!" replied Ruggles with a concentration of passion that
made the words seem to hiss between his teeth.

Since the stream was so insignificant, Wade Ruggles leaped across and
went up the canyon on the other side, his course being parallel with
his friend's. A hundred yards further and he made a discovery.

"Helloa, Brush, here they are!"

The parson bounded over the brook and hurried to his side, but a
disappointment followed. The three mules having cropped their fill had
lain down for the night but the horses were not in sight.




CHAPTER XVII

THE PURSUERS


The parson expressed his disappointment in vigorous language, when,
instead of the horses, the hybrids proved to be the only animals near
them.

"I am afraid this proves one thing," he said.

"What is that?"

"I have had a dread all along that the Indians would run off the
horses, but it seems to me that if they had done so, they would have
taken the mules."

"It strikes me as more likely that the leftenant took the horses, so
as to prevent our follering him and the gal."

"That sounds reasonable," said the parson thoughtfully; "the plan is
so simple that it must have occurred to him. The mules are too slow to
be of any use to us, and it may be as well that we shall have to go
afoot."

"How do you figure that out?"

"They will conclude that, if we haven't any horses, we won't follow
them; they will, therefore, take their time and travel so slow, that
we'll have the chance to swoop down on them when they are not
expecting it."

"I s'pose there's what you call philosophy in that, but it doesn't hit
me very favorable. We'll see what the cap thinks--helloa!"

Clearly and distinctly through the still air came the signal by which
Captain Dawson was to announce his discovery of the animals. The call
scattered all thoughts of making the journey on foot, and, wheeling
about, the two started off at a rapid pace to join their friend. At
the same moment the call sounded again, and they answered it to let it
be known they understood the situation. In a brief time they came upon
Captain Dawson impatiently awaiting them. There was no need for him to
tell them he had been successful in his search, for he was standing
beside the three horses, which were quickly saddled and bridled. A
minute later the men vaulted upon their backs and the captain said
crisply:

"Now we are off!"

Each seemed to be inspired by the spirit of adventure. They sat erect
in the saddles, drew in a deep inhalation of the keen night air, and
moved off with their horses on a brisk walk, which almost immediately
became a canter. For a mile, the trail through Dead Man's Gulch was
nearly as hard and even as a country highway. The width of the canyon
varied from a few rods to a quarter of a mile, with the mountain
ridges on either hand towering far up into cloudland, the tallest
peaks crowned with snow which the sun never dissolved.

The tiny stream wound like a silvery serpent through the stretch of
green, succulent grass, narrowing gorge and obtruding rock and
boulder. Now and then the path led across the water, which was so
shallow that it only plashed about the fetlocks of the horses. Captain
Dawson, in his impetuosity, kept a few paces in front of the other
two, as if he were the leader. When the space increased too much he
reined up his animal and waited until his friends joined him. They
were grim, resolute and for most of the time had little to say to one
another, though, as may be supposed, their thoughts were of anything
but a pleasant nature.

So long as the moon held her place near the zenith, the canyon was
suffused and flooded with its soft radiance, but the rifts of clouds
drifting before its face rendered the light at times treacherous and
uncertain. The horses had rested so long, and had had such extensive
browsing on the rich pasturage, that they were in fine condition, and
the gallop seemed more grateful to them than an ordinary walking gait.
The air was cool and the fine trail, at this portion of the journey,
made all the conditions favorable. After a time however, the ascent
and descent would appear, the ground would become rough and the best
the animals could do would be to walk.

When Parson Brush remarked that Lieutenant Russell had proved himself
an idiot when he left these horses behind for his pursuers to use, the
captain and Ruggles agreed with him.

"I don't understand it," said Brush; "he must have expected we would
be hot after him, within the very hour we learned of what he had done,
or can it be that he and she concluded we would say, 'Depart in
peace?' If so, the young man shall have a terrible awakening."

"It seems to me," said Ruggles, "that it is more likely he believed
that with the start he would gain, it didn't matter whether we
follered or not, feelin' sure that he could keep out of reach and get
to Sacramento so fur ahead of us, that he needn't give us a thought."

"I am not very familiar with the trail," remarked the captain, "for,
as you know, I have passed over it only twice; first, nearly five
years ago, when I went to the war, and a few months since when I came
back."

"But you and Russell did not lose your way," said the parson.

"That was because we did our traveling by day. We tried it once at
night, but came within a hair of tumbling over a precipice a thousand
feet deep. This will be easy enough, so long as we have the sun to
help us."

"You probably know as much about the trail as Wade and I, for neither
of us has been over it often. Consequently, when we travel by night,
we shall have to go it blind, or rather shall do so after awhile,
since all is plain sailing now."

"I ain't so sure of that," observed Ruggles doubtfully; "we must have
come a mile already and ought to have made a turn by this time."

Captain Dawson checked his horse and peered ahead.

"Can it be we are off the track? We have come nearer two miles than
one--ah!"

Just then the moon emerged from the obscuring clouds and their field
of vision so broadened that they saw themselves face to face with an
impassable barrier. The canyon closed directly in front of them like an
immense gate of stone. It was impossible to advance a hundred feet
further.

"Well, I'm blessed if this isn't a pretty situation!" exclaimed the
captain.

"We have passed the opening, but we haven't far to return, and you
know that a bad beginning brings a good ending."

"Humph! I would rather chance it on a good beginning."

Ruggles was the first to wheel and strike his horse into a gallop,
which he did with the remark that he knew where the right passage was
located. His companions were almost beside him. The canyon was of that
peculiar conformation that, while it terminated directly in front, it
contained an abrupt angle between where the party had halted and the
mining settlement. At that point it was so wide that the little
stream, which might have served for a guide, was lost sight of. Had
they followed the brook, they would not have gone astray. The only
inconvenience was the slight delay, which in their restless mood tried
their spirits to the utmost. Captain Dawson muttered to himself and
urged his horse so angrily that he again placed himself in advance.
His mood was no more savage than that of his companions, but he chafed
at everything which caused delay, no matter how trifling, in the
pursuit.

Fearing that he might go wrong, Ruggles spurred up beside him. The
distance passed was less than any one expected it to be, when Ruggles
called out:

"Here we are!"

The exclamation was caused by the hoofs of their horses plashing in
the water. They seemed to share the impatience of their riders; "all
we have to do now is to keep to the stream; obsarve its turn."

Its course was almost at right angles to that which they had been
following. The animals were cantering easily, when suddenly a deeper
gloom than usual overspread the valley like a pall. This came from a
heavy bank of clouds sweeping before the moon. The steeds were drawn
down to a walk, but the obscurity was not dense enough to shut out the
chasm-like opening, where the mountains seemed to part, riven by some
terrific convulsion ages before. The enormous walls drew back the door
as if to invite them to enter and press the pursuit of the couple that
were fleeing from a just and righteous wrath.

The width of the canyon had now dwindled to a few yards, and the stream
expanding and shallow, occupied so much of the space that the horses
were continually splashing through it, but the rise and fall of the
trail was so slight that the gallop might have continued with little
danger of mishap.

The formation of the party was in "Indian file," with Captain Dawson
leading, Ruggles next and Brush bringing up the rear. All three
animals were walking, for the light of the moon was variable and often
faint, while the danger of a mis-step was ever present, and was likely
to bring a fatal ending of the pursuit almost before it had fairly
begun. Occasionally the gloom in the narrow gorge was so deep that
they distinguished one another's figures indistinctly, but the animals
were left mostly to themselves. They seemed to know what was expected
of them and showed no hesitation. It was impossible for them to go
wrong, for it was much the same as if crossing a bridge, with its
protecting barrier on either hand. The horse of the captain showed his
self-confidence once or twice by a faint whinney and a break from the
walk into a trot, but his rider checked him.

"Not yet; heaven knows that I am as anxious to push on as you, but we
have already made one blunder and we can't afford another; when the
time comes that it is safe to trot you shall do so and perhaps run."

"Hush!" called Brush from the rear; "I hear a curious sound."

"What does it seem to be?"

"It is impossible to tell; let's stop for a moment."

As the three animals stood motionless, the strange noise was audible.
It was a deep, hollow roar rapidly increasing in volume and intensity,
and resembled the warning of a tornado or cyclone advancing through
the forest. The animals, as is the case at such times, were nervous
and frightened. They elevated their heads, pricked their ears, snuffed
the air and the animal of the parson trembled with terror.

The three believed that something in the nature of a cyclone was
approaching, or it might be a cloudburst several miles away, whose
deluge had swollen the stream into a rushing torrent that would
overwhelm them where they stood, caught inextricably in a trap.

The terrifying roar, however, was neither in front nor at the rear,
but above them,--over their heads! From the first warning to the end
was but a few seconds. The sound increased with appalling power and
every eye was instinctively turned upward.

In the dim obscurity they saw a dark mass of rock, weighing hundreds
of tons, descending like a prodigious meteor, hurled from the heavens.
It had been loosened on the mountain crest a half mile above, and was
plunging downward with inconceivable momentum. Striking some
obstruction, it rebounded like a rubber ball against the opposite side
of the gorge, then recoiled, still diving downward, oscillating like a
pendulum from wall to wall, whirling with increasing speed until it
crashed to the bottom of the gorge with a shock so terrific that the
earth and mountain trembled.

Landing in the stream, the water was flung like bird shot right and
left, stinging the faces of the men fifty feet distant. They sat awed
and silent until Ruggles spoke:

"Now if that stone had hit one of us on the head it would have hurt."

"Probably it would," replied the captain, who had difficulty in
quieting his horse; "at any rate, I hope no more of them will fall
till we are out of the way."

"I wonder whether that could have been done on purpose," remarked the
parson.

"No," said Ruggles; "the leftenant couldn't know anything about our
being purty near the right spot to catch it."

"I alluded to Indians,--not to him."

But Ruggles and the captain did not deem such a thing credible. A
whole tribe of red men could not have loosened so enormous a mass of
stone, while, if poised as delicately as it must have been, they would
have known nothing of the fact. Sometimes an immense oak, sound and
apparently as firm as any in the forest around it, suddenly plunges
downward and crashes to the earth, from no imaginable cause. So, vast
masses of rock on the mountain side which have held their places for
centuries, seem to leap from their foundations and tear their way with
resistless force into the valley below. This was probably one of those
accidental displacements, liable to occur at any hour of the day or
night, which had come so startlingly near crushing the three men to
death.

Captain Dawson drew a match from his pocket and scraping it along his
thigh, held it to the face of his watch.

"Just midnight and we are not more than half a dozen miles from
home."

"And how far do you suppose _they_ are?" asked the parson.

"Probably five times as much, if not more."

"But they will not travel at night, and by sunrise we ought to be
considerably nearer to them than now."

"You can't be certain about that. Lieutenant Russell knows me too
well to loiter on the road; he has a good horse and the pony of Nellie
is a tough animal; both will be urged to the utmost; for they must be
sure the pursuit will be a hard one."

The discomforting fact in the situation was that if the fugitives, as
they may be considered, pushed their flight with vigor, there was no
reason why they should not prevent any lessening of the distance
between them and their pursuers, and since they would naturally fear
pursuit, it was to be expected that they would use all haste. The hope
was that on account of Nellie, the animals would not keep up the
flight for so many hours out of the twenty-four, as the pursuers would
maintain it.

The trail steadily ascended and became so rough and uneven that the
horses frequently stumbled. This made their progress slow and
compelled the three men, despite themselves, to feel the prudence of
resting until daylight, but not one of them wished to do so, since the
night pursuit was the only phase of the business which brought with it
the belief that they were really lessening the distance separating
them from the two in advance.

Eager as the couple were to get through the mountains and reach
Sacramento, where for the first time they could feel safe from their
pursuers, the young officer was too wise to incur the risk of breaking
down their horses, for such a mishap would be a most serious one
indeed, and fraught with fatal consequences.

There was little fear of the pursuers going astray. Captain Dawson had
an extraordinary memory for places, as he repeatedly proved by
recalling some landmark that he had noticed on his previous trip.
Furthermore, the gorge was so narrow that in a certain sense, it may
be said, they were fenced in, and would have found it hard to wander
to the right or left, had they made the effort.

After an hour of steady climbing they reached an altitude which
brought with it a sharp change of temperature. The air became so
chilly that Ruggles and Brush flung their blankets about their
shoulders and found the protection added to their comfort. The horses,
too, began to show the effects of their severe exertion. Their long
rest had rendered them somewhat "soft," though the hardening would be
rapid. After a few days' work they would not mind such exertion as
that to which they were now forced.

When a sort of amphitheatre was reached, it was decided to draw rein
for a brief while, out of sympathy for their panting animals.

"I thought if we failed to find our horses," remarked the parson, "we
wouldn't find it hard to keep up the pursuit on foot; I have changed
my mind."

He looked back over the sloping trail, which speedily vanished in the
gloom and the eyes of the other two were turned in the same direction.
At the moment of doing so, the animals again became frightened, so
that, despite their fatigue, it was hard to restrain them.

"There's something down there," remarked the captain slipping from his
saddle; "Wade, you are the nearest, can you see anything?"

Ruggles was out of the saddle in an instant, Winchester in hand.

"I catched sight of something," he said in an undertone; "look after
my horse, while I find out what it is."

"Have a care," cautioned the parson; "it may be an Indian."

"That's what I think it is," replied Ruggles, who instantly started
down the trail rifle in hand, his posture a crouching one and his
senses strung to the highest point.

He passed from view almost on the instant, and his companions listened
with intense anxiety for what was to follow. Suddenly the sharp crack
of their friend's rifle rang out in the solemn stillness, the report
echoing again and again through the gorge, with an effect that was
startling even to such experienced men. It was the only sound that
came to them, and, while they were wondering what it meant, Ruggles
reappeared among them with the noiselessness of a shadow.

"It was a bear," he explained; "I think he scented the animals and was
follering on the lookout for a chance at 'em."

"Did you kill him?"

"Don't think I did; he must have heard me comin' and was scared; he
went down the trail faster than I could; when I seen that I couldn't
catch him, I let fly without taking much aim. Maybe I hit him;
leastways, he traveled so much faster that I give it up and come
back."

The party lingered for half an hour more, but as the horses showed no
further fear, they concluded that bruin had taken to heart the lesson
he received and would bother them no further.

The mountains still towered on every hand. The stream had long since
disappeared among the rocks and the gorge had become narrower.
Generally it was no more than a dozen feet in width, occasionally
expanding to two or three times that extent. The moon had moved over
so far that only its faint reflection against the dark walls and
masses of rock availed the horsemen. The sky seemed to contain an
increasing number of clouds and there were indications of a storm,
which might not break for a day or two, and as likely as not would not
break at all.

The traveling, despite its difficulty, was comparatively safe. The
trail did not lead along the sides of precipices, with a climbing
wall on one side and a continuous descent on the other, but it was
solid and extended across from one ridge to the other. Because of this
fact the three pushed their animals hard, knowing that it would not be
long before they would have to be favored.

"I don't know whether we are wise to keep this up as we are doing,"
said the captain, "but I know there are few places where we can travel
in the darkness and I feel like making the most of them."

"It is only a question of what the horses are able to stand," replied
Brush; "it is easy enough for us to ride, but a very different thing
for them to carry us. We must guard against their breaking down."

"I will look out for that, but it is strange that when we were making
ready to start we forgot one important matter."

"What was that?"

"We did not bring a mouthful of food."

"We shall have little trouble in shooting what game we need."

"Perhaps not and perhaps we shall. The lieutenant and I found on our
way from Sacramento that, although game appeared to be plenty, it had
an exasperating habit of keeping out of range when we particularly
needed it. Delay will be necessary to get food, and the reports of
our guns are likely to give warning, just when it is dangerous."

"It was a bad slip," assented the parson; "for there was plenty of
meat and bread at home; but we shall have to stop now and then to rest
our animals and to allow them to feed and we can utilize such
intervals by getting something for ourselves in the same line."

"It isn't that, so much as the risk of apprising the two of their
danger. In addition, it will be strange if we get through the
mountains without a fight with the Indians. According to my
recollection, we shall strike a region to-morrow or on the next day,
where there will be the mischief to pay."

Two miles more of laborious work and another halt. For the first time
Parson Brush showed excitement.

"Do you know," he said, "that some one is following us? There may be
several, but I am sure of one at least and he is on a horse."




CHAPTER XVIII

A CLOSE CALL


Few situations are more trying than that of being followed at night by
what we suspect is an enemy. The furtive glances to the rear show the
foe too indistinctly for us to recognize him, and the imagination
pictures the swift, stealthy attack and the treacherous blow against
which it is impossible to guard.

There was little of this dread, however, in the case of our friends,
for they felt strong enough to take care of themselves. Moreover, all
three formed an instant suspicion of the identity of the man.

It was Felix Brush at the rear who first heard the faint footfalls,
and, peering into the gloom, saw the outlines of a man and beast a few
rods distant, coming steadily up the trail in the same direction with
himself. A few minutes later the halt was made and all eyes were
turned toward the point whence the man was approaching. He must have
noticed the stoppage, but he came straight on until he joined the
group.

"Howdy, pards," was his greeting.

"I thought it was you, Vose," said the captain, sharply; "what do you
mean by following us?"

"What right have you to get in front of me? Don't I have to make a
trip to Sacramento three or four times each year?"

"But you are not accustomed to start in the night time."

"And I never knowed it was your custom to leave New Constantinople in
the middle of the night; leastways I never knowed you to do it
afore."

"We have important business," added the captain brusquely, uncertain
as yet whether he ought to be displeased or angered by the intrusion
of Adams.

"So have I."

"What is it?"

"Your good."

"I don't understand you; explain yourself."

"There ain't one of you three that knows the way through the
mountains, and if you undertook it alone, it would take you three
months to reach Sacramento."

This was a new and striking view of the situation, but the parson
said:

"Each of us has been over it before."

"Sartinly, but one trip nor half a dozen ain't enough. You lost your
way the first hour in Dead Man's Gulch; if you hadn't done so, it
would have took me a blamed sight longer to find you; there are half a
dozen other places in the mountains ten times worse than the one
where you flew the track. Howsumever, if you don't want me, I'll go
back."

And Vose Adams, as if his dignity had received a mortal hurt, began
turning his mule around.

"Hold on," interposed Captain Dawson; "you have put things in their
true light; we are very glad to have you with us."

"That makes it all right," was the cheery response of the good natured
Vose; "I never like to push myself where I ain't wanted, but as you
seem glad to see me, after having the thing explained, we won't say
nothing more about it. Howsumever, I may add that I obsarved you
started in such a hurry that I thought it warn't likely you fetched
any vittles with you, so I made up a lunch and brought it with me,
being as you may not always have time to spare to shoot game."

The chilliness of Vose Adams' greeting changed to the warmest welcome.
He had shown more thoughtfulness than any of them, and his knowledge
of the perilous route through the mountains was beyond value. Indeed,
it looked as if it was to prove the deciding factor in the problem.

"Do you know our business, Vose?" asked the captain.

"I knowed it the minute I seen you sneaking off like shadows toward
the trail. I hurried to my cabin, got a lot of cold meat and bread
together and then hunted up Hercules, my boss mule. He isn't very
handsome, but he has a fine voice and has been through these mountains
so many times that he knows the right road as well as me. I knowed you
would travel fast and didn't expect to overhaul you afore morning, but
you went past the right turn and that give me a chance to catch up
sooner."

"But how was it you suspected our errand?" persisted the captain.

"How could I help it? What else could it be? I seen the miss and the
leftenant start for Sacramento, and being as you took the same course
it was plain that you was going there too, if you didn't overtake 'em
first."

"You saw them start!" thundered the father of Nellie Dawson; "why
didn't you hurry off to me with the news?"

"Why should I hurry off to you with the news?" coolly asked Vose
Adams; "it wasn't the first time I had seen the two ride in that
direction; sometimes she was with you, or with the parson or Ruggles,
and once or twice with me. Would you have thought there was anything
wrong if you had seen them?"

"No, I suppose not," replied the captain, seeing the injustice of his
words; "but I have been so wrought up by what has occurred that I can
hardly think clearly. I ask your pardon for my hasty words."

"You needn't do that, for I see how bad you feel and I'm sorry for
you."

"When was it they left?"

"Early this afternoon."

"There was no one with them of course?"

"Nobody except that big dog they call Timon; he was frolicking 'round
the horses, as if he enjoyed it as much as them."

Every atom of news was painful, and yet the afflicted father could not
restrain himself from asking questions of no importance.

"About what hour do you think it was when they left?"

"It must have been near two o'clock when the leftenant fetched up his
horse and the pony belonging to the young lady. She must have been
expectin' him, for she come right out of the house, without keeping
him waitin' a minute. He helped her into the saddle, while they talked
and laughed as happy as could be."

This was wormwood and gall to the parent, but he did not spare
himself.

"Did you overhear anything said by them?"

"I wouldn't have considered it proper to listen, even if they hadn't
been so far off I couldn't catch a word that passed atween 'em."

"Was there anything in their actions to show they intended to take a
longer ride than usual?"

"I don't see how there could be," replied the puzzled Adams, while
Parson Brush, understanding what the distraught captain meant,
explained:

"Was there anything in their appearance which suggested that they
meant to take anything more than an ordinary gallop?"

"I didn't think of it at the time, but I can see now there was. Each
of them had what seemed to be extra clothing and perhaps they had
food, though I couldn't make sure of that. You know there has been
something in the sky that looked like a coming storm, and I thought it
was on that account that the clothing was took along. Then, as the
leftenant had knocked off work, it might be he was not feeling very
well."

"The scoundrel made that very excuse for leaving me," bitterly
commented Captain Dawson, "but he wouldn't have taken the clothing as
part of the same design for there was no need of anything of the kind.
They laid their plans carefully and everything joined to make it as
easy as possible."

"Your thoughts were precisely what ours would have been," said the
parson, drawn toward the messenger unjustly accused by the captain in
the tumult of his grief;" if we had seen the two start, we should have
believed it was for one of the usual gallops which the young lady is
so fond of taking; but, Vose, if we would have certainly gone astray
in the mountains, without your guidance, how will it be with them,
when she has never been over the trail and he has ridden over it but
once?"

"They are sure to have a tough time of it which will make it all the
harder for us."

"How is that?"

"Some good luck may lead them right; more than likely, howsumever,
they'll get all wrong; therefore, if we stick to the path we may pass
'em a half dozen times. You see it's the blamed onsartinty of the
whole bus'ness."

"I would not question your wisdom on such matters, Vose, but when I
remember that each of them is riding a horse, and that the two must
leave traces behind them, I cannot apprehend that we shall go very far
astray in our pursuit. The most likely trouble as it seems to me is
that they will travel so fast that it will be almost impossible to
overtake them."

"If they can manage to keep to the trail, it is going to be hard work
to come up with them. You haven't forgot that when I'm pushing through
the mountains I sometimes have to hunt a new trail altogether."

"That is due to the trouble with Indians?"

"Precisely; sometimes it's a long, roundabout course that I have to
take, which may keep me off the main course for a couple of days, or
it may be for only a part of the day, but Injins is something that
you must count on every time."

"And they are as likely to meet them as we?"

"More so, 'cause they're just ahead of you. Oh, it was the biggest
piece of tomfoolery ever heard of for them to start on such a journey,
but what are you to expect of two young persons dead in love with each
other?"

This was not the kind of talk that was pleasing to the father, and he
became morosely silent. It was equally repugnant to Ruggles and the
parson to hear Nellie Dawson referred to as being in love with the
execrated officer. Ruggles was grim and mute, and the parson deftly
drew the conversation in another direction.

"I would like to ask you, Vose, how it was that Lieutenant Russell did
not take the other horses with him, so as to make it impossible for
anything in the nature of pursuit?"

"There might be two reasons; he may have thought it would be mean to
hit you below the belt like that; he was too honorable--"

"It warn't anything like _that_," fiercely interrupted Ruggles.

"Then it must have been that if he had took all the animals with him,
even though they was a considerable way down the gulch, the thing
would have been noticed by others, who would have wanted to know what
it meant."

"No doubt you have struck the right reason. Had the start been in the
night time, he would have made sure that not even the mules were left
for us. But, Vose," added the parson gravely, "we would be much better
pleased if when you referred to the lieutenant, you said nothing about
'honor.'"

"Oh, I am as much down on him as any of you," airily responded Vose;
"and, if I git the chance to draw bead on him, I'll do it quicker'n
lightning. Fact is, the hope of having that same heavenly privilege
was as strong a rope in pulling me up the trail after you as was the
wish to keep you folks from gettin' lost. But, pards, Hercules is
rested and I guess likely your animals are the same, so let's be
moving."

Although Captain Dawson had been silent during the last few minutes,
he did not allow a word to escape him. He knew Vose Adams was
talkative at times, due perhaps to his enjoyment of company, after
being forced to spend weeks without exchanging a word with any one of
his kind, but there was no overestimating his value, because of his
knowledge of the long, dangerous route through the mountains. When,
therefore, the party were about to move on, the captain said:

"Vose, from this time forward you are the guide; the place for you is
at the head; you will oblige me by taking the lead."

Vose accepted the post of honor, which was also the one of peril, for
it is the man in his position whose life hangs in the balance when
Indians are concerned. But there was no hesitancy on his part, though
he was well aware of the additional risks he incurred.

"There's one good thing I can tell you," he said, just before they
started.

They looked inquiringly at him and he explained:

"The hardest part of the climbing is over,--that is for the time," he
hastened to add, seeing that he was not understood; "you'll have
plenty more of it before we see Sacramento, but I mean that we have
struck the highest part of the trail, and it will be a good while
before there's any more climbing to do."

"That is good news," said Ruggles heartily, "for it has been mighty
tough on the animals; I 'spose too, the trail is smoother."

Adams laughed.

"I am sorry to say it's rougher."

Ruggles muttered impatiently, but the four took up the task, Adams in
the lead, with the rest stringing after him in Indian file. The
declaration of Vose was verified sooner than was expected. While the
mule was so sure-footed that he seemed to meet with no difficulty, it
was excessively trying to the horses, who stumbled and recovered
themselves so often that Captain Dawson began to fear one or more of
them would go lame. Still in his anxiety to get forward, he repressed
his fears, hoping that there would be some improvement and cheering
himself with the belief that since all had gone well for so long, it
would continue on the same line.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Once, however, his horse made such an abrupt stumble that the captain
narrowly saved himself from being unseated. On the impulse of the
moment he called to Adams in advance:

"Vose, I am afraid this won't do!"

The leader did not look around and acted as if he had not heard him.

"I say, Vose, isn't it better that we should wait till our horses can
see the way?"

Since the leader took no notice of this demand, the captain concluded
his fears were groundless and said no more.

"If he thinks it safe for us to keep on, I shall not oppose."

But Captain Dawson might have opposed, had he known the truth, for,
strange as it may seem, Vose Adams did not hear the words addressed to
him, because he was asleep on the back of his mule Hercules, as he had
been many a time while riding over the lonely trail. In truth, there
was some foundation for his declaration that he could sleep more
soundly on the back of his animal than while wrapped up in his blanket
in some fissure among the rocks. Fortunately for him, however, these
naps were of short duration, and, while indulging in them, he relied
upon his animal, which had acquired a wonderful quickness in detecting
danger. The slightest lagging in his gait, a halt, a turning to one
side or a whinny was sufficient to bring back on the instant the
wandering senses of the rider. In the present instance his slumber was
not interrupted until Hercules, seeing exactly where he was, dropped
his walk to a lagging gait.

On the very second Vose Adams opened his eyes. So naturally that no
one suspected anything, he checked his animal and looked around.

"Pards, we've reached a ticklish spot, and it's for you to say whether
we shall wait for daylight afore trying it."

"What is its nature?" asked the captain, as he and the two behind him
also reined up their animals.

"The trail winds through these peaks in front, and instead of being
like that we've been riding over all along, keeps close to the side of
the mountain. On the right is the solid rock, and on the left it
slopes down for I don't know how many hundred feet, afore it strikes
bottom. Once started down that slide, you'll never stop till you hit
the rocks below like that mass of stone that tumbled over in front of
you."

"How wide is the path?" asked the parson.

"There's more than a mile where it isn't wide enough for two of us to
ride abreast, and there are plenty of places where a horse has got to
step mighty careful to save himself. Hercules knows how to do it, for
he larned long ago, but I have my doubts about your hosses."

"It might have been better after all if we had brought the mules,"
said the captain.

"Not a bit of it, for Hercules is the only one that knows how to git
over such places."

"How do the others manage it?"

"They've never tried it in the night time; that's what I'm talking
'bout."

Adams's description enabled the others to recall the place. It was all
that had been pictured and they might well pause before assuming the
fearful risk. One reason for wishing to press forward was the
knowledge that at the termination of the dangerous stretch, the trail
was so smooth and even that for a long distance it would be easy to
keep their animals at a gallop, while still further the peril appeared
again.

Captain Dawson once more struck a match and looked at his watch.

"Half-past three; in two hours it will begin to grow light; if no
accident happens we shall be at the end of the ugly piece of ground by
that time, where the traveling is good. It is a pity to lose the
opportunity, but I will leave it to you, parson and Ruggles; what do
you say?"

"Our horses have been pushed pretty hard, but they are in good
condition. I hate to remain idle."

"Then you favor going ahead?"

"I do."

"And you, Ruggles?"

"I feel the same way."

"That settles it; lead on, Vose."

"I'm just as well suited, but keep your wits about you," was the
warning of the leader, whose mule instantly responded, stretching his
neck forward and downward and occasionally snuffing the ground, as if
he depended on his sense of smell more than that of hearing.

The task was a nerve-wrenching one, and more than once each of the
three regretted their haste in not waiting for daylight; but, having
started, there was no turning back. To attempt to wheel about, in
order to retrace their steps, was more perilous than to push on, while
to stand still was hardly less dangerous.

The moonlight gave such slight help that the four depended almost
wholly upon the instinct of their animals. Hercules never faltered,
but advanced with the slow, plodding, undeviating certainty of those
of his kind who thread their way through the treacherous passes of the
Alps. Once his hind hoof struck a stone which went bounding down the
precipice on his left, until at the end of what seemed several
minutes, it lay still at the bottom. Neither animal nor rider showed
the least fear, for in truth both were accustomed to little slips like
that.

"I'm blessed if this isn't the most ticklish business that I ever
attempted," muttered Captain Dawson; "I never had anything like it in
the army; it reminds me of scouting between the lines, when you expect
every second a bullet from a sharpshooter--"

At that instant his horse stepped on a round, loose stone which turned
so quickly that before he could recover himself the hoof followed the
stone over the edge of the precipice. The horse snorted and struggled
desperately, and the brave rider felt an electric shock thrill through
him from head to foot, for there was one moment when he believed
nothing could save them from the most frightful of deaths.

The left hind leg had gone over the rocky shelf, which at that point
was very narrow, and the hoof was furiously beating vacancy in the
despairing effort to find something upon which to rest itself. His
body sagged downward and the rider held his breath.

"Steady, my boy!" he called, and with rare presence of mind allowed
the rein to lie free so as not to disconcert the steed.

The tremendous struggle of the intelligent animal prevailed and with a
snort he recovered his balance and all four feet stood upon firm
support.

"That was a close call," observed the parson, whose heart was in his
mouth, while the brief fight for life was going on.

"It was so close that it couldn't have been any closer," coolly
commented the captain, fully himself again.




CHAPTER XIX

A COLLISION


At this moment, the cheery voice of Adams called:

"There's only about a hundred yards more of this, but we've now struck
the worst part of the whole trail."

"If it is any worse than what we have just passed, it won't do to try
it," replied Captain Dawson, with the memory of his recent thrilling
experience still vivid with him.

"We can do it, but we must foller a different plan."

"What is that?"

"We must lead our animals. There are plenty of places where you can
get off your horses with more comfort, but we can't stand here doing
nothing. Get to the ground the best way you know how."

It was clear that the advice of the guide would have to be followed,
and all four set about the task with the cool daring shown from the
first. Since each man was to lead his animal, it was necessary to
dismount in front, instead of slipping over the tail, as would have
been easier. The beasts showed striking sagacity in this delicate
task. The trail was so narrow that to dismount to the left, on the
side of the dizzying precipice, made it impossible for a man to keep
his poise, while to descend on the right, directly beside the body of
the animal was almost certain to crowd him over into the gorge. Each,
therefore, lowered himself with infinite care over the right shoulder
of his steed, so well forward, that the horse by turning his head to
the left afforded just enough room for the trick to be done. Every one
dismounted in safety, each drawing a breath of relief when the
exquisitely delicate task was accomplished.

Looking around in the gloom, Vose Adams saw that his friends stood on
the ground.

"Are you all ready?" he asked.

"Yes," replied Brush from the rear.

"Hold the bridle so gentle that you can let go if your animal slips
off: if he has to go over the precipice, there's no need of your
follering him."

Each man took his Winchester in hand, and loosely grasping the bridle
rein, began stealing forward, the captain's loss compelling him to
make his single arm answer for both purposes. The advance was
necessarily slow, for it was made with the utmost care. The path could
not have been more dangerous than for the brief stretch between them
and the broad, safe support beyond.

Several times the trail so narrowed that each trembled through fear of
not being able to keep his balance, while it seemed absolutely
impossible for a horse to do so; but one of the strange facts
connected with that intelligent animal is that, despite his greater
bulk, he is generally able to follow wherever his master leads. So it
was that when a miner carefully turned his head, he saw his steed
following slowly but unfalteringly in his footsteps.

It was soon perceived that this perilous stretch did not take a
straight course, but assumed the form of an immense, partial circle.
When half way around, the plodders came in sight of a huge rent in the
distant mountain wall, through which the sky showed nearly from the
zenith to the horizon. In this immense V-shaped space shone the moon
nearly at its full, and without a rift or fleck of cloud in front of
its face.

A flood of light streamed through and between the encompassing peaks,
tinging the men and animals with its fleecy veil, as if some of the
snow from the crests had been sprinkled over them. On their left, the
craggy wall sloped almost vertically downward, the projecting masses
of rock displaying the same, fairy-like covering, ending in a vast,
yawning pit of night and blackness, into whose awful depth the human
eye could not penetrate.

On the right, the mass of stone, rock and boulder, rugged, broken and
tumbled together, as if flung about by giants in sport, towered beyond
the vision's reach, the caverns, abysses and hollows made the blacker
and more impenetrable by the moonlight glinting against the protruding
masses.

It was as if a party of Titans had run their chisels along the flinty
face of the mountain from the rear, gouging out the stone, with less
and less persistency, until they reached the spot where the men and
animals were creeping forward, when the dulled tools scarcely made an
impression sufficient to support the hesitating feet.

Captain Dawson was but a few paces to the rear of Vose Adams's mule,
whose surety of step he admired and tried to imitate.

"Training seems able to accomplish anything," reflected the captain;
"I remember how Lieutenant Russell and I stopped on the further edge
of this infernal place when we reached it one forenoon and spent
several hours trying to find a safer path. It kept us in a tremor
until we were across. Had any one told me that on the next journey I
should try it in the night, I would have believed him crazy, but," he
grimly added, "I would have thought the same, if I had been told that
a necessity like this would compel us to do so."

The bridle rein was looped over his elbow, which extended behind him,
the same hand grasping his rifle, so that he advanced partly sideways
over the treacherous trail. He attempted to do nothing but look after
his own footsteps. Sometimes, when it was a little harder to pull the
rein, he slackened his pace. It would not do to hurry the animal,
since a slight disturbance might cause him to loose his footing. The
horse knew what was required of him and would do it better by being
left wholly to himself.

It was because of this concentration of his mind upon the one thing
that the captain failed to perceive that the mule in his front had
stopped walking, until the rim of his slouched hat touched the tail of
the motionless animal.

"Helloa, Vose, what's the matter?"

The guide said something, but kept his face turned away, and his
words, instead of being in the nature of an answer, were addressed to
some one who confronted him. Adams was of slight stature, so that,
although he stood erect, it was easy for the captain to look over his
head and see what was beyond. That which was thus revealed was another
horseman leading his animal and coming toward them. He was advancing
in the same manner as the miners, that is by leading his horse, and,
meeting our friends thus face to face, it was impossible for either
party to pass: one or the other must give way and retreat.

A startling feature of this meeting was that the individual who thus
confronted them was an Indian of gigantic stature. He was more than
six feet in height and of massive proportions. He belonged to what
were known as the "mountain Indians," who were brave and of
irrestrainable ferocity. They were the most dangerous people met by
the miners in the early days on the Pacific slope.

Equity demanded that this particular specimen should back his horse
over the few yards to the point where the trail broadened, for the
task was possible of accomplishment, while the white men were unable
to force their animals in safety for one-half of the distance behind
them. Moreover, it was evident that this Indian had deliberately
started over the trail, with the knowledge of the four white men
approaching, so that a meeting was inevitable. He courted an encounter
with them and was in a murderous mood.

Vose Adams knew all this and recognized the warrior as one of the
dreaded Indians, with whom he was better acquainted than were his
friends. He had had several scrimmages with them on his trips through
the mountains, and held them in such wholesome fear that he contrived
to avoid a direct conflict. The diminutive miner overflowed with
pluck, but in a hand to hand encounter, must be only a child in the
grasp of the aboriginal giant. The present situation, however, was
peculiar.

There can be no doubt that this savage sought the meeting with the
party, for on no other supposition can his acts be explained. He must
have reasoned that on the narrow ledge his enemies would have to meet
him one by one and engage him single handed. He was like a chamois
that had lived all its life in these wild solitudes and was
surer-footed than any white man. What a triumph it would be (and was
it unreasonable to expect it?) for him to slay the insignificant pale
face immediately in his front, shove his mule over the precipice, and
then serve the remaining three in same fashion!

"Get out of this!" were the words which Vose Adams addressed to the
Indian, directly after the question of Captain Dawson to himself, and
when the enemies were within six feet of each other; "there isn't room
for both of us; you knew that before you started; one of us has got to
give way and I'll be hanged if I do!"

Inasmuch as the red man did not understand a word of English, it is
not to be supposed that he grasped the whole meaning of this command,
but the situation must have made it evident that he had been ordered
to back his horse and to open a way for the white men, and inasmuch as
he had come upon the trail for the express purpose of bringing about
this encounter, it seems hardly necessary to say that he failed to
obey the order. Instead, he repeated some words in his own language,
which it is not unlikely were of the same import as those addressed
to him, for he resolutely maintained his place.

"I tell you," added Vose, raising his voice, as if that could help
make his meaning clear; "if you don't do as I say, somebody is going
to get hurt!"

The warrior, who was carrying a rifle, stooped and gently let it fall
beside him. At the same moment he let go of the thong which served as
a bridle. Thus both hands were free and he crouched down with his
hideous face thrust forward and took a slow, half-step toward Adams.

The coarse black hair dangling loosely about his shoulders, the broad
frightful countenance, which, however, was devoid of paint, the
glittering, basilisk-like eyes, the sinewy half-bent finger, with the
right fingers closed like a vise around the handle of the knife at his
waist, while gently drawing it forth, the catlike advance,--all these
made him so terrible an enemy that the bravest man might well doubt
the result of a meeting with him.

And yet the closest scrutiny of Vose Adams would not have discovered
any tremor in his frame, or so much as a blanching of his face. He
fully comprehended the nature of the peril that impended, but with the
cool readiness of a veteran, he had fixed upon his line of action, in
the same moment that he read the purpose of his formidable enemy.

The preliminary actions of the guide were similar to that of the
warrior. The bridle rein dropped from his hand, and, slightly
stooping, he let his Winchester fall to the ground beside him. Then
his knife flashed out and he was ready.

Since only the mule was between Captain Dawson and the combatants, he
observed all this and interpreted its meaning.

"Vose, what do you mean to do?" he sharply asked.

"Have a little dispute with the fellow," replied Adams, without
removing his gaze from the face of the savage.

"You mustn't do it."

"It sorter looks as if it can't be helped, captain."

"I shall prevent it."

"How?"

"Thus!"

The captain had laid down his rifle and drawn his revolver, in the use
of which he was an expert. While thus engaged, he stooped down, so
that the interposing body of the mule, prevented the Indian from
observing what he was doing. When his weapon was ready and just as he
uttered his last word, he straightened up like a flash. Adams being of
short stature and in a stooping posture, gave him just the chance he
needed. His single arm was extended with the quickness of lightning
and he fired. The bullet bored its way through the bronzed skull of
the Indian, who, with an ear-splitting screech, flung his arms aloft,
leaped several feet from the ground, toppled sideways over the edge of
the trail and went tumbling, rolling and doubling down the precipice
far beyond sight, into the almost fathomless abyss below.

"That's what I call a low down trick!" was the disgusted exclamation
of Adams, looking round with a reproachful expression.

"Do you refer to the Indian?" asked the captain.

"No; to you; I had just got ready for him and had everything fixed
when you interfered."

"Vose, you are a fool," was the comment of his friend.

"And why?"

"That fellow was twice as big as you and you hadn't an earthly chance
in a fight with him."

"Do you 'spose that is the first time I ever met a mountain Injin?"

"You never fought one of that size in this spot."

"What difference does the spot make?"

"I want you to understand," said the captain with assumed gravity,
"that I didn't interfere out of any regard for you."

"What the mischief are you driving at?" demanded the puzzled guide.

"Under ordinary circumstances, I would have stood by and watched the
flurry, only wishing that the best man might win. That means, of
course, that you would have been the loser. But we need some one to
guide us through the mountains; you haven't done it yet; when your
work is over you may go and live on wild Indians for all I care."

Vose quickly regained his good nature. He returned his knife to its
resting place, picked up his rifle, grasped the bridle rein and gently
pulled.

"Come, Hercules; I don't know whether they appreciate us or not;
steady now!"

"What are you going to do with that horse in front of you?" asked the
captain.

"Hang it! if I didn't forget about him; back with you!" he commanded
with a gesture, moving toward the animal, who showed the intelligence
of his kind, by retrograding carefully until he reached the broad safe
place so anxiously sought by the others. There he wheeled and trotted
off, speedily disappearing from sight.

"Vose, you might have traded Hercules for him."

"Not much! I wouldn't give that mule for a drove of horses that have
belonged to these mountain Injins."

"What's the matter with them? Aren't they as good as ours?"

"They're too good; you can't tell what trick they'll sarve you; I was
once riding through these very mountains, on the back of a horse that
I picked up--it isn't necessary to say how--when his owner gave a
signal and the critter was off like a thunderbolt. If I hadn't slipped
from his back at the risk of breaking my neck, he would have carried
me right into a camp of hostiles and you would have been without your
invaluable guide on this trip."

"That is important information--if true--helloa! it is growing light
off there in the east!"

"Yes,--day is breaking," added Vose.

The captain looked at his watch and found the time considerably past
five o'clock. They had been longer on the road than any one supposed,
and the coming of morning was a vast relief to all.

The party were now grouped together, for the trail was broad and safe.
Parson Brush asked, as he pointed almost directly ahead:

"Isn't that a light off yonder?"

The guide gazed in that direction and replied:

"Yes, but it comes from a camp fire, which isn't more than a half mile
away."

The men looked in one another's faces and the captain asked in a
guarded voice, as if afraid of being overheard:

"Whose fire is it?"

"There's no saying with any sartinty, till we get closer, but I
shouldn't be 'sprised if it belong to the folks you're looking for."

The same thought had come to each. There was a compression of lips, a
flashing of eyes and an expression of resolution that boded ill for
him who was the cause of it all.

In the early morning at this elevation, the air was raw and chilling.
The wind which blew fitfully brought an icy touch from the peaks of
the snow-clad Sierras. The party had ridden nearly all night, with
only comparatively slight pauses, so that the men would have welcomed
a good long rest but for the startling discovery just made.

Over the eastern cliffs the sky was rapidly assuming a rosy tinge. Day
was breaking and soon the wild region would be flooded with sunshine.
Already the gigantic masses of stone and rock were assuming grotesque
form in the receding gloom. The dismal night was at an end.

The twinkling light which had caught the eye of Felix Brush appeared
to be directly ahead and near the trail which they were traveling.
This fact strengthened the belief that the fire had been kindled by
the fugitives. The illumination paled as the sun climbed the sky,
until it was absorbed by the overwhelming radiance that was
everywhere.

The pursuers felt well rewarded for the energy they had displayed in
the face of discouragement and danger. Valuable ground had been
gained, and even now when they had supposed they were fully a dozen
miles behind the fugitives, it looked as if they had really caught up
to them, or at least were within hailing distance.

Every eye was fixed on the point which held so intense an interest for
them. As the day grew, a thin, wavy column of smoke was observed
ascending from the camp fire, which was partly hidden among a growth
of scrub cedars, some distance to the right of the trail, whither it
must have been difficult for the couple to force their horses.

"That leftenant ought to have knowed better than to do that," remarked
Vose Adams, "his fire can be seen a long way off."

"What else could they do?" asked the captain.

"The rocks give all the cover he needs."

"But they could have no idea that we were so near," suggested the
parson.

"It isn't that, but the leftenant had 'nough 'sperience with Injins on
his way through here before to know he's liable to run agin them at
any time. I never dared to do a thing like that on my trips."

"Let's push on," said the captain, who saw no reason for tarrying now
that they had located the game.

The ground was so much more favorable that the animals were forced to
a canter, though all were in need of rest. Little was said, and
Captain Dawson spurred forward beside Adams, who as usual was
leading.

Wade Ruggles and Parson Brush also rode abreast. They were far enough
to the rear to exchange a few words without being overheard.

"From the way things look," said Brush; "we shall have to leave
everything with the captain and he isn't likely to give us anything to
do."

"He's mad clean through; I don't b'leve he'll wait to say a word, but
the minute he can draw bead on the leftenant, he'll let fly."

"He is a fine marksman, but he may be in such a hurry that he'll
miss."

"No fear of that; I wonder," added Ruggles, startled by a new thought,
"whether Vose has any idee of stickin' in his oar."

"Likely enough."

"I must git a chance to warn him that we won't stand any nonsense like
that! The best that we'll do is to promise him a chance for a crack
after you and me miss."

"That won't be any chance at all," grimly remarked the parson.

"Wal, it's all he'll have and he mustn't forgit it. There's some
things I won't stand and that's one of 'em."

"We can't do anything now, but we may have a chance to notify him. If
the opportunity comes to me, he shall not remain ignorant."

They were now nearly opposite the camp and the two noticed with
surprise that Adams and the captain were riding past it.

"What's that fur?" asked the puzzled Ruggles.

"That's to prevent them from fleeing toward Sacramento. When they find
we are on the other side, they will have to turn back."

This was apparently the purpose of the men in advance, for they did
not draw rein until a hundred yards beyond the camp. Suddenly the two
halted, and half-facing around, waited until Brush and Ruggles joined
them. The explanation of the guide showed that his plan had been
rightly interpreted by Parson Brush.




CHAPTER XX

THE CAMP FIRE


The trail, as has been stated, was broad and comparatively level. The
slope of the mountain to the right was so moderate that it could be
climbed by a horse almost as readily as by a man. Its face was covered
with a growth of cedars, continuing half way to the summit, when it
terminated, only bleak masses of rock, sprinkled with snow, whose
volume increased with the elevation, being visible above and beyond.

When the four pursuers came together, their faces showed that they
comprehended the serious business before them. It was seen that
Captain Dawson was slightly pale, but those who had been with him in
battle had observed the same peculiarity. Accompanied, as it was in
this instance, by a peculiar steely glitter of his eyes, it meant that
he was in a dangerous mood and the man who crossed his path did so at
his peril.

It was evident that he and Vose Adams had reached an understanding
during the few minutes that they were riding in advance. The words of
Vose Adams were spoken for the benefit of Ruggles and the parson.

"You'll wait here till I take a look at things."

"What do you mean to do?" asked Brush.

"I'm going up the slope on foot to find out how the land lays."

"And when you find that out, what next?"

"He is to come back and report to me," interposed the captain.

There was a world of meaning in these words. It showed that the
captain allowed Adams to lead only when acting as a guide. In all
other matters, the retired officer assumed control. The opportunity of
Vose to pick off the offending lieutenant promised to be better than
that of any one else, since he would first see him, but he had been
given to understand that he must immediately return and let the
captain know the situation. Adams had promised this and he knew Dawson
too well to dare to thwart him.

Brush and Ruggles could make no objection, keen though their
disappointment was. They watched Adams, as he slipped off his mule,
not deeming it worth while to utter the warning both had had in mind.
It was the parson who said:

"I suppose we have nothing to do except to wait here till you come
back?"

"It looks that way, but you must ask the captain."

"You won't be gone long?"

"I don't think so."

"Be careful, but there's no need of waiting," said the captain.

The three watched the guide until he disappeared from sight among the
cedars, when the captain added:

"Vose told me that it was possible that camp fire had been started by
Indians, but it seems to me there is little likelihood of that."

"Why?"

"Those people are so skilled in woodcraft that they would have been on
the alert against our approach, for a brief survey of the trail for
the last half hour would have revealed us to them."

"It may be," suggested the parson, "that with every reason to believe
there is no danger of anything of the kind, for it must be rare that a
white man passes along this trail, they did not keep a lookout."

The captain shook his head.

"From what I know of the American race, it is unlike them."

"What knowledge have we that they have not maintained such a lookout
and discovered us as soon as we noticed the camp fire itself? They may
have formed an ambuscade at some point further along the trail."

"It is a disturbing possibility and I would be alarmed, but for my
confidence in Vose. He has been through this region so often and knows
these wild people so thoroughly that he could not commit a blunder
like that. It seems to me," added the captain a few minutes, later,
"that he is absent a long time."

"It's tough," remarked Ruggles, "that things are fixed so we won't
have a chance to take any hand in this bus'ness."

The captain looked inquiringly at him and he explained:

"You and Vose have set it up atween you."

"I have told you that if your help is needed, it will be welcome; I
can add nothing to that."

"The captain is right," interposed the parson, "but at the same time,
he can see what a disappointment it is for us."

"I admit that, but we are not out of the woods yet."

Before he could make clear the meaning of this remark, Vose Adams
emerged from the cedars, and the three breathlessly awaited his
coming. He broke into a trot and quickly descended the slope to where
they stood. The expression of his face showed before he spoke that he
brought unwelcome news.

"Confound it!" he exclaimed with a shake of his head, "they're not
there!"

"Then they have gone on up the trail," said the captain inquiringly.

"No; they haven't been there; it isn't their camp."

"Whose is it?"

"Injins; there are five of 'em; they've just had their breakfast and
are gettin' ready to make a start."

"Didn't they see you?"

"That isn't the way I do bus'ness," replied Vose rather loftily; "it's
more'n likely, howsumever, they seen us all awhile ago when we was
further down the trail. They're traveling eastward."

"How can you know that?" asked the parson.

"The Injin that took his dive off the trail 'bout the time the captain
fired off his revolver, was going that way. He b'longed to the party
and was sorter leading 'em; he was a chief or something of the kind."

"Where are their ponies?"

"They haven't any,--leastways he was the only one that had, which is
why I said he was some kind of a chief. We shall hear from 'em agin."

"Why?"

"I mean after they find out about that little row."

"Why need they find out about it?"

"They can't help it; they'll miss their chief; they'll run across that
horse of his and that'll give 'em the clue."

This unexpected discovery put a new face on matters. Five mountain
Indians, the bravest and most implacable of their race, were almost
within stone's throw of the party. But for the occurrence of a brief
while before, they probably would have permitted the white men to
continue their journey unmolested, since the strength of the two
bands, all things considered, was about equal, but when the hostiles
learned of the death of their leader, they would bend every effort
toward securing revenge. They would dog the miners, watchful, alert
and tireless in their attempts to cut them off from the possibility of
ever repeating the deed.

"But that chief, as you seem to think he was," said Captain Dawson,
"is gone as utterly as if the ground had opened and swallowed him.
They will never have the chance to officiate at his funeral, so how
are they to learn of the manner of his taking off?"

"It won't take 'em long," replied Adams; "his pony will hunt them out,
now that he is left to himself; that'll tell 'em that something is up
and they'll start an investigatin' committee. The footprints of our
horses, the marks on the rocks, which you and me wouldn't notice, the
fact that we met the chief on that narrer ledge and that he's turned
up missing will soon lay bare the whole story, and as I remarked
aforesaid, we shall hear from 'em agin."

"It looks like a case of the hunter hunting the tiger," said the
parson, "and then awaking to the fact that the tiger is engaged
in hunting him; it is plain to see that there's going to be a
complication of matters, but I don't feel that it need make any
difference to us."

"It won't!" replied the captain decisively; "we haven't put our hands
to the plough with any intention of looking back. What's the next
thing to do, Vose?"

"We've got to look after our animals."

"But there's no grass here for them."

"A little further and we'll strike a stream of water where we'll find
some grass, though not much, but it's better than nothing."

Vaulting into the saddle, the guide after some pounding of his heels
against the iron ribs of Hercules, forced him into a gallop, which the
others imitated. The trail continued comparatively smooth, and, being
slightly descending, the animals were not crowded as hard as it would
seem. A mile of this brought them to the water, where they were turned
loose. The stream gushed from the mountain side, and, flowing across
the trail, was lost among the rocks to the left. The moisture thus
diffused produced a moderate growth of tough, coarse grass, which the
animals began plucking as soon as the bits were removed from their
mouths. They secured little nutriment, but as the guide remarked, it
was an improvement upon nothing. The men bathed their faces in the
cold, clear water, took a refreshing draught, and then ate the lunch
provided for them by the thoughtful Adams. Though they ate heartily,
sufficient was kept to answer for another meal or two, if it should be
thought wise to put themselves on an allowance.

They had just lighted their pipes, when Wade Ruggles uttered an
exclamation. Without explaining the cause, he bounded to his feet and
ran several rods to the westward, where he was seen to stoop and pick
something from the ground. He examined it closely and then, as he
turned about and came back more slowly it was perceived that he held a
white handkerchief in his hand. His action caused the others to rise
to his feet.

"What have you there?" asked Captain Dawson, suspecting its identity.

"I guess you have seen it before," replied Wade, handing the piece of
fine, bordered linen to him. He turned it over with strange emotions,
for he was quick to recognize it.

"Yes," he said, compressing his lips; "it is hers; she dropped it
there--how long ago, Vose?"

The latter examined the handkerchief, as if looking for the answer to
the question in its folds, but shook his head.

"Even a mountain Injin could not tell that."

The parson asked the privilege of examining the article. His heart was
beating fast, though no one else was aware of it, for it was a present
which he had made to Nellie Dawson on the preceding Christmas, having
been brought by Vose Adams, with other articles, on his trip made
several months before the presentation. There was the girl's name,
written by himself in indelible ink, and in his neat, round hand. It
was a bitter reflection that it had been in her possession, when she
was in the company of the one whom she esteemed above all others.

"It may have been," reflected the parson, carefully keeping his
thoughts to himself, "that, when she remembered from whom it came, she
flung it aside to please him. Captain," he added, "since this was once
mine, I presume you have no objection to my keeping it."

"You are welcome to it; I don't care for it," replied the parent.

"Thank you," and the parson carefully put it away to keep company with
the letter of Nellie Dawson which broke her father's heart; "I observe
that it is quite dry, which makes me believe it has not been exposed
to the dew, and therefore could not have lain long on the ground."

"You can't tell anything by that," commented Vose; "the air is so dry
up here, even with the snow and water around us, that there's no dew
to amount to anything."

All seemed to prefer not to discuss the little incident that had
produced so sombre an effect upon the party. Wade Ruggles was disposed
to claim the handkerchief, inasmuch as it was he who found it, but he
respected the feelings of the parson too much to make any protest.

The occurrence was of no special interest to the guide. He had said
they were in danger from the Indians and he gave his thoughts to them.
While the others kept their seats on the ground, he stood erect, and,
shading his eyes with one hand, peered long and attentively over the
trail behind them. The clump of cedars from amid which the thin column
of vapor was slowly climbing into the sky and the narrow ledge which
had been the scene of their stirring adventure were in view, though
its winding course shut a portion from sight.

"I expected it!" suddenly exclaimed Vose.

The others followed the direction of his gaze and saw what had caused
his words. The five Indians, whom Vose had discovered in camp, were
picking their way along the ledge, with their faces turned from the
white men, who were watching them. Despite the chilly air, caused by
the elevation, not one of the warriors wore a blanket. Two had bows
and arrows, three rifles, carried in a trailing fashion, and all were
lithe, sinewy fellows, able to give a good account of themselves in
any sort of fight.

A curious fact noted by all of our friends was that while these
warriors were thus moving away, not one of them looked behind him.
Their long black hair hung loosely about their shoulders, and in the
clear air it was observable that three wore stained feathers in the
luxuriant growth on their crowns.

"Is it possible that they have no suspicion of us?" asked the parson;
"their action in not looking around would imply that."

"Don't fool yourself," was the reply of Adams; "they knowed of us
afore we knowed anything of them."

"Why did they allow us to pass their camp undisturbed?"

"Things weren't in the right shape for 'em. There are only three guns
among 'em, though them kind of Injins are as good with the bow as the
rifle, and they made up their minds that if we let them alone, they
wouldn't bother us."

"You said awhile ago that we should have trouble from them."

"And so we shall; when they reasoned like I was sayin', they didn't
know anything about the little accident that happened to their chief;
it's that which will make things lively."

"We can't see the point where that accident took place," said Captain
Dawson.

"No; the trail curves too much, but we can foller it most of the way;
they're likely to go right on without 'specting anything, but when
they find the horse, it'll set 'em to looking round. After that, the
band will begin to play."

While the party were watching the five Indians, the leader was seen
to pass from view around the curve in the trail, followed by the next,
until finally the fifth disappeared. All this time, not one of the
warriors looked behind him. It was a singular line of action, and
because of its singularity roused the suspicion of the spectators.

While three of the miners resumed their seats on the boulders and
ground, Vose Adams kept his feet. Doubling each palm, so as to make a
funnel of it, he held one to either eye and continued scrutinizing the
point where he had last seen the hostiles. He suspected it was not the
last of them. Instead of imitating him, his friends studied his
wrinkled countenance.

The air in that elevated region was wonderfully clear, but it is
hardly possible to believe the declaration which the guide made some
minutes later. He insisted that, despite the great distance, one of
the Indians, after passing from view, returned over his own trail and
peeped around the bend in the rocks, and that the guide saw his black
hair and gleaming snake-like eyes. The fact that Vose waited until the
savage had withdrawn from sight, before making the astonishing
declaration, threw some discredit on it, for it would have required a
good telescope to do what he claimed to have done with the unassisted
eye alone.

"You see I was looking for something of the kind," he explained, "or
mebbe I wouldn't have obsarved him."

"Could you tell the color of his eyes?" asked the doubting Ruggles.

"They were as black as coal."

"It is safe to say that," remarked the parson, "inasmuch as I never
met an Indian who had eyes of any other color."

"There are such," said Vose, "and I've seen 'em, though I'll own
they're mighty scarce and I never knowed of any in this part of the
world. Howsumever, I won't purtend that I could see the color of a
man's eyes that fur, but I did see his hair, forehead and a part of
his ugly face. He knowed we was behind him all the time, and this one
wanted to find out what we was doing. When he larned that, they kept
on along the ledge, but there's no saying how fur they'll go afore
they find something's gone wrong."

Captain Dawson showed less interest in this by-play than the others.
He was not concerned with what was behind them, so much as with what
was in front. The belief was so strong with him that their persistent
travel through the night had brought them close to the fugitives that
he begrudged the time necessary for the animals to rest and eat.

Parson Brush felt that Adams was acting wisely in giving attention to
the rear. It would be the height of folly to disregard these
formidable warriors when they meant trouble. Brush rose to his feet
and using his palms as did the guide, scanned the country behind
them.

He saw nothing of any warrior peering around the rocks, but he did see
something, which escaped even the keen vision of Vose Adams himself.
Beyond the ledge and a little to the left, he observed a riderless
horse, with head high in air, and gazing at something which the two
white men could not see. The parson directed the attention of Vose to
the animal.

"By gracious! it's the chief's horse," he exclaimed; "do you see
that?"

The other two were now looking and all plainly saw a warrior advance
into view, approaching the animal, which, instead of being frightened,
seemed to recognize his friends, and remained motionless until the
Indian came up and grasped the thong about his neck. Then the two
passed from sight.

The identical thing prophesied by Vose Adams had occurred under the
eyes of the four pursuers. The steed of the dead chieftain had been
recovered, and it would not take the hostiles long to penetrate the
mystery of the matter. Vose was wise in taking the course he did, and
his companions were now inclined to believe his astonishing assertion
that he saw one of the number when he peeped around the curving ledge
and watched their actions.

However, it would have been absurd to wait where they were in order to
learn every move of their enemies, for that would have been a
voluntary abandonment of the advantage secured at the cost of so much
labor and danger. Captain Dawson insisted that the pursuit should be
pressed without any thought of the red men, and Vose consented.

"But there's one thing we mustn't forget, captain," he said, "and that
is that it is daytime and not night."

"I do not catch your meaning," replied the captain, pausing on the
point of moving off to secure his horse.

"It is this: them people in front will keep as sharp an eye to the
rear as to the front; more'n likely it will be sharper, and it will be
a bad thing if they discover us when we're two or three miles off."

"How shall we prevent it?"

"We can do it, if we're careful. You'll remember that when you went
over this route last, you come upon places where you could see for a
mile or more, 'cause the trail was straight and broad, while there are
others where you can't see more'n a hundred yards. Them that I've
named last is where we must overhaul 'em."

"That sounds well, Vose," said the captain, "but I am unable to see
how you are going to manage so as to bring that about."

"While you're getting the animals ready, I'll take a look ahead."

This was not in the nature of an explanation, but the three willingly
did their part. Vose disappeared almost instantly, and, though they
took but a few minutes to prepare their animals for the resumption of
travel, he was back among them, the expression of his face showing
that he brought news of importance.

"They ain't fur off," he said.

"How far?" asked the captain.

"I can't say anything more than that we're purty close to 'em. Let's
push on!"




CHAPTER XXI

STRANGERS


The signs of an approaching storm that had been noted with some
apprehension the night before, passed away. The sky revealed hardly a
cloud rift, and, when the sun had climbed the mountain crests, the
scene was grand beyond description. But for the grim errand of the
four men, holding relentlessly to the pursuit, they must have yielded
to its impressive influence.

The trail remained so favorable for a couple of miles further, that it
was passed at the same easy, swinging gallop. Vose Adams retained his
place a few paces in advance of the others, who saw him glance sharply
to the right and left, often to the ground and occasionally to the
rear, as if to assure himself that none of his friends was going
astray.

The moderate but continuous descent of the path took them so far
downward that the change of temperature again became noticeable. The
ground was rough and uneven and the animals dropped to a walk.
Sometimes the course led around boulders, through sparse growths of
cedar, beside brawling torrents, two of which they were compelled to
ford, where it was hard for their animals to keep their feet.

"Last fall," remarked the guide, at the most difficult of these
passages, "I had to wait two days before I dared try to cross with
Hercules and one of the other mules."

His companions nodded their heads but made no other answer. They were
not in the mood for talking.

They were now making their way through a canyon similar to Dead Man's
Gulch, with rents and yawning ravines opening on the right and left,
before which the party might have halted in perplexity, had it been in
the night time. But the path showed plainly and the familiarity of the
guide prevented any mistake on his part.

Adams had intimated that by a certain line of procedure the watchful
fugitives could be prevented from discovering the approach of the
pursuers until too late to escape them. In counting upon his ability
to do this, he overestimated his skill, for the task was clearly
impossible, and it was because of his efforts in that direction that
he made a serious blunder. He had crossed for the third time a stream
which was shallow, and, upon reaching the opposite bank, where the
ground was moist and soft, he reined up with an exclamation of
impatience.

"What's the matter?" asked Captain Dawson, in the same mood.

"We've passed 'em," was the reply; "they're somewhere behind us."

"How far?"

"That remains to be found out, but I don't think it's a great
distance."

The captain angrily wheeled his horse and re-entered the stream.

"If they don't get away, it won't be our fault," was his ungracious
comment; "we have done little else than throw away our chances from
the first."

The guide made no response, and the next minute the four were
retracing their course, their animals at a walk, and all scanning the
rocks on either hand as they passed them.

It was clear by this time that the fugitives held one important
advantage over their pursuers. The route that they were following was
so devious and so varied in its nature, that only at rare intervals
could it be traced with the eye for a quarter or half a mile. Certain
of pursuit, Lieutenant Russell and his companion would be constantly
on the lookout for it. They were more likely, therefore, to discover
the horsemen than the latter were to observe them. Even if their
flight was interrupted, there were innumerable places in this immense
solitude where they could conceal themselves for an indefinite
period.

The question the pursuers asked themselves was whether the others had
strayed unwittingly from the trail, or whether they had turned off to
elude their pursuers, whose desperate mood they could not but know.
The latter supposition seemed the more likely, since the path was
marked so plainly that it could be lost only by unaccountable
carelessness.

At the first break in the side of the vast mountain walls Vose Adams
again slipped from his mule and spent several minutes in studying the
ground.

"They haven't gone in here," was his comment, as he remounted.

"Make certain that we are not too far back," said the captain.

"I have made no mistake," was the curt reply of the guide. The party
had gone less than twenty rods further, when another rent opened on
the other side of the canyon, which was about an eighth of a mile wide.
It would not do now to slight anything, and Adams headed his mule
diagonally across the gorge, the animal walking slowly, while the
rider leaned over with his eyes on the ground. Suddenly he exclaimed:

"We've hit it this time! Here's where they went in!"

All four leaped from the back of their animals. Adams pointed out the
faint indentations made by the hoofs of two horses. Less accustomed
than he to study such evidence, they failed to note that which was
plain to him; the hoof prints of one of the animals were smaller than
those of the other, since they were made by Cap, the pony belonging to
Nellie Dawson. There could no longer be any doubt that the pursuers
were warm on the trail of the fugitives.

Such being the fact, the interest of the men naturally centered on the
avenue through which the others had made their way.

It was one of those fissures, sometimes seen among enormous piles of
rock, that suggest that some terrific convulsion of nature, ages
before, has split the mountain in twain from top to bottom. The latter
was on a level with the main canyon itself, the chasm at the beginning
being ten or twelve yards in width, but, occurring in a depression of
the mountain spur, its height was no more than five or six hundred
feet, whereas in other localities it would have been nearly ten times
as great. The base was strewn with fragments of sandstone, some of the
pieces as large as boulders, which had probably been brought down by
the torrents that swept through the ravine in spring or when a
cloudburst descended upon the upper portion.

Standing at the entrance, it was observed that the gorge trended
sharply to the left, so that the view was shut off at a distance of
fifty yards. It was noticeable, too, that the path taken by the
fugitives sloped upward at so abrupt an angle that it must have sorely
tried the horses.

"I thought so," was the comment of Vose Adams, when he returned from a
brief exploration of the ravine; "they got off and led their
animals."

"Have you any idea of the distance they went?" asked Captain Dawson,
who was in a more gracious mood, now that he appreciated the value of
the services of their guide.

"No; I've rid in front of that opening a good many times, but this is
the first time I ever went into it."

"Well, what is to be done?" asked Parson Brush.

"Why, foller 'em of course," Wade Ruggles took upon himself to reply.

"That won't do," replied Adams, "for it is likely to upset everything;
I'll leave Hercules with you and sneak up the gorge far enough to find
how the land lays. I'll come back as soon as I can, but don't get
impatient if I'm gone several hours."

Brush and Ruggles showed their displeasure, for, while admitting the
skill of the guide, they could not see adequate cause for the
impending delay. They had made so many slips that it seemed like
inviting another. It was clear that they were close upon the
fugitives, and the two believed the true policy was to press the
pursuit without relaxing their vigor. But Captain Dawson, the one who
naturally would have been dissatisfied, was silent, thereby making it
apparent that Adams was carrying out a plan previously agreed upon by
the two.

Vose paid no heed to Ruggles and the parson, but started up the
ravine, quickly disappearing from view. Believing a long wait
inevitable, the three prepared to pass the dismal interval as best
they could. Here and there scant patches of grass showed in the canyon,
and the animals were allowed to crop what they could of the natural
food. The men lounged upon the boulders at hand, smoked their pipes
and occasionally exchanged a few words, but none was in the mood for
talking and they formed a grim, stolid group.

Hardly ten minutes had passed, when Ruggles, with some evidence of
excitement, exclaimed in a guarded undertone:

"Helloa! Something's up!"

He referred to the horses, who are often the most reliable sentinels
in the presence of insidious danger. Two of them had stopped plucking
the grass, and, with their ears pricked, were staring up the canyon at
some object that had attracted their attention and that was invisible
to their owners in their present situation.

Convinced that something unusual had taken place, Ruggles walked out
into the canyon where he could gain a more extended view. One sweeping
glance was enough, when he hurried back to his companions.

"Thunderation! all Sacramento's broke loose and is coming this way!"

The three passed out from the side of the gorge to where they had a
view of the strange procession. There seemed to be about a dozen men,
mounted on mules, with as many more pack animals, coming from the west
in a straggling procession, talking loudly and apparently in exuberant
spirits.

"I don't like their looks," said Brush; "it is best to get our
property out of their way."

The counsel was good and was followed without a minute's delay. The
four animals were rounded up and turned into the ravine, up which Vose
Adams had disappeared. They gave no trouble, but, probably because of
the steepness of the slope, none of the four went beyond sight. Had
the three men been given warning, they would have placed them out of
reach, for none knew better than they how attractive horses are to men
beyond the power of the law. But it was too late now, and the little
party put on a bold front.

As the strangers drew near, they were seen to be nine in number and
they formed a motley company. Their pack mules were so cumbrously
loaded as to suggest country wagons piled with hay. The wonder was how
the tough little animals could carry such enormous burdens, consisting
of blankets, picks, shovels, guns, cooking utensils, including even
some articles of furniture.

Our older readers will recall that for years after the close of the
war, tens of thousands of the blue army overcoats were in use
throughout the country. It looked as if every man in the present
company was thus provided, including in many instances trousers of the
same material, though each person had discarded the army cap for a
soft slouch hat, similar to those worn by the miners. All the garments
were in a dilapidated condition, proving their rough usage as well as
their poor quality. Many of the heavy boots disclosed naked toes,
while the mules had not known a curry comb for weeks and perhaps
months.

The faces of the men were anything but attractive. Most of them were
heavily bearded, with long, frowsy, unkempt hair, dangling about the
shoulders. Every one displayed side arms, and there could be no
mistake in setting them down as a reckless lot, whom a peaceable
citizen would not care to meet anywhere.

The leader of this mongrel gang was a massive man, who bestrode so
small a mule that his feet were only a few inches from the ground.
There was little semblance of discipline in the company, but a certain
rude deference to the fellow, who kept his place at the head, and did
the loudest talking, ornamented with plenty of expletives, indicated
his prominence among his fellows.

The mountain tramps had descried the three men standing at the side of
the canyon, watching them as they approached. They ceased their
boisterous talking and studied them as they drew near.

"Howdy, pards?" called the leader, raising his two fingers to his
forehead and making a military salute, to which our friends responded
coolly, hoping the company would keep on without stopping.

But they were disappointed. Colonel Briggs, as his men called him,
suddenly shouted "Whoa!" in a voice that could have been heard a mile
off, and pulled so hard on his bridle rein that he drew the jaws of
the mule against his breast, while the rider lay back almost on the
haunches of his animal, who showed his contrariness by walking round
in a short circle before standing still.

"Which way, pards?" asked the leader, while his followers, who with
more or less effort succeeded in checking their mules, curiously
surveyed the three miners.

"We intend to visit Sacramento," replied Captain Dawson.

"Huh! that's where we come from."

"On your way to the diggings I presume?" continued the captain
courteously.

"That's what's the matter; we're going to New Constantinople, which is
the name of a mining settlement in Dead Man's Gulch. Do you know
anything of the place?"

"We live there."

"The deuce! Queer town, ain't it?"

"In what respect?"

"Don't like visitors; Red Tom and Missouri Mike, two of the gang with
me, stopped there a year or so ago with the idee of staying; the best
they could do was to sleep there one night and git fired the next
morning. That went agin the grain," continued Colonel Briggs, "and the
more the boys thought it over the madder they got. When they told the
rest of us, we made up our minds that the trouble was the diggings had
panned out so rich in them parts that the folks meant to keep 'em to
themselves. I don't call that square, so we're going down to divvy
with 'em. Big scheme, ain't it?"

Our three friends were astounded. The addition of this gang to New
Constantinople meant nothing less than its moral ruin. It would bring
a peril from the first hour and doubtless precipitate a murderous
conflict with a doubtful issue.

"They are a peculiar people," said Captain Dawson, repressing all
evidence of his anger; "it's a mistake to attribute their prejudice
against immigrants to the richness of the diggings, for though they
have been worked for years, they have not produced much. But they want
no strangers among them, and I know they will not allow you and your
friends to make your homes in their settlement."

Colonel Briggs threw back his head, opened his enormous mouth and
broke into uproarious laughter, most of his companions joining him to
the extent of a broad grin.

"Do you hear that, boys? Won't let us settle among 'em, eh? And there
are nine of us and we hain't had a scrimmage since we left Sacramento,
except with the Injins, which don't count. Stranger, we're yearning to
hear your folks say we shan't jine 'em, 'cause if they try to stop it,
it'll make things lively."

It was not a pleasant recollection of our friends that, since their
departure from New Constantinople, the force left behind would be
hardly a match for this desperate gang of marauders, who no doubt were
as eager for trouble as they professed to be.

"Why not make a settlement of your own?" was the conciliating question
of Parson Brush; "there's plenty of room in this country."

"That would be too peaceable like; it don't suit us; we're looking for
trouble."

"And you'll find it powerful quick," said Wade Ruggles, "if you try to
shove that gang of yours into New Constantinople."

"That's music in our ears; that's what we're hungry for; we're ready
to start an opposition hotel to the Heavenly Bower, too; we've got the
stock to furnish it."

"Wade," said the parson, "keep your temper; we can't afford to quarrel
with these men."

"It wouldn't take much for me to shoot that chap off his mule as he
sets there."

"Leave matters to the captain; it looks as if we shall have a fight,
but it is best to keep cool."

The observant trio had noticed an additional cause for uneasiness.
More than one of the party were surveying the three horses and mule
with admiring eyes. Some of them spoke to one another in low tones,
and there could be no doubt they looked with envy upon the animals,
which, tiring of their confinement in the ravine, had come forth as if
with the purpose of passing under review, on their way to crop the
grass from which they had been driven.

"Colonel," called one of the men behind him, "them is likely
animals."

"I had obsarved that fact myself; strangers, I've made up my mind to
buy them critters; what's your price?"

"They are not for sale," replied Captain Dawson.

"Why not?"

"We need them for our own use."

"Then we'll trade."

"You won't do anything of the kind," said the captain, speaking with
the utmost coolness, but with that paling of the countenance and
glitter of the eyes that Colonel Briggs would have done well to heed.

"Strikes me, stranger, you're rather peart in your observations," said
the leader with an odd chuckle; "we ain't used to having people speak
to us in that style."

"It is my custom to say what I mean; it saves misunderstanding."

"It's my opinion, stranger, you'd better say trade."

"It is of no importance to me what your opinion is; we need the horses
and the mule for our own use and we shall keep them."

"But you've got one more than you want."

"He belongs to a friend who is not far off and will soon return; we
can't spare one of them."

"If we give you four of ours for the lot, that'll make an even thing
of it. Besides, we'll throw in something to boot."

"I wouldn't give one of the horse's shoes for all the trash you have
piled on top of your animals; the stuff isn't worth house room, but it
is what I should expect to see in the hands of a lot of tramps like
you and yours; I wouldn't trade our mule for the whole party which, to
judge by their looks, ought to be in jail."

Brush and Ruggles were amazed to hear the captain use such language,
for it sounded as if he was trying to provoke instead of avoid a
fight. The truth was the veteran was thoroughly enraged by the
evident purpose of the fellow before him. Although his voice was low
and deliberate, the captain's temper was at a white heat. The point
had been reached where a desperate struggle seemed unavoidable, and he
wished to precipitate the crisis, inasmuch as it had to come.

Colonel Briggs did not laugh, but turning his head, talked for a
minute with the man nearest him, their words so low that no one else
heard them. Then the leader turned back in a quick, decisive way.

"There don't seem much use in talking, stranger, so 'spose we make a
fight of it."

"As you prefer."

The gang hardly expected so firm a front. Some of them muttered to one
another. They were not a unit on the question, though it was evident
that the majority preferred to fight.

The three men stood with their backs almost against the mountain wall.
Each had a Winchester and revolver and all were expert in the use of
the weapons. The others were gathered in an irregular group around
their leader. They, too, were provided with all the weapons they could
use, not to mention the extra guns strapped upon the pack mules. They
outnumbered our friends three to one.

Captain Dawson could use his rifle as well with his single arm as
formerly with two.

"He can't fire before me," he said in an undertone to Brush, standing
next to him; "when the shooting begins, I'll drop him off his mule
before he knows what's coming. When I say the word, let fly as quick
as lightning! Likely enough they'll win, but we'll make them pay high
for their victory."

"Do you notice that tall thin man at the rear?" asked Brush, in the
same guarded voice; "his eyes shine like a rattlesnake's; he'll be
_my_ first target."




CHAPTER XXII

FRIENDS


Colonel Briggs was nonplussed for the moment. He had failed to scare
the men whom he meant to despoil of their property and some of the
mutterings behind him showed that he lacked the unanimous support of
his followers.

"Boys," he said, looking round in their faces; "you've heerd what
these strangers say to my mild requests. Since they are too mean to
trade, I leave it to you to say whether we shall let up on 'em or make
'em trade; which is it?"

"Trade! trade!" was the response, given with such ardency that there
seemed to be no dissent, though there was.

"That hits me right; trade it shall be; the first one of the strangers
that kicks, fill him full of holes."

"And the first man that lays a finger on my property," said Captain
Dawson, in the same deliberate voice, "will be shot down like a dog!"

The person whom Parson Brush had selected a few minutes before for
his first target and whom he was watching closely, now did an
extraordinary thing. This individual was thin to emaciation. His
beard was scant and scraggly, and his large black eyes gleamed like
those of a wild animal. He had a very long body, and sat so upright
in his saddle, with his Winchester resting across in front, that he
towered head and shoulders above his companions. From the first,
he fixed his penetrating eyes on Captain Dawson and studied him
closely. It was this persistent intensity of gaze that attracted
the notice of Brush, who set him down as being even more malignant
than the leader of the disreputable party.

When a collision was impending, and must have come the next second,
the singular looking man, grasping his revolver, raised his hand above
his head and called:

"Hold on a minute!"

His commanding voice and manner hushed every one. From his place at
the rear, he spurred his mule straight toward the three men standing
on the ground.

"Keep off!" commanded the parson; "if you come any nearer I'll
shoot!"

The extraordinary looking individual gave him no heed, but forced his
mule in front of Captain Dawson, upon whom he kept his eyes riveted.

"Don't fire till I give the word," commanded the captain, who had
become suddenly interested in the tall, slim man.

Halting his mule directly before Dawson, and with no more than a
couple of yards separating them, the stranger craned his head forward
until his chin was almost between the long ears of his animal. He
seemed to be trying to look the officer through, while every other man
watched the curious proceeding.

Suddenly the fellow resumed his upright posture in the saddle, his
manner showing that he had solved the problem that perplexed him.
Through his thin, scattered beard, he was seen to be smiling.

"What's your name?" he asked.

"Maurice Dawson."

"Formerly captain of the Iowa ---- cavalry?"

"The same at your service."

"Don't you know me, captain?"

The officer thus appealed to took a single step forward, and looked
searchingly in the face of the man that had thus addressed him.

"There is something familiar in your looks and voice, but I am unable
to place you."

"Did you ever hear of Corporal Bob Parker of the ---- Missouri?"

"Yes; you are he! I recognize you now! I am glad to greet you."

And shoving his Winchester under the stump of his arm, Captain Dawson
extended his hand to his old comrade and shook it warmly, the two
seeming to forget the presence of every one else.

"Something in your face struck me," said the corporal, "but I wasn't
sure. The last time I saw you, you had both arms."

"Yes; I got rid of this one at the very close of the war."

"Things were pretty well mixed up around Petersburg; I tried to get on
your track, but failed; I knew you meant to come to California, and
when we drifted here, I was hopeful of finding you, but I didn't think
it would be in this style."

While speaking the corporal had retained the hand of the captain,
shaking it occasionally as he spoke. He now gave it a final pressure
and dropped it.

"Captain, you and I went through some pretty tough scrimmages and you
were always dead true and game; when we lost our colonel and major,
you took command and led the charge that day at Cold Harbor; Grant or
Sheridan couldn't have done better."

"It _was_ rather warm," smiled the captain, blushing at the
compliment; "but, corporal, it looks as if we are going to have
something of the kind here."

Corporal Parker deliberately turned to the wondering group behind
him.

"Jim and Tom, you know what we agreed on, if this should prove to be
my old commander. You two wore the gray, but you are true blue now."

At this reminder, two of the company without a word rode forward and
placed themselves beside the corporal.

"Now, we'll face the other way."

His suggestion was followed. The three wheeled their animals around,
so that their riders, like the footmen, were in a line confronting
Colonel Briggs and his astonished company.

"Dress," said the corporal, looking down and moving his mule about
until the alignment would have drawn a compliment from a West Point
cadet.

"Now, boys, are your shooting irons ready?"

"They gin'rally air," was the significant response of one of the men.

"All right, colonel," added the corporal making a military salute;
"everything being in readiness please let the skirmish proceed."

Colonel Briggs emitted a forceful exclamation.

"What's the meaning of all this? I don't understand it."

"There are six on each side; that evens matters; shall you start the
music or do you prefer to have the captain fire the opening gun?"

"But you haven't told me what this means."

"It means that Captain Dawson and Corporal Bob Parker have drunk from
the same canteen."

It must be conceded that Colonel Briggs had one merit; no one was
quicker than he to grasp a situation. So long as there were nine men
on one side and three on the other, the success of the former was
promising. He meant to crowd the defiant miners to the wall and would
have done so but for the unprecedented turn of affairs. Now it was six
to six and he knew the mettle of the three recruits that had joined
the miners. Bob Parker was the most terrific fighter in the whole
company. He was one of those men, occasionally seen, who was
absolutely without fear. He would have stood up alone and fought the
other eight. During that single week in Sacramento, he gained the name
of a terror and caused a sigh of relief on the part of the authorities
when he left for the mountains.

The corporal always fired to kill, and his skill with rifle and pistol
was marvelous. While talking with Colonel Briggs, he fixed his
brilliant black eyes on him, as if to intimate that he had selected
_him_ for his pet antagonist. All this was disconcerting.

In this crisis, when every nerve was drawn tense and the question of
life and death hung on the passing of a breath, Colonel Briggs leaned
backward and elevating his chin in the way that had become familiar,
emitted one of his resounding laughs. Then he abruptly snapped his
jaws together like the springing of a trap.

"Why, Bob, this puts a different face on things," he said cheerily;
"if the man's a friend of yours, of course we can't quarrel with
him."

"I rather think not," replied the corporal.

"I was in the army myself," added the colonel, "but didn't stay long;
me and General Grant couldn't agree as to how the war should be run,
and one night when no one was around, I resigned and left."

"Then you didn't win your title in the service," remarked Captain
Dawson, who felt that he could afford to show good will, now that the
situation had taken so remarkable a turn.

"Scarcely; the boys think that no officer lower than a colonel is fit
to command this crowd, so that's how I got the handle."

Captain Dawson could not forbear saying:

"I think it much more befitting that a true and tried soldier, like
Corporal Parker, should be in your place."

"It was offered to me," said the corporal, "but I refused it."

"No; we agreed to make him a full-fledged major-general, but he
declined the honor with some sarcastic remarks," said the colonel;
"howsumever, boys, now that things have been straightened out, do you
intend to go with the captain or with us?"

Corporal Parker addressed his two comrades.

"Wheel and salute!"

They faced their animals around, and, taking the cue from the
corporal, made an elaborate military salutation to Captain Dawson and
his companions. Then they wheeled again and rode back to their former
places.

"With my best regards," added the colonel, also saluting, while the
rest half-nodded and grinned over the odd turn of affairs. Dawson,
Brush and Ruggles unbent sufficiently to respond, but kept their
places, side by side, and watched the curious procession until it
passed out of sight beyond a sweeping curve in the canyon.

"I wonder if we are likely to see any more of them," said the parson;
"they are an ugly lot and badly want our horses."

"Not badly enough to fight Corporal Parker and his two friends. The
corporal is the bravest man I ever saw. I know he was disappointed
when the colonel was so quick in backing down. He will go hungry for
two or three days, for the sake of a fight. It is he and not the
colonel or any one in the company that is spoiling for a row."

"And I picked him out as the first one to shoot," grimly remarked
Brush.

"The chances are ten to one that he would have dropped you first, but
it shows how easily one may be mistaken."

"I tell you," said Ruggles earnestly, "when that gang strikes New
Constantinople, there'll be trouble."

"There's no doubt of it," commented Brush; "the forces will be about
equal; if the boys at home could have warning of what is coming, they
would make it so hot for Colonel Briggs and his tramps that they would
be glad to camp somewhere else."

"That wouldn't improve matters, for of necessity there would be
passing back and forth, and there are some people at New Constantinople
who would welcome the change. That's the worst of it; a good deal of
this evil seed will fall on soil waiting for it."

"We may be back in time to take a hand in the business," said the
parson; "I don't know whether your friend, the corporal, can be
secured as an ally."

"It is doubtful, for about the only merits he has are his bravery and
his loyalty to his friends."

"In my 'pinion the same is considerable," commented Ruggles.

"He would be a powerful friend to Nellie, because she is a female and
because she is my daughter, but," added the father with a sigh, "I
have my doubts whether I shall ever take her to the settlement
again."

This announcement strangely affected the two who heard it, for the
dearest schemes which they secretly nourished included the spending
of their days in the mining settlement. The hope of each had flickered
into life once more with the prospect of recovering and punishing her
abductor. They knew that she would bitterly mourn his loss, and would
probably be inconsolable for a time, but the months and years would
bring forgetfulness and then--who should say what _might_ come to
pass?

"We thought," remarked Ruggles, as they resumed their seats, "that we
should have a weary wait for Vose, but it didn't prove so dull after
all."

The captain looked at his watch.

"He has been gone more than an hour, and there's no saying when he
will be back. He has his own way of managing this business, and,
though I concede his skill and superior knowledge in this part of the
world, it is hard to keep my patience when I see the hours slipping
away without bringing any results."

But the patience of the three men was tried more sorely than ever
before, and to a greater extent than any one of them anticipated. Noon
came and passed and without bringing Vose Adams. The party partook
sparingly of their lunch, leaving enough for their absent friend, but
the lagging hours wore away and they still waited. They said little to
one another, but the captain, unable to restrain his restlessness,
wandered down the canyon. The two left behind watched him until he
passed from view in the direction taken by Colonel Briggs and his
company. A few minutes later, the report of his rifle came back to
them.

"I wonder if _he's_ got into trouble," exclaimed the parson, rising to
his feet and peering to their left, without seeing everything to
explain the sound that had reached them.

"I shouldn't wonder," replied Ruggles; "everything is going wrong;
Vose wouldn't stay away so long, unless he, too, was in difficulty."

"The captain may need us; he can't be far off."

Gun in hand, the couple walked hurriedly down the canyon, on the alert
for Indians, for it seemed more likely that if any danger threatened,
it was from them. To their relief, however, they soon found their
alarm groundless. The captain was seen coming, apparently as well as
ever.

"Nothing is wrong," he explained when they were within speaking
distance; "I saw an antelope among the rocks and took a shot at him."

"How near did you come to hitting him?"

"He made only a single jump after he received my bullet; it's a pity
he didn't make a couple of them."

"Why?"

"It would have brought him over the outer rock and into the ravine;
then we should have had something for supper. Haven't you seen Adams
yet?"

Instead of answering directly the three looked toward the fissure in
the side of the canyon, and there, to their unspeakable relief, they
saw the man who had been absent for so many hours. As is the rule at
such times, their ill-humor deepened.

"Why didn't you wait till morning?" was the question of the captain.

"I was afraid I would have to do so," replied the guide, whose flushed
face and agitated manner proved that he brought important news; "but I
didn't have to, and got away in time to reach you afore night."

"Not much before," commented the parson; "you must have had a
remarkable experience to detain you so long."

"Rather, but I'm starving, give me something to eat, while I talk."

The lunch was produced, and he fell to with avidity, but he saw they
were in no mood for frivolity, and he did not presume upon their
indulgence.

"Wal, pards, after leaving you, I picked my way as best I could up the
gorge, which runs back, with the bottom rising more or less all the
way, for 'bout two hundred yards when you reach level ground. That is
to say, the gorge ends, but the ground is anything but level."

"And they went all that distance ahead of you with their animals?"
asked Brush.

"That's what they done; the tracks of the horses were so plain there
couldn't be any mistake 'bout it. At the top of the gorge, the trail
slanted off to the right, toward a big pile of rocks, caves and
gullies, where it didn't look as if a goat could travel. There was so
much stone that it was mighty hard to keep on the trail and I lost
it."

"And didn't you find it again?" demanded the captain.

"Yes, but it took a good deal of time; that's one reason why I was
gone so long, but it wasn't the only reason by a jug full. When I
struck it agin, it led straight toward a high rocky place to the left,
where I made up my mind the two were hidin'."

"That would imply that they knew we were close behind them."

"There can't be any doubt of that. What bothered me was to learn what
they had done with their horses, fur the prints that I followed was
made by the folks' feet. I couldn't figger out what they had done with
the animals, and I spent some more time in trying to larn, but it was
no use.

"Bime by I struck better ground, where the trail was so clear I could
have trotted over it."

"Why didn't you do it?" asked Ruggles.

Adams shook his head.

"It wouldn't have done; as I said they must have found out, purty
early in the day, that we was after them, for if they didn't, why did
they turn off the reg'lar track?"

"Never mind asking questions," replied the captain; "go on with your
story."

"Wal, pards, by that time I must have been a mile from here and it
looked as if I'd have to go that much further. I had a good mind to
come back after you, for time was important, but when another rocky,
walled-up place showed in front of me, I was sartin I was close upon
'em. Their horses couldn't make their way through such a spot, and I
was sure I had 'em fast."

"Why didn't you come back at once?" said the captain, "but, never
mind, go on with your account."

"I thought it would be best to find out just how they was fixed. At
the same time, it would never do to let 'em diskiver that I was about.
So I was powerful careful and crept forward as if into an Injin camp.
It wasn't long before I smelled burning wood. That told me they had
come to a stop, built a fire and didn't dream I was anywhere in the
neighborhood.

"But I wasn't through with the bother yet; it took me another long
time to find where that fire was burnin', but I hit it at last. A
little faint streak of smoke was climbin' from behind a ridge, among a
growth of pines. I begun creeping forward when I changed my mind. I
thought that if one of 'em happened to be on the watch and see me,
they would be off afore I could git anywhere near 'em. So I worked
round to the other side to come upon 'em from that. Then you see if
they took the alarm, they'd have to come back toward you or make
another long circuit. Anyway, I was sure of a chance to meet 'em.

"Wal, pards, I don't want to make a long story of what is a short one.
I got round to tother side, but it took me a good while, and it's
hardly an hour ago that I catched my first sight of their camp."

"What passed between you and them?" asked the captain.

"When I rested my eyes on the little bundle of wood burnin', there
wasn't a man, woman or horse in sight."

The listeners were dumbfounded for the moment. After the waste of the
greater part of the day, they were no nearer seeing the fugitives than
before. In a voice, husky with passion, Captain Dawson exclaimed:

"It will take hard work to convince me that all this was not done on
purpose by you."

"What do you mean?" demanded Vose, showing more anger than at any time
since the strange hunt had been begun.

"If you had spent a week trying to fix things so as to help them get
away from us, you couldn't have done any better than your own account
shows you to have done. The whole day has been lost and we stand just
as near success as we did twenty-four hours ago."

"You ought to have returned to us as soon as you located them," added
Brush in the effort to soothe the ruffled feelings of the two.

"P'raps I didn't do the wisest thing," replied Adams with unexpected
meekness; "but I ain't the first person in the world that has made a
mistake. Howsumever, there won't be any more slips by me."

His companions looked inquiringly at him.

"I don't understand that remark," said the captain, "when you are sure
to blunder as long as you attempt to manage things."

"That's the p'int; I resign from this time forward; I haven't given
satisfaction and you may now do the work to suit yourselves."

"It's just as well," commented the captain, "for we can't make a
greater mess of it than you."

The story told by Vose Adams was a singular one, but the most singular
feature about it was that it did not contain a grain of truth. Every
statement was a falsehood, deliberately intended to deceive, and,
seeing that he had succeeded in his purpose, he was satisfied.




CHAPTER XXIII

VOSE ADAMS


Lieutenant Russell gave no hint to Nellie Dawson of the scheme upon
which he had fixed his hopes, until after she had confessed her love
for him, and he was certain beyond the shadow of a doubt, that he
possessed the sole affection of her heart. Even then he hesitated for
he knew the shock it would cause the gentle one, who was devotedly
attached to her father. But the resolution of Captain Dawson to spend
the remainder of his days at the mining settlement, and his intention
of selecting her husband from among those that had made New
Constantinople their home for years, crystallized the determination
that had been vaguely shaping itself in his brain for weeks.

As he expected, she recoiled shocked by the proposal to leave her
father; but love is eloquent, and he won by convincing her that the
separation would be only temporary. Her father would be quick to see
the great wrong his course would inflict upon his child, and he would
not only consent to the union, but would follow and make his home with
them. It was this implicit belief which made her the companion of
Lieutenant Russell in the flight from the mountain settlement.

The project having been carefully planned and arranged, the
preparations were more complete than those of their pursuers. They
took sufficient extra clothing in the form of wraps and blankets, and
enough food to last for several days. They were well mounted and had
the companionship of the huge dog Timon, with his almost human
intelligence.

The lieutenant's memory of places was good, and, having a number of
hours of daylight at command, he escaped the mistake of his pursuers.
The turn from Dead Man's Gulch was made at the right point, and they
were miles on their way before their flight was discovered by Captain
Dawson and his friends.

Both of the fugitives did not doubt they would be pursued. They knew
the consuming anger that would take possession of her father, who
would probably collect several companions and start after them with
furious haste. He would take frightful vengeance upon the man that had
dared to steal his daughter. Everything, therefore, must be done to
keep beyond his reach until his wrath had time to cool. The intention
was to make Sacramento ahead of him. At that city, the lieutenant
would seek out his future father-in-law and plead his cause.

When night closed around them, they had penetrated to a distance of
perhaps fifteen miles in the Sierras. It was at sunset that they
passed a spot, where horses and riders, the latter on foot, had to
pick their way with extreme care, while even Timon, who clung
faithfully to them, showed timidity, though he had been over the place
before. The sagacious brute knew that a mis-step on his part meant
death. The passage, however, was made without mishap, and Russell, as
he helped his companion into the saddle, assured her that nothing so
trying to the nerves was to be expected during the rest of the
journey.

There was no fear of pursuit until after nightfall, but Russell
frequently pointed his glass backward and scanned the trail over his
whole field of vision. When the gathering darkness shut out
everything, he had seen nothing of enemies, either white or red. He
could not forget that on his previous journey, he and the captain had
desperate fighting with the Indians and the same peril still
impended.

Nellie was eager to cover all the ground possible, while the
opportunity was theirs, and the flight was pushed longer than Russell
would have advised. Finally, he insisted they should stop and rest
themselves and horses for the remainder of the night. The halting
place was selected with much care. The animals were turned loose,
where the grass was growing and a small stream wound its way toward a
larger one. Then the two, accompanied by Timon, pushed in among the
rocks to where the final halt was made.

They were in profound darkness. The lieutenant decided to start a
fire, and, with much difficulty, gathered a sufficiency of dried
branches. They were fortunate enough to find a partial cavern, so open
in front that it would have given slight shelter in the event of a
storm. When the blaze threw out its cheerful light, it served to
dissipate the gloom which in spite of themselves had oppressed them
with the coming of night.

They partook of food and the lieutenant's spirits rose, for he saw
nothing to prevent the full success of the dream which had inspired
and thrilled him so long. His buoyancy was infectious, and he brought
a smile to the beauteous countenance by his merry sallies, and his
picture of the happy future that was close at hand.

"Your father will be angry at first," he said; "it would be strange if
he were not, but he loves you and I think has a pretty fair opinion of
me. When he gains time to think over the matter, he will admit the
wisdom of what we have done and we shall receive his blessing."

It was this assurance, more than all else, that served to lift the
gloom from her. Deep as was her love for the one at her side, it would
not have sufficed to draw her from her adored parent, had she believed
that his resentment against her would last. As it was, she grieved
that even for a brief time, as she thought would be the case, he
should hold harsh feelings toward her.

No chivalrous knight of the Crusades could have been more scrupulously
considerate of lady intrusted to his charge than Lieutenant Russell.
He would have died before offending Nellie Dawson by act, word or
presumptuous thought. When, as the night advanced, the bright eyes
began to grow drowsy, he arranged a couch for her, saw that she was
well provided with blankets and then turned to the immense dog, who
had never left them and who looked as if he understood everything.

"Now, Timon, you are to stay right here," he said, bending over and
impressively shaking his finger at the animal; "you are not to
venture a dozen feet from your mistress without permission. Do you
understand?"

A whine and wagging of the tail left no doubt that the wishes of his
late master were clear to him.

"You have your gun at your side," he added, turning to Nellie; "I do
not think you will have any call to use it. We have not met any
Indians and your father cannot overtake us before morning. Timon will
be sure to give you warning of the approach of danger, and, if your
gun goes off, I shall be here in a twinkling."

He bade her good night and departed. Enough wood had been flung on the
fire to keep it going for an hour or two, but long before it sank to
ashes, the girl had drifted into dreamland.

The lieutenant carefully selected his own sleeping quarters. He
finally fixed upon a large flat boulder, at the rear of the cavern
occupied by Timon and his charge; but, although beyond sight, he was
near enough to reach the spot on the instant needed. Spreading out his
blanket, he lay down upon it.

"This recalls the old days in Virginia, when mud a foot deep, with the
rain dashing in our faces, was what we had for weeks at a time. This
couch doesn't equal a feather bed, but it will answer."

The night passed without incident and it was hardly light when the
young officer was astir. He visited the horses and found them cropping
the grass, but he waited until Timon came to him before calling upon
Nellie. She, too, had been awake for some time and they partook of
their morning meal with rugged appetites.

She was so eager to hurry on that he lost no time in taking the road
again. Neither could doubt that their pursuers were on their trail,
and, with the aid of his small glass, he carefully studied the country
behind them. It was not long before he made the discovery he dreaded:
four horsemen were following their footprints, and beyond them were
the five Indians picking their way along the ledge in the opposite
direction.

The lieutenant passed the glass to his companion who scrutinized the
party with the keenest interest.

"They must have traveled all night," remarked her escort, while she
still peered through the instrument.

"That shows how dreadfully angry father is; I hope it will not last."

"Can you make out the members of the party?"

She studied them a minute or two more before answering:

"I think that is father who is close to the man on a mule."

"The one on a mule must be Vose Adams, for he is more accustomed to
that sort of animal. I am sorry he is with the party."

"Why?" asked Nellie, lowering the glass and looking at him.

"He is so familiar with the trail, that it will be hard work to outwit
him; he isn't the man to make mistakes. Did you recognize the
others?"

"I cannot be sure, but I suspect they are Mr. Ruggles and Mr. Brush."

"I have no doubt you are right,--not because I was able to identify
them, but because the two are partners and your father would naturally
go to them first. I do not think any one of the four has a glass, so,
despite their sharp eyes, we have a big advantage in that respect."

"But they know the route better than we, and we are losing time."

The course of the trail took them out of the field of vision of their
pursuers. It was at the suggestion of Russell that the two turned
aside from the canyon into the fissure-like gorge. This would have been
a serious mistake, except for the plan he had in view, for it must
place the pursuers in advance, the very thing which it would seem the
fugitives ought if possible to prevent.

The lieutenant had believed from the first that Vose Adams, in
threading his way through the mountains, traveled a good many miles
more than was necessary. It was quite likely that, if he could follow
a straight line, he would shorten the distance one-half. Although this
was impossible, the young man, nevertheless, was convinced that by
changing the route, a good many miles could be saved: and it was in
his mind to do that thing.

The lieutenant's experience in campaigning had taught him the danger
of going astray, when picking his way through an unfamiliar country,
but the little compass attached as a charm to his watch chain would
help him to keep track of the variations and windings, and he was
confident of coming out right. He and Nellie were well mounted and
armed, all of which being impressed upon his companion, she offered no
objection to the radical change of plan which took them out of the
canyon into the ravine that led them they knew not whither, but it was
ominous of disaster that at the top of the fissure, when the two were
leading their animals, a grievous mishap occurred. The pony of Nellie
slipped and sprained his ankle so badly that he whined with pain and
paused with his weight supported on three legs.

[Illustration: THE LIEUTENANT PASSED THE GLASS TO HIS COMPANION, WHO
SCRUTINIZED THE PARTY WITH THE KEENEST INTEREST.--PAGE 269.]

"That's a bad go!" exclaimed the dismayed Russell; "it will be several
days before he is able to travel."

She examined the ankle, as best she could, trying to soothe the pain
by passing her hand over the injured part, but it was plain that
neither she nor her companion could give any help.

"Poor fellow," she said sympathetically; "you cannot go any further;
what shall be done, Fred?"

"Only one thing seems possible,--take you on my horse."

"And what will become of Cap?"

"We must leave him behind."

"What will happen to him?"

"Some one will pick him up, or, after his leg recovers, he may find
his way back to the settlement."

The impulsive girl flung her arms about the animal's neck and touched
her lips to the silken nose.

"They shall not part us, Cap," she exclaimed with tears in her eyes.

The lieutenant watched this by-play, full of sympathy for the girl,
but he was in a quandary. Prudence seemed to demand that everything
should be sacrificed to speed by abandoning the pony. In all
probability, the latter would serve as a dinner for some of the bears,
wolves or other denizens of the mountains, who would quickly harry him
to death. To wait where they were until the animal was able to travel
rendered certain a speedy meeting with their pursuers. The woodcraft
of Vose Adams would enable him to discover with slight delay the point
where the fugitives had left the canyon, and he would guide his
companions with the skill of one of the mountain Indians themselves.

On the other hand, the plan he had in view imposed prodigious work
upon his own animal. Between the halting place and Sacramento were
many miles of easy traveling, over which he could walk, but for long
distances the beast would be compelled to carry double. In the event
of close pursuit, this must prove a fatal handicap.

In his perplexity, the lieutenant again examined the hurt of the
pony.

"It would be cruel to make him take a single step, but he may soon
recover. I am afraid to leave him behind and to continue our flight
with only my horse. You know how dangerous it is to linger, Nellie,
when it is certain _they_ are not far off----"

She caught his arm and whispered:

"Look at Timon! he has discovered something!"

The dog was standing a few paces in front of them, with his nose
pointed toward the canyon. He emitted several growls and pricked up his
ears in a way that left no doubt that he was angered. The lieutenant
had hardly time to place himself in an attitude of defence with his
Winchester, when a soft footfall was heard, and the next moment Vose
Adams emerged from behind the pile of rocks and approached them.

It was proof of the guide's woodcraft that he was able to come thus
close before being detected by Timon, who advanced threateningly
toward him. A word, however, from the lieutenant stayed the dog.

"Well, Vose," said the young man, "this is unexpected."

"So I jedge and I've a 'spicion that you ain't tickled half to death
to see me."

"We were always friends, but I can't say that either Nellie or I am
glad to meet you under the circumstances; for in truth, we have been
doing all we could to prevent such a meeting."

"Things has that look," added Vose, standing on guard as may be said,
for he was not free from misgiving concerning the young lieutenant
whom he had managed to run down. His positive orders forbade him to
assume the aggressive, but no one could forbid him to defend himself,
and he did not mean that this handsome officer should catch him
unprepared.

"Whom have you with you?" asked Russell.

"The captain, Wade Ruggles and the parson."

"What we suspected; I presume no one of the three feels specially
affectionate toward me."

"It is all the captain can do to prevent the other two from quarrelin'
as to which shall have the first chance to shoot you."

"Why does Captain Dawson prevent them?"

"'Cause he means to have the first chance himself."

"How about _you_?" grimly asked Lieutenant Russell.

"I'm left."

"How's that?"

"A low down trick was played onto me; as near as I can find out, the
captain comes first, Wade and the parson next and me fourth. You can
see for yourself that there won't be any chance at all left for me
after them three is through."

"It doesn't look so,--that's a fact. But where are the three?"

"Along the main trail, down in the kenyon."

"Why did they not come with you?"

"I advised 'em to wait till I found out how the land laid and they
won't leave the spot till I get back."

Lieutenant Russell gave no expression to the thought that flashed
upon him. Why not keep Vose Adams a prisoner? The loss of his services
to the party would be irreparable, for, as it was, the present hiding
place of the fugitives never would have become known to them without
the help of the guide. It was a daring scheme, but there were so many
objections to carrying it out, that the officer dismissed it. In truth
he thought of a much better plan.

"You have told me enough, Vose, to prove that the four men--for I may
as well include yourself--feel bitterer toward me than I suspected: do
you think this enmity of theirs will last?"

"Not for long."

"How long?"

"They'll let up as soon as you're shot."

Lieutenant Russell could not restrain a smile at this way of putting
it, while Nellie was so horrified that she gasped and stared and
listened in silence.

"There can be little doubt that you are right, but I meant to ask
whether you do not think the captain will moderate his anger when he
is given time to think it over."

"He has had all night to do that, and this mornin' he was hotter if
anything, than at any time since he larned what you had done."

"When did he learn it?"

Thereupon, Vose told the facts which have already been made known to
the reader, the most interesting feature of which was that Adams was
not an original member of the pursuing party. But, although the guide
was so pronounced in his opinion of the continuance of the enmity of
Captain Dawson, the lieutenant believed otherwise. He was confident
that if he and Nellie could reach Sacramento before meeting the irate
father, the latter would be open to reason, and all would turn out
well.

Vose turned to the young woman.

"Nellie, do you want a little advice from me?"

"I am glad to have it at any time."

"Howsumever, what I say is as much for the leftenant as for you, which
the same is that both of you should give up this bus'ness."

"But," said Nellie, "you have just told us that father is so angry
with Lieutenant Russell that he will shoot him the moment they meet."

"We can fix that easy 'nough; let the leftenant stay here while you go
with me; I think we can explain matters to the captain and the others
so they won't bother the leftenant."

"And what am _I_ to do?" asked Russell.

"Push on to Sacramento as fast as you can, for though I think I can
fix it, I wouldn't advise you to take too many chances."

"In other words, after Nellie and I have fled from the settlement and
got this far on the road to safety, you urge me to give her up
forever."

"Wal, that's lookin' a little further ahead than I meant to, but I
'spose it amounts to that."

"You mean well, Vose, but do you imagine that Nellie and I did not
count the cost before turning our backs on New Constantinople? Don't
you suppose we knew we should be pursued and were prepared for the
consequences?"

"I can't say as to that, but it strikes me that the plan I laid before
you is the only one there is."

"Why?"

"You cannot get away from the captain and the men with him."

"Well, there is no call for me to repeat my opinion, but I will say
that the decision shall rest with Nellie herself. If she wishes to go
with you I will interpose not a word of objection."

He looked toward her as an invitation for her to speak. There was a
world of affection and faith in the lustrous eyes, as she walked
resolutely forward and placed herself by his side.

"Only death shall separate us!"




CHAPTER XXIV

AN UNEXPECTED ALLY


The lovelight shone in the eyes of Lieutenant Russell, as he looked
down at the slight figure beside him. He tenderly passed his arm
around the girl and touched his lips to her forehead.

"It was not that I doubted you, Nellie," he said, "but that Vose might
know the full truth."

Then turning to the guide, he asked:

"Do you still advise her to leave me?"

Vose Adams was unaccustomed to scenes like this. He moved about
uneasily, coughed, cleared his throat, and for a few minutes was at a
loss for words.

"I don't know what to advise," he finally said; "but don't you think,
if she could go to the captain and let him see how she feels, he will
give in? How would it do for both of you to walk back with your arms
round each other's neck and sayin' sweet words--wouldn't that fetch
him? Hanged, if I know what to tell you!" he exclaimed desperately,
observing the smiles on their faces.

"I am afraid your plan wouldn't work," said the lieutenant, "but you
have proved yourself the very friend we need."

These words were a hint of the scheme that had come into the brain of
the young officer. Had he made a prisoner of Vose Adams, as he thought
for a minute of doing, the guide would really be more dangerous, since
there was no way of guarding against his treachery, but if he could be
turned into a friend, it would be almost equivalent to saving the
fugitives. It was that for which the young man planned, but he felt
that the real work must be done by Nellie. He could not win the good
will of Vose, but she could, for who was able to resist her appeals?

It was a proof of the brightness of the girl that she caught the
purpose of her escort the moment his last words were uttered, and she
performed her part with a cleverness that could not have been
surpassed.

Tears were in the eyes of the emotional Nellie, but she stepped across
the brief intervening space and laid her hand on the arm of Adams.

"How glad I am, Vose, that you will help us, for you have told enough
to show that it will not do for us to meet father for some time to
come; we are now in your hands."

"Blamed if I won't do anything I can! But what can _I_ do? 'Spose I
sneak back, shoot the captain and then plug Ruggles and the parson?
Will that suit you?"

"Gracious; I should rather you would kill me than harm a hair of
father's head."

"Wal, 'spose I shoot you and the leftenant and the captain and the
rest? No; that won't do; how the mischief shall I fix things?"

The cooler headed Russell saw that the problem had been solved; Nellie
Dawson had won over Vose Adams, as may be said, by the turn of her
finger. He was eager to do all he could to help them, but in the
flurry of the moment could not reason with his usual acumen.

"We don't want any shooting, Vose; I am sure that if we can reach
Sacramento without meeting the captain, his anger will pass away. In
Sacramento, I shall be able to arrange a meeting between him and his
daughter, and his love for her will break down the barriers and do the
rest."

"I'm in too deep water when you get to figgerin' that way, but there
seems to be reason in what you say, but what about Ruggles and the
parson?"

"We'll leave them out; they are in this as the friends of Captain
Dawson, and will not dare go contrary to his wishes, but if they do,
it can make no difference to my plan."

"They're just as savage as the captain," said Vose significantly; "and
it won't do to forget 'em; but what did you expect to do, when you
left the kenyon? If you come back, you would have been sartin to meet
us, and what then?"

"My intention was not to return, but to keep away from the main trail
and hunt a shorter road through the mountains to Sacramento."

Vose Adams gave a low whistle of astonishment.

"That's the worst I ever heard!"

"And why?"

"You're not follerin' any trail at all; you would be sartin to get
lost and would never find your way through the mountains; anyhow it
would take you three or four years, which I ca'clate is longer than
you want to wait."

"How can you be so positive?"

"It's true I never went to Sacramento and back, except by follerin'
for most of the way the trail that I know so well, but other folks as
smart as you have been lost in the mountains and you couldn't help
it."

"You advise against it then?"

"I'm so sure of your goin' wrong that I won't try to help you unless
you give up the idee."

"Then I hereby give it up."

Since Vose Adams had committed himself to Russell and Nellie's
interests, there was no more talking at cross purposes. The object
of the three was the same, and they sat down on the rocks for
consultation. There was abundance of time in which to do this,
since those whom they feared would not leave the canyon until the
return of their guide, and he did not mean to go back until the day
was so far spent that further delay was unavoidable.

"They will be mad when they see me," he said with a grin, "but it
won't do them any good and I'll fix up a yarn about gettin' on and
then off your trail agin, that they'll have to be satisfied with."

"That will serve for to-night, but you will all be astir at an early
hour to-morrow morning."

"They will still have to depend on me to guide 'em, and I rather think
I can steer 'em off the track, so as to give you plenty of time to get
out of the way."

"How?"

"As soon as they leave the kenyon, that is as soon as the way is
clear, you must ride back to it and put on all steam for Sacramento,
for I understand, leftenant, that you've give up your idee of finding
a new route through the mountains."

"I have."

"You've got two good animals and you'll gain a full day's start."

"You forget about poor Cap," said Nellie.

"So I did! if he can't go with you, you'll have to leave him behind
and ride double, but it will be rather tough on your horse,
leftenant."

"Nellie doesn't weigh enough to make any difference, and I expect to
walk most of the distance."

An unexpected piece of good fortune raised the spirits of the three.
To the amazement of all, Cap, the pony, was seen hunting for grass and
bearing upon the lame foot with little inconvenience. That which was
thought to be a bad sprain was only a wrench, from which he promised
speedily to recover.

"He'll be as well as ever by to-morrow mornin'," said Vose Adams;
"you'll need to humor him at first, but not for long."

As has been intimated, the guide remained with them through most of
the afternoon, for, if he had gone back to his friends earlier than he
did, he would not have dared to offer any excuse for not leading them
in the pursuit, and he meant to avert all possibility of that. The
reader understands by this time why the guide formulated such an
astounding fiction when attempting to explain the cause of his delay.
Had his listeners been in cooler mood, they might have tangled him up
with a few questions, but their exasperation and disgust prevented.

Before parting with the fugitives, Vose assured them that he was
confident their plans could not fail.

"All they've got to do," he reflected, "is to do nothing afore
to-morrow and then when the road is open, strike out over the main
trail as hard as they can travel. I hope none of them Injins that we
had the row with will be pokin' 'round to-night, for if there's to be
any trouble, it'll come from them."

It will be recalled that the story of Adams was received with such
coolness that he indignantly resigned and told the captain to run
matters himself.

"And he'll make purty work of it," chortled Vose "he won't be able to
come within miles of where they are hidin'."

When the moody silence had lasted for some time, the guide was moved
to remark in a more conciliatory spirit:

"There's one thing that mustn't be forgot: Colonel Briggs and his
folks won't make any trouble, but we're not done with them Injins."

"Isn't there likelihood that Colonel Briggs will divert them?" asked
the parson.

"No; for the redskins can't be fooled; they'll know it wasn't any of
the colonel's folks that give their chief his walkin' papers, but us,
and they're the sort of people that don't forget a thing of that
kind."

"I was thinking of hunting up enough wood to start a fire," said the
captain; "but we don't need it, and I suppose it will be safer without
it."

"It seems to me," observed Ruggles, "that what we've got the most to
fear is that the Injins will run off with our animals: we would be
left in a bad fix."

"We must look out for that; I'll stand guard the first part of the
night."

Each was ready to take his turn, and it was arranged that Captain
Dawson should act as sentinel until midnight, when he would awake Vose
Adams, who would assume the duty till morning. Soon afterward, the
three wrapped themselves in their blankets and stretched out on the
ground, near the boulders, where they speedily sank into deep
slumber.

It seemed to Adams that he had slept less than an hour, when the
captain touched him. Rising immediately to a sitting position, he
asked:

"Is it midnight?"

"It's a half hour past."

"Why didn't you awake me afore? Have you seen anything wrong?"

"I am not sure; my doubt made me hold on a little longer, but I
learned nothing of account."

"What was it anyway?"

"It is only that the animals appear to be uneasy, but it may mean
nothing, or it may mean a good deal."

"It's more'n likely it means something. Where are they?"

"Lying down off there to the right, almost near enough to be seen."

"They can't be too close; wal, you can sleep and I'll take my turn."

Thus warned by Captain Dawson, Vose Adams assumed the duties of
sentinel with his senses on the alert. He had become so accustomed to
the delicate duty, when aware that the slightest slip on his part
meant death, that he was better fitted for the task than any member of
the party, though the experience of Ruggles and the captain in the
army had given them the ability to awake at any moment fixed upon
before sinking into slumber, and they were sensitive to the least
disturbance while enjoying refreshing rest.

Adams believed what he had remarked more than once that the little
company of mountain Indians would do their utmost to revenge
themselves upon the men who had taken off their chief. He suspected
that the five were prowling in the neighborhood, looking for some such
opportunity, and that they would strike a blow before the rising of
the morrow's sun.

Nothing was to be hoped for in the way of a diversion, created by the
intrusion of Colonel Briggs and his vagrant miners. Not that the
Indians were not eager to strike at any members of the hated race, but
the all-controlling motive was lacking in the case of the larger
party.

Although the moon was in the sky, only a small part of its light
penetrated the canyon. Peering into the darkness, Vose dimly made out
the forms of the four animals, who, having ceased their cropping of
the grass, had lain down for the remainder of the night. They were so
near that they could not be stampeded or stolen without the effort
being known to the sentinel.

It would have been the height of rashness to start a camp fire, for
all the figures within its circle of illumination must have formed the
best of targets for their stealthy foes. As it was, an enemy would
have to steal from the gloom and approach near enough to touch them,
before striking a blow or firing a shot.

Vose Adams, with his Winchester in his right hand and held close to
his side, took his seat on the ground, resting his back against the
nearest boulder. As a rule, a sentinel can keep awake for an extended
time only by motion and exercise, such as walking to and fro, but the
trained hunter often takes the risk and there is little danger of his
succumbing, especially after he has just finished a nap, as was the
case with the guide.

Thus seated, with the boulder rising several feet above his head,
Adams's only reliance was upon his keenness of hearing and sight.

He had not waited long when he saw proof of what the captain had told
him: the animals were restless, or rather one of them was. The
quadruped thus affected was Hercules, his own mule, who, although
lying down, twice rose to his feet, shifted his position and lay down
again. Then he sniffed as if the air contained an odor that was
displeasing to him.

"I wouldn't think much of it, if it was one of the horses," reflected
his master, "but Hercules has brains; he knows more'n all the others
together, and yet it may be it ain't that after all."

One of the singular facts regarding cattle and other quadrupeds is
that they are sometimes troubled with disquieting dreams, the same as
ourselves. This trifling cause has resulted many a time in the
stampeding of a drove numbering tens of thousands.

"I've knowed Hercules to kick and snort in his sleep, and one time he
come mighty near breakin' a leg of mine; howsumever, I don't think
that's the trouble with him to-night. I 'spect it's Injins this
time!"

When Captain Dawson lay down to sleep and Vose Adams assumed his place
as sentinel, the moon was near the zenith, but the contour of the
canyon shut out its beams. While Vose was striving to pierce the gloom,
over and about the four animals, he noted a flickering tremor against
the vast wall which formed the other side of the canyon. A faint,
fleecy veil of moonlight having been lifted over the mountain crests,
was now flung downward and caught against and suspended upon the
projecting rocks and crags. It was but a frosty shimmer, but the veil
dangled lower and lower, pendant here and there until the fringe
rested on the bottom of the gorge.

The sleeping miners and horses were wrapped in deep shadow, but the
tremulous, almost invisible veil still fluttered on the further side
of the canyon. By and by, the shifting moon would whisk it up again
and all would be gloom as before.

The sentinel lay flat on his face and peered over the prone animals
toward the faint light across the canyon, and, looking thus, he saw the
outlines of a man moving among the horses and mule. A shadow could not
have been more noiseless. Not the faintest rustle betrayed his
footsteps.

"Just what I expected," thought Vose; "I'll wager Hercules against a
dozen of the best horses in Sacramento that that shadder is one of
them five Injins we seen stealin' along the ledge this mornin'. All
the same, I can't imagine what the mischief he is driving at."

The guide's first impulse was to bring his rifle to his shoulder and
let fly. The intruder was so near that it was impossible to miss him,
but two causes operated to prevent this summary course: Vose wished
first to learn the business of the intruder, and there was a single
possibility in a hundred that he was neither an Indian nor an enemy.

The latter doubt could be solved by challenging the prowler with a
threat to fire, if instant satisfaction was refused, while the firing
could be made so promptly that the stranger would have no chance of
whisking out of reach. Vose decided to wait until he got some idea of
the other's business.

He could still dimly discern the form, but it was so obscure that had
it not been moving about, he would not have been able to distinguish
it or make sure it was within his field of vision.

While studying the phantom, the lower part of the veil of moonlight on
the other side of the canyon was twitched up for a hundred feet.
Lingering thus a minute, it was twitched still higher; then a third
flirt snatched it out of the gorge. The shifting of the moon had left
the canyon shrouded in darkness as before.

Nothing could have attested more strikingly the marvelous stealth of
the intruder than the fact that not one of the horses was awakened by
him. The approach of the great Geronimo and several of his Apaches was
betrayed under somewhat similar circumstances by the neighing of a
horse that they awakened, apparently when making no noise at all.

This prowler was a shadow in a world of shadows. If Hercules detected
his presence, the man succeeded in soothing the fear of the hybrid.

"_Halt or I'll fire!_"

Vose Adams's voice was low, but in the tomb-like stillness a
thunderclap could not have been more distinct. The hail, however,
produced no response. The angered Vose drew his Winchester to a level,
with his finger on the trigger, but when he ran his eye along the
barrel, he failed to perceive any target. He lowered the muzzle a few
inches and peered over the top. Nothing was discernible.

"You're there somewhere and I'll find you!"

Instead of rising erect, the sentinel advanced in a crouching posture,
so that his head was no higher than if he were on his hands and
knees.

This clever strategy was thrown away. Within five seconds, he was at
the side of Hercules, prepared and expecting to grapple with his
enemy, who, to his exasperation, continued invisible. Vose did not
require to have the matter explained to him, for he understood it.
Upon being hailed, the intruder instead of throwing up his hands or
starting to run, had also assumed a stooping position. It was as if he
had quietly sunk below the surface of a sea of darkness through which
he was wading, and swum with noiseless celerity to a point beyond
reach.

Vose was angered but took his defeat philosophically.

"You was too smart for me that time; I never had it played finer on
me, but I guess it's just as well; you've learned that we're on the
lookout and you can't sneak into camp without _some_ risk of having a
hole bored inter you."

But Vose was not yet through with his nocturnal experiences. He held
his seat for some fifteen or twenty minutes without seeing or hearing
anything to cause the slightest misgiving. The horses still slept,
and even the uneasy Hercules appeared to have become composed and to
have made up his mind to slumber until morning.

"I don't b'leve there'll be anything more to disturb me, onless some
wild animal wants his supper----"

The thought had hardly taken shape, when a shiver of affright ran
through him, though the cause was so slight that it might have brought
a smile, being nothing more than a pebble rolling down the ravine, up
which the fugitives had passed the day before. The stone came slowly,
loosening several similar obstructions, which joined with it, the
rustling increasing and continuing until all reached the bottom and
lay at rest a few feet from where he sat.

Nothing could have been easier than for this to occur in the natural
course of things, since hundreds of such instances were taking place
at every hour of the day and night, but in the tense state of the
sentinel's nerves, he was inclined to attribute it either to the
Indian that had just visited camp and slunk away, or to one of his
comrades trying to steal a march upon him.

"I 'spose the next thing will be for him to climb over this boulder
behind me and drop onto my head. Howsumever, if he does, he'll find me
awake."

Vose sat thus, depending almost wholly upon his sense of hearing to
apprise him of the stealthy approach of an enemy, while the long
silent hours gradually passed, without bringing additional cause for
alarm.




CHAPTER XXV

INSTINCT OR REASON


As the night wore away without bringing any further evidence of the
presence of enemies, the solicitude of Vose Adams was transferred to
the two, who, hardly a mile distant, were awaiting with equal anxiety
the coming of morning. They and he had agreed upon the plan to be
pursued, but now, with the crisis at hand, the guide became
apprehensive about the final issue.

Suppose the couple should leave their hiding place to return to the
main trail before their pursuers were out of the way? Mutual discovery
was certain with the dreadful catastrophe that none dreaded more than
he. But it would seem that Lieutenant Russell was too cautious to run
the risk of so fatal a mistake. He would reconnoitre the ground and
keep out of sight until the coast was clear, but the restless Adams
was astir at the first streakings of light in the canyon.

He first visited the animals. It was possible that the stealthy
prowler of the night before had done them injury, but, so far as he
could ascertain, nothing of the kind had occurred. Except for what he
had seen and heard during the darkness, he would not have known that a
visitor had been in camp.

It was not fully light when the others rose from their primitive
couches. Water was at hand, and after drinking and ablution, the group
sat down to their morning meal, which disposed of the last remnant
furnished by Vose Adams. While they were eating, he told of the
occurrences of the night and was surprised that his companions made
light of them. To them it was of less importance than to him.

"So long as they do no more than prowl about the camp," remarked
Captain Dawson, "we need feel no concern."

"It seems to me," said Brush, "that if the fellow intended mischief,
he would have done it, but he has left no traces of anything of the
kind."

"Which was because the right kind of chance didn't show itself," said
Vose; "if we don't have a lively fight before this bus'ness is over,
I'm much mistook, but it's time we was moving."

The guide seemed to have forgotten his resentment of the night before
and his friends were too considerate to refer to it. It took but a
short time to make the animals ready, when the procession started up
the gorge, Vose, as usual, leading, with the captain next, then Wade
Ruggles, while the parson brought up the rear, that position naturally
falling to him.

Men and beasts were refreshed by their rest and food, and it required
but a brief while to reach the top of the gorge, where, as will be
remembered, it terminated. It was here that Vose Adams began his fine
work, and he showed no more hesitancy in drawing a "long bow," than on
the previous night, when pretending to account for his long absence.

"The trail leads to the right," he said, with a glance at the ground,
as if to refresh his memory.

His first thrill of misgiving came when he saw the parson pause and
look searchingly at the ground. Had he possessed one-half the skill of
Vose in trailing, he would have discovered that the guide was
misleading them, but he did not have that cleverness nor did any other
member of the party. The glance of the parson was perfunctory and his
brief pause was to regain his breath after the short but laborious
climb of the steep slope. Vose was watching him closely and quickly
saw the meaning of his action, for, whatever Brush may have observed
on the ground in front of him, it was not the faint impressions left
on the stones by the fugitives. Neither the captain nor Ruggles so
much as looked at the earth, accepting the dictum of their guide
without question.

It was not deemed best to mount the animals, because of the roughness
of the ground and the belief that they were close upon the parties for
whom they were searching. Vose took care to turn so sharply to the
right that they were speedily out of sight of the spot where he had
parted from the fugitives. Everything was going promisingly when Wade
Ruggles startled his companions by the exclamation:

"Helloa! there's that dog Timon!"

A hundred yards to the left rose a pile of rocks, the highest of which
reached an altitude of two hundred feet or more. Upon the crest of one
of the lower rocks, which had only a slight height, the immense dog
stood in plain sight. It looked as if he had started to ascend the
rocks, when he discovered the party and paused to learn their
business.

The picture was a striking one. The enormous size of the brute gave
the impression at first that he was a wolf or some wild animal that
had challenged the advance of the four men. This error would have been
made had not each been so familiar with the creature. As he stood, his
formidable head raised, his forequarters being slightly higher than
the remainder of his body, his position was diagonal. He was surveying
his acquaintances, who surveyed him in turn with equal curiosity.

Vose Adams's heart sank. What was the meaning of this? As he viewed
it, the presence of the dog could have no other significance than that
the lieutenant and Nellie Dawson were close at hand. Timon was in
their company and would not have strayed far, so that he had betrayed
them. From some cause, which the guide could not comprehend,
Lieutenant Russell had made a change of plan and placed himself almost
in the path along which Vose was leading the pursuers, in the belief
that the fugitives were at a safe distance.

The four men looked at the dog for several moments in silence, when
the captain spoke:

"We must be very near them."

"You're dead right," added Ruggles in the same undertone; "we've got
'em cornered sooner than we expected."

"They can't go far," said the parson, "without being stopped by the
rocks, when we shall have them in the nicest trap that was ever set
for any game."

The reflection of Vose Adams was of a different nature.

"If they make fools of themselves and upset all my plans, what can I
do to help 'em? Why didn't they stay where they promised to stay, and
why didn't they kill that blamed dog afore he played this trick on
'em?"

Timon stood for two or three minutes so immovable that he suggested a
stone image of himself, carved out of the rock on which he was
perched. Then he emitted a single husky bark and leaped lightly down
from where he had been standing. It was no more than a dozen feet, and
he alighted as gracefully as a panther. He trotted part way to the
horsemen, who were closely watching his movements, stopped, barked
again and wheeling, trotted forward over precisely the course Vose
Adams was taking when checked by the appearance of the canine.

The men looked at one another in astonishment. The action of the dog
was unaccountable, but Captain Dawson's explanation sounded
reasonable.

"That shows we are on the right track and he has come to guide us to
where they are awaiting him."

There could be no doubt of it. The actions of the brute said as
plainly as so many words: "Come with me and I will take you straight
to the people you want to see."

Instead of following Timon at once, the party kept watch of him. He
trotted a dozen steps and then paused and looked back. Observing that
he was not understood, he emitted several more barks, took a couple of
steps and then repeated the performance. His object was so evident
that Captain Dawson said:

"That's as plain as the nose on your face; the animal is worth a dozen
guides like you, Vose."

"Then why don't you foller him?" sulkily asked the latter.

"That's what we shall do; come on."

Observing that the captain left his horse standing, the parson
inquired the reason.

"They are of no use to us and will be only a bother; leave them here
until we need them; I will follow the dog and you can take what order
you choose, but," he added with unmistakable earnestness, "every one
of you must keep in the background till I'm through."

Timon held his motionless position until the four men had taken
several steps toward him and there could be no error as to their
intention. Vose Adams observed that he was following, without a hair's
variation, the course he had in mind.

"It serves 'em right," was his angry reflection; "when the leftenant
spoke 'bout hunting up a new trail through the mountains, I oughter
knowed he hain't no sense and was sure to make a mess of things. Now's
he gone and sneaked off where these folks will stub their toes agin
him; I'm 'sprised that the Queen didn't hammer a little sense into his
head."

The guide was in a torture of apprehension. The impending outcome was
likely to betray the deception he had used, but it was not for that he
cared. There could be no mistaking the deadly mood of Captain Dawson
and the equally intense hatred of Ruggles and Brush. A meeting with
Lieutenant Russell made a frightful tragedy inevitable, and no one
could be more vividly aware of the fact than the young officer
himself, for Vose had impressed it upon him, but the guide in his
anguish of spirit, saw no possible escape from it. He stolidly
followed, striving to brace himself for what must soon come.

Meanwhile, the strange leadership continued. Timon seemed to be
impatient, for occasionally he broke into a trot, abruptly pausing and
looking back, as if to urge his followers to use more haste. Since
they did not do so, he checked himself, when about to pass beyond
sight and waited for them to draw near. He led them around boulders
and masses of rocks, over ridges, down declivities, across one small
stream, through a ravine and again among the precipitous piles of
stone, until even the hardy men were well nigh exhausted. They had
traveled fully a mile over a route that was of the most trying
nature.

It was about this time that an extraordinary suspicion began forming
in the mind of Vose Adams. He hardly dared give credence to it, but it
took greater hold upon him with every few rods of advance. Nothing in
the world would have induced him to make known his suspicion, but it
continued to grow.

Suddenly Captain Dawson stopped. As he looked around his face was
agitated.

"Boys," said he, "there's something infernally strange about this."

Vose Adams saw that his own suspicion had entered the mind of their
leader, but the countenance of the guide was as blank as that of a
child.

"It's the worst tramp I ever had," remarked the parson, removing his
hat and mopping his forehead.

"If there's any harder work," added Ruggles, "count me out."

Captain Dawson looked angrily at Vose.

"Do you know the meaning of this?"

Vose shook his head and prevaricated still further by adding:

"Nor what you're driving at either."

"That dog has misled us; instead of conducting us to the couple he has
taken us away from them."

It was true and every one of the four knew it. The suspicion of the
guide had become certainty. Was it instinct or reason that controlled
the animal? Who shall draw the line in explaining many of the actions
of the brute creation?

Vose Adams was silent a moment and then emitted a low whistle.

"Hang me, if I don't b'leve you're right, captain. I've been told that
that dog knowed more than a good many folks and there ain't no doubt
of it now."

The disgusted parson exclaimed:

"Why didn't one of us think of that? The idea of all four being fooled
by a dog!"

"It wouldn't have been so bad if there had been two dogs," said
Ruggles, who saw the grim humor of the thing, "but it is tough to have
our eyes shet by only one."

It was impossible for Vose Adams wholly to restrain all evidence of
his pleasure. When in the depths of despair, he was awakened to the
fact that the canine had performed one of the most brilliant exploits
conceivable. He could not help smiling. The captain was in an ugly
mood and in a threatening voice asked:

"Did you have anything to do with this?"

"Certainly; me and Timon fixed up the thing afore he left Dead Man's
Gulch; it took us a good while; the dog didn't think it would work,
but I stuck to it and finally he promised to have a try at it;
certainly we fixed it up atween us."

The guide did a clever thing in thus turning the fantastic belief of
the captain into ridicule. Had he protested, he might have added to
the suspicion against himself. It was further in his favor that it was
known he had never had much to do with Timon. As already related, the
brute had few friends among the miners and Vose Adams never sought his
acquaintance.

Nevertheless, it was impossible to brush out of sight one significant
fact,--the long absence of Adams the day before. But for the last
occurrence, nothing would have been thought of the former, but it was
clear that Captain Dawson had begun to entertain doubts of the loyalty
of his guide.

"He'll never repeat his trick anyway," exclaimed the officer, facing
about and bringing his rifle to his shoulder. But his intention of
shooting Timon was frustrated, for the brute was nowhere in sight.
Unreasonable as it might sound, it looked as if he suspected how
things would turn out and took the occasion to place himself beyond
danger from the indignant men.

"In the army we shoot spies and traitors," remarked the captain, so
angered by his repeated disappointments that he could not govern his
feelings. In giving expression to the remark, the officer made a
serious mistake, which he saw the moment the words left his lips. He
was suspicious of Vose Adams, but he should have concealed all
evidence of it, until the proof appeared. When that took place, he
would shoot the man with no more hesitation that he would have shot
the dog. But he had now put Vose on his guard and the difficulty of
detecting him was increased tenfold.

As if to obliterate the memory of his words, the captain said in the
most matter of fact tone he could assume:

"The mistake we made has taken us from the right spot; they must have
been near the rocks where Timon showed himself."

"No doubt," said the parson, "and were watching us."

"The one thing to do is to retrace our steps; perhaps the two may be
fools enough," bitterly added the captain, "to wait for us, since that
seems to be the only way by which we shall ever come up with them."

A single short bark startled them. The captain wheeled like a flash
with his gun at his shoulder. But Timon was too cunning to show
himself. It is not improbable that he meant the expression for a note
of triumph over his inimitable exploit, while such a wonderful dog was
too wise to run any risk of punishment from his indignant victims.

The hunter is sustained against fatigue by the excitement of the
chase; and, despite the severe labor of following the canine guide,
all four men stood it far better than the return to the spot where the
pursuit began. Angered, chagrined and in desperate mood, even the grim
leader was forced occasionally to stop and rest. Nearly two hours
passed before they descried the familiar pile of rocks in their
front.

"That's the spot," he said, "but what good can it do us? It's a wonder
if they have not run off with our horses; it would be a fitting climax
to this folly."

It was the secret wish of Adams, from the moment of discovering the
cleverness of Timon, that this very thing should be done. If
Lieutenant Russell took such a precaution, it could not fail to be
effective. Returning to the main trail after his pursuers were out of
the way, he would have an open path through the mountains to
Sacramento. If the lameness of Nellie's pony continued, her saddle
could be transferred to one of the other horses, and, leading or
driving the remainder of the animals, the four men would soon find
their task a hopeless one.

But the young officer was restrained from such action by a certain
chivalry that governed all his actions. He could not consent to take
so unfair an advantage of an enemy, even though the fate of one dearer
than his own life was at stake. And yet it must be confessed that the
lieutenant drew it very fine. His course did not win the respect of
his enemies, who were inclined to attribute it to stupidity, rather
than courtesy.

But no time was to be lost in deciding their line of action.

"I think we'd better make a hunt among them rocks," suggested Wade
Ruggles.

The others studied them with as much interest as if it were the first
time they had been seen. If the couple had taken refuge among the
caverns and crevices of this immense pile of stone, they must have
left their animals on the ground below where they could be readily
discovered.

"We may as well have a look," remarked the captain; "what do you
think, Vose?"

"I don't think anything; don't ask me any questions."

He never looked more angry. He had not forgotten the slur of the
captain and had spirit enough to resent it. Dawson was too proud to
apologize and he could not do so, when his suspicion of the fellow's
loyalty was as strong as ever. On the contrary, having made his
blunder, the officer drove the arrow home.

"I am sorry you didn't take that resolution in the first place; it
would have been better for all of us, though not so good for those we
are looking for."

The captain and Ruggles now turned to the right, while the other two
took the opposite direction. They were thus enabled, after more hard
work, practically to pass around the mass of rocks, returning to their
starting point, without having discovered any traces of man, woman or
their animals. On the journey, Adams and the parson exchanged few
words, but it was different with the other couple.

"What do you think of his long absence yesterday?" asked the captain.

"It has a bad look,--worse than I thought when he come back."

"Why so?"

"I take it with the action of that dog. You didn't fail to notice that
Timon took us along the exact route that Vose was leadin' us over and
we found out that it was the wrong one."

"And you believe he purposely misled us?"

"It's almost sartin."

"Suppose it _was_ certain, Wade?"

"I'd shoot him quicker'n lightning."

"So would I."

"But you see we can't be sartin just yit; if Vose is in that kind of
bus'ness, he'll give himself away purty soon."

"I agree with you and we'll watch him."

Thus was the momentous bargain made.

When the four came together once more, the parson remarked:

"It's my belief that after we were well out of the way, the two went
down the gorge to the main trail and are now making haste to
Sacramento."

The exact line of action that had been agreed upon! Vose Adams was
firmly convinced that this was the very thing that had taken place and
the utmost he could do was to prevent the horsemen from acting on that
theory until the fugitives were given opportunity to pass beyond
reach.

Except for the words of Captain Dawson, the guide would have striven
to delay the pursuit, but he dared not attempt it after the warning.
Ignoring the captain, he said to Felix Brush:

"It's more'n likely you're right, parson; that would have been the
most nat'ral thing for them to do and it's no use of our standing here
and talking, when every minute counts."

"We can quickly learn the truth; it isn't far to the gorge, where they
must have left traces; leave the horses here, for we can soon return
for them if it proves necessary."

Forgetting their fatigue, the four walked back over their own trail.
The forenoon was well advanced, and, by this time, the fugitives were
probably a good way off. Adams was relieved because of this action,
for it promised more delay.

Reaching the beginning of the gorge, all began an examination of the
ground, for the imprints of the horses' feet were plainly seen. To the
amazement of every one, each hoof pointed upward, that is away from
the canyon. There was no evidence that any quadruped had descended the
slope. All had gone up. Vose Adams was in despair.

"They have let their only chance go by," he bitterly reflected; "it's
too late now to save them!"




CHAPTER XXVI

AT BAY


Lieutenant Russell held a long consultation with Nellie Dawson, after
the departure of Vose Adams. His first intention had been to press
their flight with all possible vigor, and, as will be recalled, Adams
carried away that belief with him.

"My view of matters has undergone a change," he said after a time to
his companion, who looked up in his face for an explanation.

"Instead of waiting until we reach Sacramento for a meeting with your
father, I believe it will be much better to have it as soon as
possible."

"Why?" she asked, though curious to say, she had been wavering for
some time in her belief.

"It will add to rather than lessen his anger, if he is obliged to
follow us that far, and the fact that he is in a city instead of the
mountains will not decrease his determination to do me injury."

"What about those who are with him?"

"Your father is the only one to be considered. My proposal is that we
wait here till to-morrow morning until they come up; what is your
opinion?"

"I believe you are right; let us do so; I don't think father will cast
me off when I go to him."

The plan was carried out, though the young man felt more misgiving
than his companion suspected. He remained on guard a part of the
night, sharing the duty with Timon, whose almost human intelligence
made him as reliable as a trained scout himself.

Straight to the spot came the pursuers soon after daylight, when the
horses were saddled and bridled. Nellie was in a state of feverish
expectancy. When she caught sight of her father, leading the others,
she joyfully uttered his name and ran toward him with outstretched
arms.

"Father, my own father, are you not glad to see your Nellie?"

Still holding his Winchester half-raised, he glanced sternly at her
and replied:

"Come no nearer; you are no daughter of mine!"

She stopped as if shot, and with hands still outstretched stood
motionless, with her eyes fixed yearningly upon him. She was like a
marble statue, without the breath of life in her body. All were
silent. Even Timon looked from one to another without moving. The
whole thing was beyond his comprehension.

Then the dreadful truth seemed to force itself upon the consciousness
of the girl, who staggered backward to the nearest boulder, upon which
she sank and covered her face with her hands. She did not weep, for
her grief was too deep.

And who shall picture the sorrow that wrenched the heart strings of
the parent? There was a strange look on his face and his massive frame
trembled. But he quickly recovered his self-poise, and looking away
from his child, fixed his eyes upon Lieutenant Russell.

"It is with _you_ that I have to settle."

"I am ready."

The young officer was standing beside his pony, with one arm resting
on the saddle, across which his rifle was supported, while the other
hand lay idly on his hip, and his body was borne upon one foot. His
pose was one of negligence, as if he and his animal had taken position
before the camera, and the world contained no such thing as hatred and
enmity. He looked calmly into the angered countenance, while he waited
for the next words of the man who was impatient to send a bullet
through his heart.

Wade Ruggles and Felix Brush would have been glad of the privilege of
doing this, but they felt that for the time they were out of it. The
right of calling Lieutenant Russell to account lay with the father of
Nellie. They had nothing to do or say until that tragedy was ended,
and they stood apart, silent, grim and watchful of everything.

The coolness of the young man disconcerted the captain for the
moment. Feeling it unnecessary to hold his weapon, he lowered the
point, but, never once removing his eyes from the face of the other,
said:

"I will give you the same chance as myself for your life; though you
do not deserve to live, it shall never be said I took any advantage
over you. Each of us has a revolver and knows how to use it; you may
pace off the distance for yourself, but make it short."

"Captain, I decline to fight you," replied Lieutenant Russell, without
a change of pose and in his usual voice.

"Why?" demanded the other.

"You have saved my life on the battle field; we have been comrades; we
have drank from the same canteen; shoot me if you wish; I will keep
the position I now hold and you may stand where you are; you have your
Winchester in your hands; you have but to raise it and it will be all
over in a twinkling, but nothing that you can say or do will induce me
to harm one of your gray hairs."

This reply was unexpected to all, but it served if possible to
intensify the wrath of Captain Dawson. He shook with tempestuous rage,
and it was several seconds before he could command his voice. Ruggles,
Brush and Adams did not stir or whisper a word to one another. The
white-faced Nellie remained seated on the boulder, but she lowered her
hands and stared at the two, as if she could not comprehend it all.
Once she made a motion to rise, but sank back and stared with a
fixidity of gaze that went to the hearts of the three spectators.

"You are a sneaking scoundrel to use those words," said Captain
Dawson, when able to command his voice; "all the past is wiped out
except that of the last two days; I shall shoot you for stealing my
child from me."

The lieutenant looked calmly into the countenance of the man, and,
lowering his tones almost to a whisper, that was perfectly audible to
all, replied:

"I am at your disposal."

From the moment Captain Dawson learned of the flight of his child, he
had been eager for but one thing,--the opportunity to draw bead on the
miscreant, without giving him an instant to prepare for death. That
opportunity was his but he hesitated. Something that he could not
explain, but which incensed him, held his hand motionless.

But perhaps the end would have been the same, when he rallied from the
momentary struggle, had not his daughter awakened from the daze that
had held her mute and motionless. Like Pocahontas, she sprang forward,
with arms again outstretched, and with a faint shriek, flung them
about the form of her lover.

"Shoot father, if you will, but you shall kill me too!"

Felix Brush shivered and turning away his head, muttered in a broken
voice:

"My God, Wade! I can't stand this!"

Ruggles attempted to reply, but the words choked in his throat. Still
he and Adams kept their eyes upon the three before them. Ruggles was
on the point of interfering when Nellie Dawson averted the necessity.

Lieutenant Russell was disconcerted. His lip quivered, and, with
infinite tenderness, he sought to loosen the arms that entwined him,
but she would not permit it.

"No, no, no! He shall not part us! Let him slay us both! Do not
repulse me! I will die with you!"

The situation of Captain Dawson was awful. He was scarcely himself.
The dainty form of his child could not fully shield the athletic
figure of Lieutenant Russell, strive as much as she might, and the
opening for the threatened shot was as clear as ever. Whether he would
have persisted in his intention can never be known, for at that
juncture the startling incidents were succeeded by one still more
startling and unexpected.




CHAPTER XXVII

NO BRAVER DEED EVER WAS DONE


The hearts of two of the party were wrung as never before. Wade
Ruggles and Felix Brush saw with noonday clearness the dreadful
mistake they had made in the past in hoping to win the heart of the
maiden who had declared that if her beloved was to die she would die
with him. It was contrary to nature and the laws of God, and it was
characteristic of each that he felt a thrill of gratitude over the
belief that no person suspected his secret. Both would have died
rather than allow it ever to become known.

With this awakening came a transformation of feeling toward the
couple. They sympathized with Lieutenant Russell, but more than all,
they pitied her whose soul was distraught with grief. They had never
before seen her in the agony of distress and neither could stand it.

"Brush," whispered Ruggles, "this must stop."

"_Hold!_" called Brush in a loud voice, striding commandingly forward
with his arm upraised; "I have something to say!"

There was a majesty and an impressiveness of mien like that of the
Hebrew prophet who hushed the tempest. Captain Dawson, without moving
body or limb, turned and glared at the intruder; Ruggles kept his
position; Nellie Dawson, with arms still clasping the neck of her
betrothed, looked over her shoulder at her old friend; Lieutenant
Russell reached up so as to hold the wrists of the girl, while still
retaining his grip upon his rifle and fixed his eyes upon the tall,
gaunt figure that halted between him and Captain Dawson and a little
to one side of him.

"Lieutenant Frederic Russell, do you love Nellie Dawson?" was the
astounding question that fell from the lips of Brush.

"Aye, more than my life," was the prompt response.

"And you have started for Sacramento with the purpose of making her
your wife?"

"That was my resolve with the help of heaven."

"And, Nellie, you agreed to this?"

"Yes, yes; we shall not be parted in life or death."

"Such being your feelings," continued Felix Brush, in the same loud,
clear tones, "I pronounce you man and wife, and whom God hath joined
together let not man put asunder!"

It was a thunderclap. No one moved or spoke for a full minute. Felix
Brush was the only one who seemed to retain command of his senses.
Stepping forward, with a strange smile on his seamed countenance, he
extended his hand to the groom.

"Allow me to congratulate you, lieutenant; and, Nellie, I don't think
you will deny me my fee."

With which he bent over and tenderly kissed her.

"O, Mr. Brush, are we really married?" she asked in a faint, wild
voice.

"As legally as if it were done by the archbishop of Canterbury and
if--"

But he got no further, for her arms were transferred from the neck of
her husband to those of the parson, whom she smothered with her
caresses.

"Bless your heart! You are the nicest, best, sweetest, loveliest man
that ever lived,--excepting Fred and father--"

"And _me_," added Wade Ruggles, stepping forward.

"Yes, and you, you great big angel," she replied, bestowing an equally
warm embrace upon him.

The two rugged fellows had won the greatest victory that can be
achieved by man, for they had conquered themselves. When the great
light broke in upon their consciousness, each resolved to let the dead
past bury its dead and to face the future like the manly heroes they
were.

And no braver deed ever was done.

Poor Captain Dawson! For a time he believed he was dreaming. Then,
when he grasped the meaning of it all, his Winchester dropped from
his nerveless grasp and he staggered and would have fallen, had not
Lieutenant Russell leaped forward and caught him in his arms. He
helped him to the boulder from which Nellie had risen and then he
collapsed utterly. The soldier who had faced unmoved the hell blast of
battle had fainted for the first time in his life.

Nellie ran to the brook a few paces away, and catching some of the
water in the hollow of her hand darted back and flung it into his
face.

"There, dear father; it is all right; rouse yourself; O, Mr. Brush,
suppose he is dead!" she exclaimed, turning terrifiedly toward him.

"He is as likely to die as you are, and you don't look just now as if
you mean to put on wings and fly away."

In a few minutes the veteran revived and looked confusedly around him.
He seemed unable to comprehend what it all meant and his gaze wandered
in a dazed way from one countenance to another without speaking.
Nellie was still caressing him, while Lieutenant Russell stood back a
couple of steps, looking pityingly into the face of the man who had
suffered so much.

Felix Brush was the hero of the occasion. Turning to the group, he
said:

"Leftenant, you and Nellie and Ruggles and Vose move off for a short
distance and leave him with me for a little while."

Understanding his purpose the three withdrew, and the two men were
left alone. The captain instantly roused himself.

"What does all this mean, Brush?"

"It means that you and Ruggles and I have been the three infernalist
fools that ever pretended to have sense."

"How?"

"How? In every way conceivable. Wade and I, as we told you, saw that
those two were in love with each other; instead of persuading you to
consent, we have helped you to prevent it. I must say, captain, that
though Wade and I played the idiot, I think the championship belongs
to you."

"I begin to suspect it."

"There's no doubt of it."

"But, you see, parson, I had never thought of anything like this."

"Which goes to prove the truth of what I have just said. If you hadn't
been blind you would have seen it."

"I got the belief into my head that his intentions were not honorable
toward Nellie."

"You never made a greater mistake; Lieutenant Russell is the soul of
honor; heaven intended him for the husband of Nellie, and we were
flying in the face of Providence when we tried to prevent it."

"I suppose it is all right; but how is it possible for a man to make
such a consummate ass of himself?"

"You have just given a demonstration of how it is done, Wade and I
adding material help in the demonstration."

The captain looked to the ground in deep thought. When he raised his
eyes there was an odd twinkle in them.

"I say, parson, wasn't that a rather cheeky performance of yours, when
you made them man and wife?"

"The circumstances warranted it. There's no saying what might have
happened, if it had been deferred for only a few minutes."

"True," replied the veteran thoughtfully; "it begins to look as if the
hand of Providence was in it."

"It is in everything that occurs in this life. It was in your coming
to New Constantinople; in the blessed influence of your child upon
that barbarous community; in the impulse that led you to bring
Lieutenant Russell to us, and now comes the crowning Providence of all
in their marriage."

"Parson, you ain't such a poor preacher after all."

"Perhaps I can preach a little, but my practice has been away off,
though I hope to get back one of these days to where I was, but--"

He suddenly turned and beckoned to his friends to join them. They
came smilingly forward, for they suspected what it meant.

Captain Dawson rose to his feet, and, without speaking extended his
single arm toward his child. With a glad cry she flew into his embrace
and pillowed her head on his breast. No one spoke, but there was not a
dry eye among the spectators, while the silent embrace lasted.

Finally the daughter was released and then the captain reached his
hand toward his son-in-law, who eagerly stepped forward and grasped
it.

"Yes, lieutenant, we have drunk from the same canteen," he said, "and
now let's all go home."

And it was accordingly so done.

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's A Waif of the Mountains, by Edward S. Ellis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WAIF OF THE MOUNTAINS ***

***** This file should be named 29693.txt or 29693.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/6/9/29693/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
