Project Gutenberg's The Little Nightcap Letters., by Frances Elizabeth Barrow

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Little Nightcap Letters.

Author: Frances Elizabeth Barrow

Release Date: August 26, 2009 [EBook #29812]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE NIGHTCAP LETTERS. ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note: Some of the text was printed in a much smaller type.
This was indicated in this text version by surrounding the smaller text
with +plus signs+.

[Illustration: The Children coaxing Mr. Appleton to tell where Aunt
Fanny lived.]




THE LITTLE NIGHTCAP LETTERS.

          BY THE AUTHOR OF
          "NIGHTCAPS," "NEW NIGHTCAPS," "BABY NIGHTCAPS,"
          ETC., ETC.

          NEW YORK:
          D. APPLETON & COMPANY,
          90, 92 & 94 GRAND ST.
          LONDON: 16 LITTLE BRITAIN.
          1869.




    ENTERED, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1860, by
    FANNY BARROW,
    In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States
          for the
    Southern District of New York.




          Dedication.


          THESE LITTLE NIGHTCAP LETTERS

          ARE LOVINGLY DEDICATED

          TO MY DAUGHTER,

          "LITTLE ALICE."




CONTENTS.


                                                          PAGE
  NIGHTCAP LETTER No. 2 FROM AUNT FANNY,                    7
  INTRODUCTION TO BELLA'S LETTERS,                         45
  THE NIGHTCAP LETTERS, HOW THEY CAME TO BE WRITTEN,       51
  FIRST LETTER,                                            64
  SECOND LETTER,                                           69
  THE FIRST LETTER FROM CHARLESTON,                        73
  THIRD LETTER,                                            76
  FOURTH LETTER,                                           94
  FIFTH LETTER,                                           127
  SIXTH LETTER,                                           159
  THE RETURN,                                             174




NIGHTCAP LETTER No. 2 FROM AUNT FANNY.


_You little darling:_

What _do_ you think happened the other day? why, a lady came to see me,
bringing with her just about the dearest little Kitty that ever lived.
Not a Kitty with whiskers, and four paws, and a fur coat, but a sweet
little girl _named_ Kitty, with lovely blue eyes, a great many soft
brown curls, and the same number of sweet rosy lips that you have. How
many is _that,_ I should like to know? I had never seen the lady, or the
little girl before, and of course I did not know their names until
afterwards. So I bowed, and smiled, and looked as pleasant as ever I
could.

Then Kitty said in a sweet trembling voice--"_Is_ you Aunt Fanny?"

I laughed a little bit, and answered, "Yes, dear."

What happened then? Why in a moment she ran up to me, climbed upon a
chair close by,--threw her arms around my neck, and gave me such a
precious little smothering hug, and so many sweet kisses, with her soft
face pressed with all her might upon my cheek, that I almost lost my
breath, and was perfectly astonished, as well as delighted.

Then the little girl said: "Oh thank you, dear Aunt Fanny, _twenty-ten_
times, for my Baby Nightcaps! I love them! I love you! I love you
_dreadfully_!" Oh! how glad I was to hear that! I was glad
"_twenty-ten_" times. It was sweeter to me, than a whole basket full of
sugar candies would be to you--and I kissed her on both her round
dimpled cheeks, and sat down, and took her on my lap, and hugged her to
my heart, and said--"what a darling! what a dear little thing!"

Then I looked at the lady. She was laughing and blushing, and I was
laughing and blushing, and the little girl was laughing and blushing.
Don't you think we three were having a very funny kind of time? _I_
did.

At last the lady said: "I hope you will excuse me for bringing Kitty to
see you; but she begged so hard for 'just one little look at Aunt
Fanny,' I could not bear to refuse her. I am afraid she has taken a
great deal more than 'one little look.' I hope she has not kissed a
piece out of your cheek?"

At this, Kitty looked up in great alarm at my cheek--but seeing that it
was not bleeding, and had no hole in it, she patted it softly with her
little tender dimpled hand, and said: "+Aunt Fanny, Aunt Fanny,+" in a
little speck of a whisper to herself a great many times.

Then I said: "I am _so_ glad to know that you were pleased with Baby
Nightcaps. Would you like me to ask poor lame Charley's mother for
more?"

With a joyful little scream, she hugged me again, and kissed my
cheek--_very softly_ this time, for fear of hurting me, and said: "Oh!
Aunt Fanny! if you only will, I will give you a whole paper full of
_perl_asses candy, and one of my new _handkerchickers_; and when you are
old and blind, I will take you in my arms, and carry you up stairs, and
put you in my lap _and teach you your letters_, and ask mamma to read
the Bible to you--all about Joseph, you know, and his wicked _bredders_;
it will make you _ki_."

Wasn't she a cunning little thing? I could not help laughing, to think
of such a little mite of a child, talking of taking me in her arms; and
then I could not help the tears coming, at her offer to have her own
mamma read the Bible to me--was it not sweet? _You_ would have done so
too, wouldn't you? You see, it must have been Kitty's greatest pleasure,
to have God's Holy Bible read to her; so she promised me, what she
thought was the very best thing in the whole world. And so it is.

You may be sure, that I told her, I would try to get the stories very
soon.

Pretty soon Kitty and her mamma went away; but not before we had given
each other one more real good kiss, and I had prayed in my heart that
God would bless the precious little child, and guide me with my new
book, so that it would help Kitty and you to be good, obedient children,
His precious little lambs here upon earth, and His bright, beautiful
angels in Heaven.

In the evening I put on my bonnet and shawl, and went to see lame
Charley's mother. As I rang the bell, I heard such a quantity of
laughing voices, and so many little feet pattering, I was almost
certain, that at least twenty cousins must have come to town to help
them have a good time: but when the door was opened, I saw they were all
Nightcap Children, rushing down stairs together. They had gone up to
wash their faces and hands and brush their hair, and were coming down
all laughing and talking at once, so you may be sure it made a great
noise.

Bless their little chattering tongues, and pattering feet! You can't
expect children to be as grave and solemn as judges--of course not. I,
for one, would not give a pin for a child that did not make a
noise--that is--a pleasant noise.

So they were jumping and tumbling down, when I entered, and in a moment
they were all about me crying. "How-de-do, Aunt Fanny? Come in, come in,
mamma is in the parlor, and Charley is sitting in her lap--and the
TREMENDOUS DOG is asleep on the rug--and we are not to have a Nightcap
story to-night--but something grand! splendid!"

[Illustration: THE TREMENDOUS DOG!]

"Somesing 'tonishing," chimed in little Minnie--"_tome!_ _kick!_"--by
which she meant me to "come quick"--and not to tell me to kick
anybody--oh dear, no!

So we all hurried along--and how I got into the room, without stepping
upon some of their dear little toes, I am sure I don't know, but nobody
seemed to be hurt--and heads and toes came in all safe--and Charley
lifted up his sweet pale face for a kiss, and his mother shook hands
with me, and then we all sat down, and the boys said "hush," and the
girls said "hush," till it sounded so much like a room brimful of cats
sneezing, that I laughed; and that made the children laugh, and then of
course they had to jump up and down in their seats, and the girls had to
twirl round and make cheeses, and this made the TREMENDOUS DOG laugh,
which he did by wagging his tail, like a flag in a high wind, and giving
two or three short barks, and it was just as good as going to Barnum's
Museum, to see such a "happy family." If you had asked _Barnum_ about
it, he would have said it was ever so much better.

At last I said: "Dear little Charley, I have put the stories told to
you, and Minnie, and the rest, into three Nightcap books. They have
pleased the children very much. I know this, because I have received a
great many letters; such nice letters! telling me how the children
laughed and cried, and not one single word in any of them to say that
anybody put his mouth out of joint, yawning over the stories. Instead of
that, they all want more; and this very day a sweet little girl came to
see me to ask for more. She was not like poor Oliver Twist, asking for
food for her body. Oh no! she was a plump, merry, rosy-cheeked darling,
just like Minnie, and eat just as much good bread and milk as she
wanted, and molasses candy, too--for she promised to give me ever so
much, if I would only give her another Nightcap book--and what is more
and better, she has promised to read the Bible to me, when I am old and
blind."

"Did you ever!" shouted the children; "Aunt Fanny, old and blind! We'll
read to you, too, the whole Bible, and all the books in the bookcase
beside! When are you going to be? Will you walk with a long black cane
like old Granny Van Winkle? Do begin pretty soon, because we want to be
kind to you, and read to you, too!"

"Ah--no!" said the sweet voice of lame Charley. "Dear Aunt Fanny, we
_don't_ want you to be old and blind; you shall have all mamma's pretty
stories without it. I am glad the children like them. _I_ think them
lovely; my back does not hurt me near so much while she is telling them,
and when I die, which I think will be very soon now, I hope the children
will think of me sometimes, and love my darling mamma, who has given
them and me so many pleasant hours. This is my birthday, Aunt Fanny. I
am ten years old to-day. Perhaps it is my last birthday. See what my
brothers and sisters have given to me."

In the midst of a sad silence, (for the children were now quite still,
and were looking at Charley, with their eyes full of love and tears,) I
went up to a table, at which he had pointed, and saw what looked like a
large tin box. It proved to be a splendid magic lantern! The children
had saved all their money for many months to be able to buy it, and the
little mother told me, that when they came in a body that morning and
gave it to Charley, with their dear love and many kisses, their faces
glowing with pleasure, it was the sweetest sight in the world to see,
and Charley thought he could never thank or love them enough, and that
very morning he made this little prayer, and added it to his others:

"Oh God, I am a poor little suffering child. Very often, I cannot help
crying with pain. But many children suffer as much as I do, and have not
one of my blessings; and Jesus, my Saviour, suffered far more. He was
innocent and good, while we, for whom He suffered, are sometimes very
naughty. Please, God, to forgive me for being naughty, and bless and
love my dear brothers and sisters who are so kind to me, and please
bless my darling mother, and if I die before another year, may we all
meet again in heaven, I pray, for Jesus' sake. Amen."

The tears came into my eyes as I listened to this little prayer--and I
bent my face down and kissed Charley's white forehead to hide them--and
whispered to him that I would tell it to the children outside in the
world, and perhaps this little prayer might be learned by some other
sick child--and it would comfort them, and I would also give them the
new stories--at which he smiled and said: "Oh, yes, do!" and all the
rest said: "Do, Aunt Fanny; and stay to-night--and see the magic
lantern--then you can tell them about that, too, you know; they'll be so
glad, they won't know what to do."

So I staid; and pretty soon there was a great scampering, and bustling,
and climbing up on chairs, to fasten a large sheet over the opening of
one of the doors, and then the grandest of the company--which consisted
of Charley, the TREMENDOUS DOG, and myself--were put, with a great many
polite speeches, into the best places in front; and the rest shook, and
jumped, and tumbled themselves into seats behind us--and all the lights
were put out, and everybody was in a perfect state of delightful
expectation, as they shouted: "Here we are, mamma, with all our eyes
staring at the sheet ready for the show."

Then the little mother went into the next room with the magic lantern,
and lighted a lamp inside, and placed it close to the sheet. In a
moment, a large, bright circle of light appeared on the sheet--and in a
moment more, we saw a splendid picture of Daniel in the Lions' Den; the
lions with their fierce-looking mouths wide open, and their sharp claws
spread out as if they would snap up Daniel the very next instant--upon
which the children raised such a shout that I thought my head was coming
off--and it was quite fortunate that the picture was changed to one of
Moses in the Bulrushes, which delighted the children beyond every thing;
but when there came a picture of little Samuel praying--a low murmur
of--"Oh! how lovely! what a good little Samuel! how I love him!"
sounded softly through the room.

There was one picture of a cross old school ma'am, with a great hook
nose, and a long whip, looking so savage at three poor little children
that did not seem to know their lessons--that Minnie cried out:

[Illustration: THE PICTURE IN THE MAGIC LANTERN.]

"Oh! see the poor chillens! they don't know their A, B, C. Ah! I so
sorry for them!" and then all the children said: "Poor things! why
don't they run away--I would! Because she looks so cross! let's scratch
a smile on her face with a pin, and _make_ her look pleasant."

But the best picture of all was Noah's Ark. First the ark came on
alone--then a plank seemed to be put down--then came the great
elephants, lions, tigers, and bears, marching up the plank two and two
into the ark--and after them all the rest of the animals in the world,
getting smaller and smaller, until little wee monkeys, and kittens, and
mice, and robins, and grasshoppers, and blind beetles, and big spiders,
and tumble-bugs, ran and hopped, and skipped, and crawled up the plank
in such quantities, that it was quite a wonder they were not all
suffocated in such a crowd. But didn't the children clap their hands
and cry: "Look! look!" when Noah and his wife, and his three sons,
Shem, Ham, and Japhet, and their families, marched gravely past, looking
straight before them, and went into the ark, and the ark sailed slowly
off! It was perfect! they wished they could have gone into the ark, too,
to put apples into the elephant's trunk, and play with the monkeys, and
count all the animals--George guessed there must have been at least a
thousand--while Annie thought a million went in. How many do you think,
you dear little darling?

The magic lantern was a great success, and Minnie said: "the magic
_nightcat_ was the bestest of all."

After the show was over, I kissed everybody, and went home quite happy
in the promise of my new stories--and you may be sure, you dear little
poppet, that Kitty, and you, and all the darling children shall have
them as fast as the printer can print them. If you like them, just go to
Mr. Appleton's, and coax him to tell you where I live; and then run up
to my house on your dear little feet, and give one real good kiss to
your loving Aunt Fanny.




INTRODUCTION.


ONE evening the little nightcap mother said: "Children, I have had a
most charming present. It is a copy of some letters and stories that
were written and told to your little friend, Bella Curtis. They are a
kind of baby stories, for children like Minnie. Do you think you shall
like them? Do _you_ Charley?"

Then the children all shouted out "Certainly! Of course! the baby
stories are the best! no, not the best, but just as good as the _old_
stories--yes, mamma, do read them. Letters! why that is something
new--how very nice."

"But I don't want to hear A--B--C," cried little Minnie, who was just
learning her letters, and thought it very hard work--"I don't like
letters a bit."

How the children did laugh when they saw Minnie's long face, and heard
her queer speech; but they soon explained to her, that these letters
were a new sort of delightful story--upon which she folded her little
fat hands and sat down quite comforted, that these letters had nothing
to do with her A, B, C.

And Charley said: "I love that dear little Bella, mamma, and I shall be
so pleased to hear her letters. I thank her very much for sending them
to you."

Then the children seated themselves, and puckered up their mouths--so as
to keep all the little laughs in. They couldn't keep their eyes from
sparkling; but as that could be done without making a noise--it was
rather a help, as it showed how delighted they expected to be--and gave
the little mother such a happy look, that they came very near all
rushing upon her to kiss her; but they managed to keep still, and the
new nightcap letters began as follows:--




THE NIGHTCAP LETTERS,

HOW THEY CAME TO BE WRITTEN.


BELLA'S mother was quite ill; and the doctor said she must go for awhile
to the sweet, sunny South--far away from the cold March winds.

Poor little Bella did not want her mother to go. When she heard of it,
she began to cry, and climbed up into her mother's lap, and kissing her
cheek said: "Stay with Bella, mamma, do please; Bella will take care of
you, and make you well."

"But the doctor says I must go, my darling," answered her mother. "If
you cry, it will make me worse, because I shall feel so miserable to see
you crying; but you mean to be good, don't you? and when I get to
Charleston, I will write you ever so many little letters one after the
other, and you must tell papa what to say, and he will write the
answers. Won't that be nice? The postman will bring you your letters,
and then you must pay him two cents apiece for every one of them, think
of that! Dear me! how much money it will take! do you think you will
have money enough?"

"My _pasense_," exclaimed Bella; "what a heap of letters! Oh, how glad I
am! I'll buy every one, mamma! I'll go and count my money now!"

So she ran to her drawer, and took out a little velvet purse. It looked
very fat and heavy. Then she sat down on the carpet and opened it, and
out tumbled ever so many bright pennies into her lap--quite enough to
astonish the postman, and make him wish he could sell her six letters
at once. Bella clapped her hands and laughed, and thumped her heels
merrily up and down, and made the pennies jingle in her lap so
pleasantly, that it seemed as if they were singing a little song.

The thought of the letters was such a comfort to Bella, that she saw her
mother's trunks packed without crying a bit, though a poor little sigh
would come out once in a while; but she told Edith, her elder sister,
that she meant to behave in the "_goodest manner_," and almost to seem
glad that her dear mamma was going away, because that would help to make
her well.

It would have delighted you to see little Bella "helping." She ran all
round the room, to find something to put in the trunks. She tucked a
little cake of soap into one corner, and half a dozen hair pins in
another; and then hunting in her funny little pocket, she found two gum
drops, which her Cousin George had given to her--these she did up in a
scrap of paper, and very carefully stowed away under the fold of a pair
of stockings.

Well, at last the time came to say "good-bye," and poor little Bella
clung to her mother, and the great sobs _would_ come, and no one could
blame her, for her mamma was crying too--and her little Bella's face was
covered with tears as well as kisses. But this dear mamma had to go--and
the steamship went swiftly away with her, and in a little while she
could no longer see the great city of New York, where her darling lived.

Bella cried a long time, and did not want to go back into her mamma's
room. At last she thought she would go. On the bed was a large paper
parcel. Something was written on the paper, and she called her sister to
"read the reading" to her.

"Why! what's this?" exclaimed Edith. "'For my little Bella.' How very
strange."

"Dear me," cried Bella, giving a jump; "it must be for me--'spose I
look? I want to look so much."

"Certainly," said Edith. Then the paper was taken off by the little
girl's dimpled fingers, and there was displayed a most beautiful
bedstead, with a lovely baby tucked up in it, fast asleep!

I only wish you could have seen the dimples on Bella's face then! and
the sparkles in her eyes! She softly lifted the baby up--and pop! her
blue eyes opened as wide as possible--and she never cried a bit, but
just looked at Bella, not the least afraid of being among strangers.

Then Bella laid her gently down, and the good little thing shut her eyes
and went fast asleep again.

"My pasense!" said Bella, "I'm _apprised_! What a dear baby! Is it for
me?"

"It must be," said Edith; "but wait, here is a little letter pinned fast
to her sleeve. Let's see what it says."

"A letter," cried Bella; "must I pay two cents for it?" and she ran to
get her little velvet purse.

"You will not have to pay for this one, because the baby brought it--it
is only the postman that wants two cents."

So Edith opened the letter, and Bella jumped up and down all the time
her sister was reading these loving words:--




FIRST LETTER.


"DEAR DARLING BELLA:

"Here is a present for you of this little bedstead, and the pretty doll
baby; who will go to sleep the moment you put her in bed. Don't cry any
more, my little kitten, and rosebud, and pearl, and dove. I will pray
to our Heavenly Father to take care of us both, and before long you will
be clasped tight in the arms of your loving _mother_."

The little girl's lip trembled, as Edith finished the letter; but she
lifted up the baby just then--and the blue eyes opened so suddenly, that
it set Bella laughing--and she said lovingly: "_Pessus keeter_, come to
mamma," and so the little mamma that couldn't say "precious creature"
plain, forgot to cry.

"Why! only see here!" exclaimed Edith, "here is another bundle under the
bedstead! It must have come from the moon;" and drawing it out, she
handed it to Bella.

"Oh! how 'lightful," cried Bella. "Two bundles! I shall jump out of the
window for joy."

And now the paper was eagerly taken off, and lo! and behold! there was a
most beautiful pair of little brown gaiter boots.

"With heels!" screamed Bella. "How grandy! like a big lady! look,
Edith--heels!"

"Did I ever!" said Edith, lifting up her hands, "you will tumble down
stairs the very first time you wear them."

"Boots with heels!" and Bella began to try them on. Something stiff
rattled inside--and she put in her hand and pulled out--another letter!
It was almost too good to be true.

But Edith soon read these kind words:




SECOND LETTER.


"_My little Darling_:

"Here are a pair of boots for your dear little feet, with the heels on
them, that you wanted so much.

"Be careful to go down stairs _very slowly_, for fear you might catch
your heels on the edge, and fall and hurt yourself.

          "Don't let your little heel,
             Bump your little head;
           That would hurt a deal,
             And make it very red.
           Then so bad 'twould feel,
             Like a lump of lead.
           First with careful zeal,
             Very gently tread;
           Do not jump or squeal,
             Precious little maid.
           But, when at your meal,
             Eating milk and bread,
           Sing a merry peal,
             Without any dread.
           Dance a little reel,
             Then skip up to bed."

"Oh, how nice," cried Bella, when Edith had finished. "I like that. It
is so jingly and jangly."

"Why! how you talk!" said Edith, laughing. "It's poetry."

"Is it?" said Bella. "O--h!"

She put both her precious letters in her drawer, and then played with
her baby all the rest of the day. I believe the good little thing went
to sleep, and woke up again that day about fifty-nine times--maybe
sixty.

[Illustration: A LETTER FOR MISS BELLA CURTIS! TWO CENTS!!]




THE FIRST LETTER FROM CHARLESTON.


ABOUT a week after this, there came such a tremendous ring at the bell,
that both the fat cook and the waiter rushed to the door, and when it
was opened, there stood the postman! bawling out, "A letter for Miss
Bella Curtis! Two cents!"

How Miss Bella Curtis did scamper for her two cents to pay the postman!
and how delighted she looked when he gave her the letter! The postman
thought there must at least be a gold watch inside of it, she seemed so
pleased.

Bella tore the envelope all to pieces in her hurry to open her letter;
and then she fell over sideways from the little bench in her hurry to
sit down--but at last she was settled as still as you could expect under
such delightful circumstances--and Edith read this.




THIRD LETTER.


                                             "+CHARLESTON, _March._+

"DEAR DARLING BELLA:

"Here I am all safe, sitting in a pleasant room, with the window
opened--listening to the singing of the pretty birds, and looking at
three little black picaninnies over the way, playing with a small white
dog. They throw a little stick as far as ever they can, and then the
little dog rushes after it, in such a hurry, that you would think he was
going to leave his tail behind him; but he don't, because it is fastened
on so very tight. The next minute he trots back with the stick in his
mouth, and hands it with his _mouth_, you know, very politely to the
children, while they jump up and down, and squeal, because they are so
pleased.

"Now they have all scrambled heels over head into the yard, and shut the
dog's tail in the gate; but he pulled it through, and so I can't see
them any more.

"I hope the doll baby has been good, and the little heels on the boots
have behaved themselves. Good-bye, my darling. Pray to God every night
and morning for your loving

                                                        "MOTHER."

Bella smiled, and patted one little hand with the other, and a sweet
loving expression came into her eyes as the last words of the letter was
read to her, and she said: "Darling mamma. I love her. I want to go to
Heaven with her."

The dear little child had been told that there would be no pain or
crying in Heaven, and so she knew it must be a very happy place.

When her papa came home, Bella ran up to him with her letter,
exclaiming: "Oh papa, see! see the letter mamma _writed_ to me!"

"Is it possible! Why, what a big woman you are getting to be!" and he
took her upon his knee, and read the letter--out loud of course, for
Bella could have heard it fifty times with delight.

"Ah! that is a beautiful letter," said her papa; "you must answer it,
you know."

"Oh yes, papa; and I want to, 'ight away now."

"Oh! do you? Well, here is a sheet of paper, and pen and ink. Put out
your tongue; dear me, how long it is! it looks in very good talking
order. Now you talk, and I'll write, and see if we won't have a letter,
for which mamma will give two cents, and all her old shoes, to the
postman. Come! _you_ must begin first."

Then Bella put her little curly head one side, and stared up at a corner
of the ceiling. She was thinking, you see. Presently she put her finger
in her mouth, as if to pull the words out--then she looked at her
father. Her father smiled, which made her take her finger out of her
mouth, and shut her eyes--for she felt funny--and a little bashful. You
see this was a very grave business--writing a letter that her mamma
would have to pay two cents for--very serious business indeed.

All at once her eyes rested on her dolly, fast asleep in her pretty bed;
and then the words came right out--"Oh, dear mamma! I love my little
baby, and the heels, and the bedstead, and--and--oh, papa! I love mamma
the mostest. I gave my baby a piece of apple pie for her dinner. It was
made of paper, just for fun, you know; not really apple pie. She hates
pepper, it makes her tongue bite--mine too. She wants you to come home
s--o bad--the bedstead wants you to come home, and I want the postman to
bring me a letter, and you too--and--and--I don't know any more this
day."

"That is a beautiful letter," said her father; "now sign your name just
here--and I will seal it up, and direct it on the outside, and send it
to the post office."

So Bella made such a funny little scratch with the pen for her name,
that it looked as if a fly had turned round and round, with ink on its
legs, and then the letter went off on its travels.

The next day her cousin Stanny came to spend the day with Bella. Stanny
was a dear little fellow, with light hair, and great blue eyes, and
cheeks as fat as butter--they were so fat that the dimples had hard work
to make holes in them.

Bella loved Stanny, and she ran to kiss him, and show him her new baby,
and the other things; and what do you think Stanny did when he saw the
baby in the bed? Why, he tilted up the bedstead, and out fell dolly flat
on her nose! That was just like a boy--they will never do to be mothers,
like little girls--because they play so roughly.

"Oh Stanny," cried Bella, picking up the dolly tenderly, "she's most
killded."

"Why don't she cry then?" said Stanny.

"'Cause she isn't a cry baby," said Bella.

"I mean to punch her and make her cry," said Stanny.

So he doubled up his fist and gave the dolly a great punch in the
stomach--but the dear little thing just stared at him without winking,
and never said a word. You see the truth was that she had no crying
place made inside of her, as some of the babies have--and I for one
think it was quite an improvement, for who wants to hear a baby
squealing like a pig--you don't, do you? you little kitten!

Bella did not like to have her baby treated in this manner--and it was
very fortunate that their grandmamma came in the room just then, with
two large slices of bread, with the most delightful currant jelly
spread all over them, and gave one to each of the children, or perhaps
Bella might have turned into a cry-baby--and that would have made you
and me very sorry.

Pretty soon a lady came in--whom the children called Cousin Caroline,
and said: "Oh! here is Stanny; why, where did you come from, little
boy?"

"I come from Brooklyn. What you got your hat on for, Cousin Caroline?
Say."

"Because I am going to see old Mrs. Badger, up the street."

"Are you? Which do you like best, Mrs. Badger, up the street, or
grandmamma?"

"Why, Stanny! I like grandmamma a great deal the best."

"But, why for?" said Stanny.

"Why, because she is my aunt," said Cousin Caroline.

"Your aunt!" cried Stanny, in a tone of severe reproof. "Oh, Cousin
Caroline, aren't you ashamed to call my grandma an _ant!_ a little ugly
black thing, crawling on the ground. She isn't an ant, now! she's a big
grandma."

You may be sure that Cousin Caroline and grandma laughed at this long
speech--and then Stanny and Bella laughed--and they all thought it was a
very funny idea--to make a little black ant out of a big grandma.

The rest of the day Bella played she was the mother and Stanny the
grandfather; and except he wanted to whip poor dolly very often, because
he said she was naughty, they got along pretty well; and upon the whole
they both had a very pleasant day.




FOURTH LETTER.


"A LETTER for Miss Bella Curtis," said the postman; "two cents."

Oh, what delightful words those were. Bella began quite to love the
postman; and she asked him if he wouldn't please to take _three_
cents--which astonished him so much, that I do believe nobody had ever
thought of saying so to him before.

The little girl pulled off the envelope with trembling eagerness, and
Edith read this:


"DEAR, DARLING BELLA:

"I was so delighted with your letter that I kissed every word once, and
the dear little scratch, that meant your name, about a dozen times.
Yesterday was Sunday, and I went to church. Just in front of me sat a
dear little girl so like you, that I wanted to lift her over the back of
the pew and kiss her. She was such a little thing, that she did not know
how to sit still. She had on a pair of worsted sleeves, and the very
first thing she did, was to poke all the fingers of one little hand
through the ruffle round the other, just as you do with your sleeves.
Then she smiled at me, and I smiled at her; then she spread out her
little pocket handkerchief, and found a small hole in the corner, about
as big as a three-cent piece. She stuck her finger through that, and
held it up, and danced it up and down; then she dusted the pew with it,
which made it rather dirty. She was such a little bit of a thing that
you could hardly expect her to sit quite still; but this that I am going
to tell you now, was really naughty.

"There was a boy in the pew just in front. She gave him three pretty
hard taps on the back of his head, and when he looked round, she
pretended to be asleep. What a girl!

"When we came out I shook hands with her, and said: 'I have a little
girl at home in the North, her name is Bella; what is your name?'

"'My name is Bella, too,' she said. Wasn't that wonderful?

"As I walked home, I saw such a sweet little white girl, carried in the
arms of a great black woman, whose head looked like an immense
butterfly, fastened on her shoulders; for she had a handkerchief on it,
of all the colors of the rainbow, and it was spread out on either side
like wings.

"The sweet little child seemed to love her black nurse dearly, for as I
walked behind, I saw her press her tender, lovely, pink and white cheek,
close against the dusky face of her nurse, and I heard her say in a
sweet lisping tone: 'Oh, Binah, I love you. When I go to Heaven, I will
take you with me. Oh, B-i-n-a-h!' she said this last word just like the
cooing of a little dove.

"'Bress de darlin' chile,' said Binah. 'I am gwine back _now_, little
missis. Ole Binah hab to go to Heben fust, and wait dere for little
darlin' missis.'

"You see Binah meant by 'gwine back now,' that she was old. When people
are old, they say, they are going 'down hill,' but Binah said, 'going
back.' You are climbing _up_ the hill of life, my dear little Bella;
and I pray that God will lead you in the right path, and then the hill
both up and down will end in a happy home in Heaven.

"Dear me! what a long letter. Give my best love to papa and sister; and
kiss yourself on your dear little cheek if you can, for your loving

                                                        "MOTHER."

Here is Bella's answer:


"DARLING MAMMA,

"I was so glad to get your letter! What a naughty little girl that was
in the church! She behaved twice as bad as me. I speak out loud
sometimes, not very often; only sometimes. I had a party
yesterday--Minnie, and Lilly, and Jeannie; and we had tea out of my cups
and saucers that Cousin Caroline gave me--real tea--and one orange that
papa brought home--it was all pulled to pieces, and we eat it all up.

"We played with my paper dolls; and one of them, Miss Hattie Smith,
knocked down a little table and _broke_ one of my glass candle
_stickers_, that Cousin Caroline gave me.

"Really, and truly, I FOUND it broke; but we made believe that she broke
it because she is so ugly.

"Dolly has been very naughty. She fighted with sister's Kitty, and Kitty
tore all the lace off her cap. Kitty slapped her first. Then sister
Edith told dolly and Kitty about 'dogs delight to bark and bite,' and
dolly was so sorry, and Kitty too; and they never mean to do so any
more--never--sister Edith mended the cap, and she is good now--next time
papa brings me candy, I will give her a big piece--only pretend, you
know--for her mouth can't open like mine, it is all shut up tight--what
a pity! Oh mamma! I want to see you so much, I don't know what to do.
Why can't the postman bring you home? Oh mamma, I can't wait any
longer."

Here poor little Bella began to cry; and her papa thought her letter was
long enough, and that the little thing was tired, as well as grieved.
So he folded up the letter, and took Bella upon his knee, and kissed
her, and wiped away her tears, and said: "My darling little pet, would
you like to hear a story that I know?"

"Oh yes, papa," said Bella, lifting her head from his breast, and
smiling: though a great tear still trembled on her long lashes, "I love
a story."

"And I love you," said her papa; "so here it is."


PAPA'S STORY.

THE DINNER PARTY.

"Once upon a time, there lived a little girl, named Edith. She was a
dear good little puss, and that was the reason everybody loved her.
Don't you think it was a very good reason?"

"Yes, papa," said Bella; and she squeezed her soft cheek lovingly
against him, and he gave her a little hug; and then they went on again
quite comfortable with the story.

"Well, one day her papa said to her mamma, 'My dear, I shall not be home
to-day to dinner; but what shall I order for yours?'

"'Well, dear,' she answered, 'I think one beef-steak, and some green
peas, and potatoes, will do for Edith and me; and the cook shall make a
poor man's pudding, with raisins in it; that will be a very nice little
dinner.'

"'If I see any thing very nice, I will send that too.'

"'Very well.' Then Edith's papa kissed all the family. It did not take
him very long, for he had only Edith and her mamma for a family at that
time; and then he went away.

"Pretty soon after, Edith said: 'Mamma, will you please to let me go
next door, and play with Annie, and Mary?'

"'Yes, dear,' answered her mother; 'but do not forget to come home at
five o'clock to dinner.'

"Edith promised to come, and then skipped joyfully off--with her best
doll, Miss Polly Dolly Adeline, and two big apples to play 'party' with,
and in a few minutes her mother thought there must be at least twenty
children next door, instead of three; for they were having such a good
time that they made noise enough to frighten the crows into fits, if any
crows happened that way.

[Illustration: WHO SHOULD COME IN BUT THE FAT COOK, WITH A GREAT GOOSE.]

"As her mother was sitting at her sewing, some one knocked at the
door, and who should come in, but the fat cook, with a great goose,
fatter than she was; who cried out: 'Only see what a big goost, mum; and
only you and Miss Edith to eat it; besides a beef-steak to brile, and
peas and potatoes.'

"'Dear me,' said her mistress, 'we could not eat a quarter of that
goose. Save it for to-morrow, Mrs. Jellybag. Only cook the beef-steak
and vegetables; and make a poor man's pudding, with raisins, for
dessert; that will do nicely.' So the fat cook put the fat goose
carefully away in the refrigerator; then she shelled enough peas for a
small dish, and peeled about a dozen potatoes, and prepared the raisins
for the pudding, and had them all nicely done in time.

"When five o'clock came, the bell rang for dinner, and Edith's mother
went down, and took her seat at the table.

"Just then she heard a whole chorus of merry little voices, and to her
great surprise, in marched Edith, and seven little girls after her! They
were all nearly of the same size, with their hair braided in two tails
apiece, as fine as you please.

"'Why, Edith!!' exclaimed her mother.

"'Yes, mamma,' said Edith, 'I told them to come in and get some dinner,
and some nice poor man's pudding, with raisins in it; they are Annie's
and Mary's cousins. They are real nice, and we are having such fun!'

"You see Edith had no idea that her mother would not like her bringing
the little girls in to dine with her; she did not _mean_ to do wrong;
and her eyes glittered so brightly with pleasure at having so many
friends, that her mamma burst out laughing; and then Edith and all the
children giggled in such a funny way, that I do believe if the Mayor of
New York could have seen their happy faces, he would have given his best
wig, to have such pleasant people at _his_ dinner parties.

"And now the children began to stare at the beef-steak with hungry eyes;
and Edith's mother thought it grew smaller and smaller, and was afraid
if she gave each one a piece, they would swallow the whole of it at once
like a pill. Dear me! how she did wish the goose had been cooked; but
there was no help for it now: so seven extra plates were set, like
buttons round the table, and seven extra knives and forks were laid
across like button holes, and seven extra _goblins_ (as little Edith
called the 'goblets') stared down at the plates, and seven extra chairs
were rattled up and scratched up to the table, by the children
themselves, because the waiting-maid was almost crazy with so much
company; and down they sat in a prodigious hurry, and the dinner began.

"Such a famous dinner as it was! Perfectly delicious. If there had only
been a little more of it. But never mind, the knives and forks rattled
merrily, and the children laughed, and the two long braids of hair on
each head flew right and left so fast, that the flies couldn't get near
the table to taste of a thing, and were almost distracted when they saw
every single crumb eaten up, and the plates nearly scraped into holes.

"Here is the portrait of the cook as she looked when the waiter brought
the beef-steak dish.

[Illustration]

"But when the poor man's pudding came in, smoking like a Turk, and
speckled in every direction with great black raisins, oh! then was the
time for bright looks! and when one little girl clapped her hands, and
exclaimed, 'My! that looks good!' all the rest laughed, and whisked
their heads round so, that it was quite fortunate their braids were fast
at one end, or they would have been shaken off up the chimney, and out
of the door, and nobody knows where else.

"The best thing was, that there was plenty of pudding, and the children
thought it was the very nicest they had ever eaten, particularly as the
maid brought to each one the bowl of powdered sugar--so that they might
_help themselves_ to as much as they liked--_that_ made a great
difference, I can tell you! and they showered down the sugar in grand
style--they put it on good and thick, just as much sugar as pudding, and
that was what made it so very nice; besides, Edith had whispered to her
mamma to give the company '_all the raisinest parts!!_ because that was
the way to be polite to company,' and so her mother did--and they had a
grand time picking out the raisins to eat by themselves--and the little
spoons went so fast, chopping at the pudding, and clicking on the
plates, that Edith's mother said it sounded like little stone-cutters at
work--at which they grew perfectly red in their faces laughing at
themselves.

"Didn't they have a fine time? I think so--and I laughed very
much--oh!--I mean, Edith's papa laughed, when he came home and heard
about the grand dinner-party, all out of one small beef-steak, and a
poor man's pudding. There! how do you like that story?"

"Oh, papa! _I_ know," exclaimed Bella, laughing, and patting his cheek.
"I found you out! it was sister Edith! wasn't it? Dear me! what a funny
girl! Did you ever!"

"Yes, it was her, and she was a funny girl--and you are a little
darling--and now, kiss papa, and run off to bed."




FIFTH LETTER.


"A LETTER for Miss Bella Curtis; two cents!" bawled the postman.

He was in a hurry this time, and Bella had to run so fast for the money,
that it was quite a wonder that she did not get thin after it--only she
laughed, too, just as much--and perhaps that may be the reason.

She began to feel as if she was quite a big woman, to be giving the
postman so much business to do; and she carried her new letter in great
state to her sister, and listened to the reading of it with all her
heart and both her ears.

It began thus:--


                                                           "+SAVANNAH.+

"DEAR, DARLING BELLA:

"I was perfectly delighted with your funny little letter, telling me all
the news about your party, and dolly, and Kitty.

"I am now in Savannah. It is a most beautiful city, and the people in it
are very good and kind. The evening before I left Charleston, a lady
came to see me, bringing with her a dear little boy who looked and
acted just like Stanny. I told him the story of 'Little Red Ridinghood,'
and I thought his eyes would pop out of his head when the wolf eat her
up. You see, I growled and snapped my teeth, just like a wolf.

"Then I drew him a picture of the wolf in a bob-tailed coat, talking to
Little Red Ridinghood in the wood; and I made him a paper fly-cage, and
a paper windmill.

[Illustration]

"He looked at them very much pleased, and said: 'But--say--I don't know
which to give to my little brother.'

"I laughed, for I saw that he wanted them all himself, and yet loved his
little brother so much that he wanted to give them to him, so I said:
'If you will kiss me and call me "Aunt Fanny," I will make some for him,
too.'

"Then he put his arms round my neck, and kissed me so hard, that it made
his dear little nose quite flat for a moment, and said: 'Thank you,
Mrs. Aunt Fanny;' and I made him another picture, and cage, and
windmill, and then he was delighted.

"There are two beautiful little children in this house, who are twins,
because they came into this world at the very same time. They are each
six years old--a boy and a girl.

"I asked Richard where he came from? He said: 'Why, don't you know?
Sally and I were dug up from under a cotton tree.' Wasn't that funny?

"Then his mamma said: 'Richard, sing "Morning's ruddy beams, in the
Eastern sky,"' and he shouted out--

          "'Morning's _ready_ beams
            Eascum eascum skri,'

then stopped, and giving one eye a queer little twist, said: 'How does
_that_ suit you?' In the afternoon the children went to a party, and
Richard brought home an orange for his mother, and said: 'I'm going to
save this for your Christmas present,' which sounded very funny as
Christmas was eight months off.

"The next morning we had flannel cakes for breakfast. Really, and truly,
they are made of eggs, milk, and flour; but just for fun I pretended to
be astonished, and exclaimed: 'Flannel Cakes! Dear me! who ever heard of
such a thing? Why, Richard, what _are_ they made of? Flannel?'

"'Why, no, you goose,' said Richard, 'they are made of _flannel flour_.'

"I could not help laughing when he called me a goose; but his mother
said he was very naughty; and then he ran and hid his head in her dress
and began to cry. You see, he was a little bit of a boy--and did not
mean to be impolite--and I think myself, I would have been a goose, if I
_had_ really and truly believed the cakes were made of flannel; don't
you, you little darling?

"I have a very curious snake-skin to show you when I return. Edward,
Richard's big brother, found it in the woods, and made it a present to
me. A snake! What a present! and to think of a snake wanting to wriggle
out of his skin! You wouldn't do such a thing, would you?

"Yesterday a beautiful little mulatto girl came to see me, and brought
me, from her mistress, a basket full of splendid flowers. She was about
five years old. A great black man with his head covered with white wool
came with her to take care of her, because she was so little. He looked
as if he had been out in a snowstorm without his hat; but really his
head was white because he was so old. His name was Jeringo. 'Well,
little one,' said I, 'what is your name?'

"'My name Georgia, and I can tell you a story. It is about Blue Man's
Beard.'

"'Oh,' said I, 'I would like to hear that very much indeed.'

"Then she put one little fat hand over the other, drew a long breath,
and began: 'Blue Man's Beard, he dreffel cross, I tell you; and he say
to he _sister_, "Now, don't you go in de rooms; you hear?" and she say,
"No, neber;" but she tell story, and go; and oh, my! she drop de key,
and de key he cum all over wid blood, and she try, try, try, to wipe um
off. But he no cum off--and Blue Man's Beard, he say: "If you don't cum
down I gib you popping." Den her brother he cum and tote her off to he
home, and make a big fire, and burn Blue Man's Beard all up in de fire.'

"'Oh,' said I, 'how glad I am! Aren't you glad?'

"'Ah, no,' she replied, 'I don't want any body to be burn up--make 'em
hurt:' which answer made me feel quite ashamed, because I was more cruel
than she; then I gave Georgia some money, and sent her home quite happy.
What do you think of that story? Don't the little mulatto girl talk
queerly? All the black people talk so.

"The other night I felt quite ill, and the dear friend with whom I am
staying sent Hannah, a black girl, up to me with a tub of warm water to
bathe my feet. She dropped a little bobbing courtesy, and said: 'Please
missis, you ain't berry well, I'se want to wash you foot.'

"'Oh dear, no, Hannah, I cannot let you bathe my feet; I always do that
for myself.'

"'Oh _do_, please missis; I ain't got noting to do. I _like_ to wash
um.'

"'But, Hannah, I shall feel very funny to have you poking at my toes.'

"'Now missis, _do_,' said Hannah, in a coaxing tone; 'I'll do um fust
rate.'

"Her eyes looked so big, and she made such a queer face at me, that I
turned round to laugh; when I looked back she was standing at the long
glass making courtesies to herself; then she turned round, and twisted
her head till I thought she would crack it off--and stared at her back
and made some more courtesies--and I had to laugh out loud, and she
looked quite ashamed.

"Then I said: 'Hannah, do you really want to bathe my feet?'

"''Strue as you live, missis.'

"'Would you like me to read to you?'

"'Oh do, missis! tank you.'

"'Well, then, you may, and I will read Little Susy's Six Birthdays to
you.'

"That seemed to be a most delightful idea--and she pulled off my boots
and stockings in a great hurry, and lifted my feet into the water, and
passed her hands so gently over my ankles that it really seemed to do me
good; but when she poked between my toes, she tickled me so dreadfully
that I squealed, and laughed, and came very near upsetting the tub of
water.

"But she liked the book very much, and her great black eyes were full of
love and gratitude as she thanked me; and I thanked her, and gave her a
penny; but she liked my _thanking her_ better than the penny.

"I have bought you a pretty little green parasol; and I love you, oh! so
dearly! you precious little roly-poly tweedle-de diamond-darling! What
do you think of that for a love name? you sweet little humpy-dumpy
tweedle-dum rosebud robin! there's another; from your loving

                                                        "MOTHER."

How Bella laughed at the love-names, and how happy they made her, is
more than I can describe; but she cuddled up to Edith, and whispered:

"Dear _little_ mamma," and that was all she said.

The next day was Sunday. Bella was old enough to go to church, and she
behaved very well.

Just before they went in, her father said: "Bella, there will be a
collection taken up to-day, and here is a nice new penny for you to put
in the plate."

"What plate, papa?"

"Why, the plate for the money that is given to the poor. You will see
six of them on the table just under the pulpit."

Bella had never put any money in the plate before, and she was quite
pleased.

When they were seated in their pew in the middle aisle, a little bit of
a boy wanted to come in, because his papa's pew was quite crowded. His
name was Eddie; and he knew Bella very well. So in he came, and the two
children sat next the door.

Presently, Bella whispered: "Look, Eddie, look at my new penny. I am
going to put it in the plate for the poor peoples."

"Why, I've got a penny, too, most as bright as yours; but where is the
plate?"

They looked all over the church, and at last spied the plates on the
table.

"When will we put it in?" said Bella.

"Why, now; let's go now," said Eddie.

"Why, of course," said Bella.

Then, before her father could stop her, she opened the pew door, and
stepped out with Eddie, and hand in hand the two little children marched
gravely up the aisle, to the table under the pulpit; and standing on
tiptoe, put their bright pennies into the plate; and then hand in hand
gravely marched back.[A]

They did not know that they were doing what would make everybody look at
them in astonishment. No, indeed! they were in a hurry to help the poor
people; and I think everybody in the church understood it, and looked
with loving eyes upon the little ones.

The next day Bella told her papa what to say, and he wrote her mother
this letter:


"DEAR, DARLING MAMMA:

"Yesterday I gave the poor peoples a penny in church. So did Eddie. We
went together and put it in the plate. Aren't you glad, the poor peoples
have so much money? I am.

"Sister Edith showed me such a 'lightful play. She did put me on the
end of the sofa, and I go backward and forward, backward and forward,
and she sings:

          'Grandmamma's sick,
             And is going to die,
           And nothing will cure her
             But a TURN-over pie;'

and then I go tumbledy over backward on the sofa so nice! Don't you wish
you could play it?

"Georgia told the story the wrong way; it was Blue Beard's _wife_, not
his sister. Of course it was! She is a funny girl. I wish she would come
and play with me.

"O dear, darling mamma! when will you come? I want you so bad. I hope
you are most well this day. Can you bring me a kitten? Please do; and
put it in a piece of paper, and tie it up tight, so it won't get out.
Miss Hattie's head is most torn off; but I don't care, 'cause she's only
made of paper, and she is so ugly. I have painted her all over with red
spots--and now she looks just like a leopard--I call her a
_pig_-leopard--don't tell anybody.

"How funny for Hannah to tickle your toes! My toes make me squeal, too,
when they are washed; and--and--I don't know any more, papa."

So this letter was finished--and Bella's mother thought this and the
others were lovely letters--and I should not be surprised if she keeps
them as long as she lives.


FOOTNOTE:

[A] A fact.




SIXTH LETTER.


"A LETTER for Miss Bella Curtis," shouted the postman; "four cents." It
was quite a thick letter this time, and Bella had to pay twice two cents
for it. How much was that? If you will give me a kiss I will tell
you--two and two make four.

But, dear me! she was just as glad to get it--and I do believe if she
had had four dollars she would have given every speck of it for one
letter. Why, certainly! A letter from your MOTHER?--_you_ would do so,
too. Of course you would, you sweet little Ba-be-bi-bo-BOO!!!

So it was taken to Edith, and if you had been an hundred years old, you
would have felt quite young again--only to have watched Bella's eyes
while the letter was read--diamonds don't sparkle half as much, and I
for one would rather have had her bright eyes to look at, than a whole
bushel of diamonds, each as big as my head.

The delightful letter commenced thus:


                                                     "+CHARLESTON.+

"DEAR, DARLING BELLA:

"I have your sweet little letter, and I am so much obliged to you for
telling papa such nice things to write to me, that I have sent you a
long, long answer in return, which I hope will please you.

"I left Savannah yesterday. When I was leaving, I kissed little Richard,
and said: 'Good-bye, Richard; don't forget Aunt Fanny.'

[Illustration: GOOD-BYE, RICHARD, DON'T FORGET AUNT FANNY.]

"'I forgot you already,' he shouted. Then I kissed Sallie, the
twin-girl, and she said so sweetly: 'Aunt Fanny, can you remember where
Bella lives? If you can find her house, go and tell her I am coming to
see her--next day before to-morrow.'

"Wasn't it funny that she should think I had been so long away from
you, my little darling, that I had forgotten where you lived?

"Do you remember a story I once read to you, about 'Good Little Henry,'
in a book called 'Nightcaps'? Well, strange to say, I know this Henry,
and love him very much. He is now almost a young man, and just as good
as ever; yes! better than ever, for he is the comfort and joy of his
father and mother. Only think, dear Bella! that from a good and lovely
little child he has grown better and lovelier every year, till now he is
almost a man. God loves Henry; and He has helped him to be good, and He
will love you and help you to be good, if you will ask Him.

"I tell you all this now, because in looking over my writing-desk a
moment ago, I came upon an amusing story Henry wrote to me, about some
little cousins of his."

Of course you would like to know what he wrote, and here it is:

"One day my dear Aunt Sarah was sitting up-stairs with the children,
when the front door bell rang, and the servant came up and said: 'Mr.
Robinson wants to see you, ma'am.' So aunt put on her best collar, and a
little lace cap, and down she went.

"'My!' said Loulou, 'I should like to see him, too.'

"'So should I,' said Bolton, whose pet name is 'Pepper.'

"'Dear me! I, too,' cried Anna, whose pet name is 'Tot.'

"'And me! me! me!' said little Walter, jumping up and down.

"So Loulou, in a great state of delight, rushed up to the washstand and
washed her face and hands; then she took Pepper and scrubbed him
well--rubbing his nose almost off to get his face dry--and dressed him
in all his best Sunday clothes, and told him to sit down in his little
chair, perfectly stiff and straight, till the rest were ready; and down
little Pepper sat, and hardly dared to wink, for fear of getting his
clothes tumbled.

"Then she took little Tot, and polished her face, and brushed her hair
as hard as she could, and Tot never cried the least bit, when Loulou
accidentally turned the brush round and gave her a thump with the back
of it; but just sat down by Pepper when her dressing was over, and kept
as still and looked as grave as if she were in church.

"And now Loulou took dear little Walter in hands, and made him as fine
as you please; and then they all marched down stairs on tip-toe,
trembling with expectation.

"They opened the parlor door and entered very softly, and stared with
all their eyes. But where was he?

"There was nobody there but their mamma, and a very quiet-looking
gentleman in a plain black coat, and a pair of spectacles, set on the
very end of his nose, who appeared to be showing her some curious coins.

[Illustration: ROBINSON CRUSOE.]

"The children stood perfectly still for a moment. They seemed to be
struck dumb. Then Loulou exclaimed:

"'Why, _mamma_, we have come down on purpose to see ROBINSON CRUSOE!!
all dressed in fur, with his monkeys and parrots, and Man Friday. Where
_is_ he, mamma? where _has_ he gone?' and they looked again in every
corner of the room.

"How her mamma did laugh! and how Mr. Robinson did laugh! when they
found that the children thought that Robinson Crusoe had come to see
them; but Loulou and the rest of the dear little children were
dreadfully disappointed. Wasn't that a pity?

"And now I have a great secret to tell you; I am so much better, and I
want to see you s--o much, that I mean to return home in the steamship
which leaves on Saturday. This is Thursday--you will get this long
letter next Monday--and on Tuesday have ready at least a hundred kisses,
and fifty squeezes for your loving

                                                         "MAMMA."




THE RETURN.


"OH!" screamed Bella, joyfully, "mamma coming home? Oh! oh! oh!" and she
commenced to dance about the room, and laugh, and sing so many little
songs, that Edith thought there must be a musical snuff-box inside of
her; particularly as she stopped to give two funny little sneezes, and
then went on again. She could hardly sit still a moment all the rest of
the day; and she begged to be put to bed earlier than usual, so that the
"next day might come faster."

Sure enough! the next day a carriage drove up to the door. It was
raining, and Bella had to stay in the room for fear she would take
cold. She fastened her face to the window, and trembling with eagerness,
saw the coachman open the door. A _gentleman_ got out--Bella's face
looked as if somebody had thrown a pail of cold water in it--but, the
next moment, the gentleman handed out her mamma, her very own mamma! and
then in an ecstasy of delight, the little girl rushed to the door, and
then it was worth more than all Barnum's Museum to see the meeting. I
believe I can't tell it--I cannot write it well enough; but all you dear
little children know how glad you are to see your kind mothers after
they have been away from you; and you can _feel_ this, much better than
I can write it.

And so ended the Little Nightcap Letters; and though Bella cherished
them as her dearest treasures, and means to keep them, she says, to
show to her children; yet, she would rather have her own "real, true"
mamma to kiss, and love, and keep close to; and she never means to part
with her again, if she can help it.

That is just the way you feel, isn't it, you little darling?


          THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note: Obvious punctation errors repaired.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Nightcap Letters., by 
Frances Elizabeth Barrow

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE NIGHTCAP LETTERS. ***

***** This file should be named 29812.txt or 29812.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/8/1/29812/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
