The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Rambles of a Rat, by A. L. O. E.


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Rambles of a Rat


Author: A. L. O. E.



Release Date: August 30, 2009  [eBook #29863]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAMBLES OF A RAT***


E-text prepared by Louise Hope



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 29863-h.htm or 29863-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/29863/29863-h/29863-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/29863/29863-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      At the time this book was written, rats were classified as
      _Mus rattus_ and _Mus norvegicus_. The genus _Rattus_ did
      not become standardized until the 20th century. Notes on
      the animals in Chapter VII are at the end of the e-text,
      along with the Errata.





THE RAMBLES OF A RAT.


  [Illustration: POORER THAN RATS.

  "The old blind rat had a bit of stick in its mouth, and the pretty
  black rat took the other end in his teeth." --Page 25.]


THE RAMBLES OF A RAT.

by

A. L. O. E.


  [Illustration: A NEW KIND OF WATCHDOG.

  "Whiskerandos looked surprised at the unexpected defiance; but my
  feelings of amazement can scarcely be conceived when I recognised
  the dumpy form, blunt head, and piebald skin, of my lost brother
  Oddity." --Page 150.]







T. Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York.




THE RAMBLES OF A RAT

by

A. L. O. E.,

Author of "The Giant-killer," "Pride and his Prisoners,"
&c. &c.







[Decoration]


London:
T. Nelson and Sons, Paternoster Row;
Edinburgh; and New York.
1864.




PREFACE


Let not my readers suppose that in writing THE RAMBLES OF A RAT I have
simply been blowing bubbles of fancy for their amusement, to divert them
during an idle hour. Like the hollow glass balls which children
delight in, my bubbles of fancy have something solid within them,--
facts are enclosed in my fiction. I have indeed made rats talk, feel,
and reflect, as those little creatures certainly never did; but the
courage, presence of mind, fidelity, and kindness, which I have
attributed to my heroes, have been shown by real rats. Such adventures
as I have described have actually happened to them, unless they be those
recorded in the 19th chapter, for which I have no authority. For my
anecdotes of this much-despised race I am principally indebted to an
interesting article on the subject which appeared in the "Quarterly
Review."

I would suggest to my readers how wide and delightful a field of
knowledge natural history must open to all, when there is so much to
interest and admire even in those animals which we usually regard with
contempt and disgust. The examination of the wondrous works of nature is
a study elevating as well as delightful; for the more deeply we search
into the wonders around us, the more clearly we discover the wisdom
which is displayed even in the lowest forms of creation!

  A. L. O. E.

  [Decoration]




CONTENTS


  Chap.                                             Page.

     I. The Family of Rats                             9
    II. A Clap-trap Discovery                         15
   III. Poorer than Rats                              19
    IV. How I made a Friend                           26
     V. How Bob met with an Adventure                 33
    VI. How I visited the Zoological Gardens          38
   VII. Finding Relations                             43
  VIII. How I heard of Old Neighbours                 51
    IX. How we found a Feast                          59
     X. The want of a Dentist                         67
    XI. A Removal                                     74
   XII. A New Road to Fame                            79
  XIII. How I set out on my Voyage                    86
   XIV. A Terrible Word                               94
    XV. First View of St. Petersburg                 103
   XVI. A Russian Kitchen                            109
  XVII. A Ramble over St. Petersburg                 118
 XVIII. How we were Transported                      125
   XIX. A Storm and its Consequences                 132
    XX. Catch him--Dead or Alive!                    137
   XXI. A new kind of Watch-dog                      146
  XXII. The Farmer and his Bride                     153
 XXIII. A Peep through the Roses                     163


  [Decoration]




  [Illustration: A L O E]


THE RAMBLES OF A RAT.




CHAPTER I.

THE FAMILY OF RATS.


My very earliest recollection is of running about in a shed adjoining a
large warehouse, somewhere in the neighbourhood of Poplar, and close to
the River Thames, which thereabouts is certainly no silver stream.

A merry life we led of it in that shed, my seven brothers and I! It was
a sort of palace of rubbish, a mansion of odds and ends, where rats
might frolic and gambol, and play at hide-and-seek, to their hearts'
content. We had nibbled a nice little way into the warehouse above
mentioned; and there, every night, we feasted at our ease, growing as
sleek and plump as any rats in the United Kingdom.

We were of an ancient race of British rats, my seven brothers and I. It
is said that our ancestors came over with the Conqueror, William; and we
are not a little proud of our Norman descent. Our smaller forms, sleek
black coats, long tails, and fine large ears, make us altogether
distinct from the Norwegian brown rat, on which we look with-- I was
going to say with contempt, but I rather think that it is quite another
feeling, and one to which neither rats nor men generally like to plead
guilty. I know that we do not usually choose to keep company with them;
but whether it be because their forms are coarser, their manners less
refined, and their pedigree not so long, or whether it be because they
sometimes have a fancy to nibble off the ears of their neighbours, or,
when their appetite is uncommonly sharp, make a meal of their Norman
cousins, we need not particularly inquire.

I said that I and my seven brothers were black rats; but I ought to make
one exception. The youngest of the family was piebald-- a curious
peculiarity, which I never noticed in any other of our race. Yes, he was
piebald; and not only had he this misfortune, but he was the clumsiest
and most ill-shaped rat that ever nibbled a candle-end! Now, this was no
fault of his, and certainly was no reason why he should have been
despised by his more fortunate brothers. Man, of course, as a superior
creature, would only look with kindness and pity upon a companion so
unhappy as to have personal defects. He would never ridicule a condition
which might have been his own, nor find a subject for merriment
in that which to another was a cause of annoyance; but we were only
inconsiderate young rats, and there was no end to our jokes on
our piebald comrade. "Oddity," "Guinea-pig," "Old Spotty," and
"Frightful"-- such were the names which we gave him. The first was that by
which he was best known, and the only one to which he chose to answer. But
he was a good-humoured fellow, poor Oddity, and bore our rudeness with
patience and temper. He pursued the plan which I would recommend to all
rats in his position: he joined the mirth which his own appearance raised;
and when we made merry at the awkward manner in which he waddled after his
more light-footed companions, he never took it amiss, nor retired into a
corner of the shed to sulk, amidst rope-ends and bits of rusty iron.

I have said that we had merry nights in the warehouse. Often has the
moon looked in through the dull, many-paned windows, lighting our
revels; though we cared little for light, our delicate feelers almost
supplying the place of eyes. But one night above all nights I remember!

There had been a great deal of moving about in the warehouse during the
day, running of trucks, and rolling of casks. Brisk, the liveliest of my
brothers, had sat watching in a hole from noon until dusk, and now
hurried through our little passage into the shed, where we were all
nestling behind some old canvass. He brought us news of a coming feast.

"A ship has arrived from India," said he, "and we'll have a glance at
the cargo. They've been busy stowing it away next door. There's rice--"

The brotherhood of rats whisked their tails for joy!

"Sugar--"

There was a universal squeak of approbation.

"Indigo--"

"That's nothing but a blue dye obtained from a plant," observed Furry,
an old, blind rat, who in his days had travelled far, and seen much of
the world, and had reflected upon what he had viewed far more than is
common with a rat. Indeed, he passed amongst us for a philosopher, and I
had learnt not a little from his experience; for he delighted in talking
over his travels, and but for a little testiness of temper, would have
been a very agreeable companion. He very frequently joined our party;
indeed, his infirmities obliged him to do so, as he could not have lived
without assistance. But I must now return to Brisk, and his catalogue of
the cargo.

"Opium--"

"The juice of the white poppy," said our aged friend, who had a taste
for general information. "I've seen it produce strange effects when
eaten in large quantities by men."

"What effects?" said I. I was a very inquisitive rat, and especially
curious about all that related to the large creatures upon two legs,
called Man, whom I believed to be as much wiser as they are stronger
than the race of Mus, to which I belong.

"Why, opium makes men first wild and bold, so that they will rush into
danger or run into folly, quarrel with their friends and fight their
foes, laugh and dance, and be merry they know not why. Then they grow
sleepy, and though their lives might depend on it, not a step would they
stir. Then, when they awake from their unnatural sleep, their bodies are
cold, their heads heavy; they feel sick, and faint, and sad! And if this
should happen day after day, at last the strong grows weak and the
healthy ill, the flesh goes from the bones and the life from the eyes,
and the whole man becomes like some old, empty hulk, whose timbers will
hardly hold together! And all this from eating opium!"

"Ugh!" exclaimed Brisk; "leave opium to man; it is a great deal too bad
for rats!"




CHAPTER II.

A CLAP-TRAP DISCOVERY.


With eager haste we scrambled into the warehouse, Furry, as usual,
remaining behind on account of his infirmities. We were almost too
impatient to wait till the men within should have finished their work,
till the doors should be shut and locked, and the place left in quiet
for us.

I soon found out what was to me a singular curiosity-- a tooth; I felt
certain that it was a tooth; but it was twice as long as any rat,
counting from the tip of his nose to the end of his tail! I could not
help wondering in my mind to what huge animal it could ever have
belonged.

"Isn't that called ivory?" said Oddity, as he waddled past me.

I felt inexpressible pleasure in gnawing and nibbling at the huge tusk,
and polishing my sharp teeth upon it. "How I should like to see the
enormous rat that could have carried such a tusk!" I exclaimed. "Oh!
how I should delight in travelling and seeing the world!"

"You've something to see worth the seeing, without travelling far!"
cried Brisk. "Such a fragrance of cheese as there is yonder! Why, Ratto,
its delicious scent reaches us even here!"

I was so busy with my tusk and my reflections, that I scarcely looked
up; but Oddity turned his eyes eagerly towards the spot.

"Now, I propose that we have a race to the place!" cried Brisk; "and he
who gets first shall have his pick of the feast! Leave Ratto to his old
bone! Here are seven of us: now for it; once, twice, thrice, and away!"

Off they scampered helter-skelter, all my seven brothers, awkward heavy
Oddity, as usual, in the rear. He had often been laughed at for his
slowness, but this time it was well for him that he was slow! On rushed
the six foremost, almost together, scrambling one over another in their
haste; they disappeared into what looked like a dark hole, and then--
alas! alas! what a terrible squeaking!

Poor unhappy brothers! all caught in a trap! All at the mercy of their
cruel enemy, man! I ran to the spot in a terrible fright. Nothing of my
six companions could I see; but Oddity, with a very disconsolate look,
was staring at the drop of the trap. His had been a very narrow
escape,-- it had grazed his ugly nose as it fell!

This is a very melancholy part of my story, and I will hasten over it as
fast as I can. In vain the poor captive rats tried to gnaw their way to
freedom from within, while Oddity and I nibbled from without. There was
something which defied even our sharp little teeth, and all our efforts
were in vain. My poor brothers could not touch the fatal feast which had
lured them to their ruin! They passed a miserable night, and were every
one carried off in a bag to be worried by dogs in the morning!

"Cruel, wicked man!" I exclaimed, as with my piebald companion I sought
my old shelter behind the canvass in our shed. My exclamation was
overheard by old Furry.

"Cruel, wicked man!" he repeated, but in a different tone from mine;
"well, I think that even when setting a trap to catch inexperienced
rats, man may have something to say for himself. I have often noticed
the big creatures at work, and much they labour, and hard they toil, and
we can't expect them to be willing to take so much trouble to collect
dainties just to feast us! Those who live on the property of others,
like rats, have no right to expect civil treatment!"

"Are there any creatures that lay traps for man?" said I, in the
bitterness of my spirit almost hoping that there might be.

"As well as I can understand," replied Furry, "man himself lays traps
for man. I have seen several of these traps. They are large, and
generally built of brick, with a board and gilt letters in front. They
are baited with a certain drink, which has effects something like opium,
which destroys slowly but surely those who give themselves up recklessly
to its enjoyment."

"Well," cried Oddity, "having once seen what comes of running into a
trap, I, for one, shall be always on my guard against them, and am never
likely to be caught in that way. I suppose that it is the same with man.
When he sees that one or two of his companions are lost by the big
man-trap, he takes good care never to go near it himself."

"Not a whit!" exclaimed Furry, with a scornful whisk of his tail. "They
like the bait, though they know its effects quite well. They walk with
open eyes into the great man-trap, they hasten merrily into the great
man-trap, when the gas-lights are flaring, and the spirits flowing, and
the sound of laughter and jesting is heard within! They know that they
are going the straight, direct way to be worried by sickness, poverty,
and shame, (what these are I never heard clearly explained, but I have
gathered that they are great enemies of man, who are always waiting at
the door of the great man-trap,) and yet they go gaily to their ruin!"

"So this is your account of the wise creature man!" I exclaimed; "he is
a great deal more foolish than any rat!"




CHAPTER III.

POORER THAN RATS.


We had not our shed always to ourselves. One cold evening in autumn,
when there was a sharp east wind, and a drizzling rain, two human
creatures came into the place and cowered down in a corner of our shed.
I call them human creatures, for they certainly were not men; they were
so different from the tall powerful fellows whom I had occasionally seen
at their work in the warehouse. These were much smaller, and so thin
that their bones seemed almost ready to break through the skin. Their
hair hung in long loose masses about their ears. They had nothing on
their feet to protect them from the stones, and one of them had a hurt
upon his heel, which looked red and inflamed.

I found that these were young human beings, neglected and uncared for,
as young rats would not have been. We were at first afraid of them, and
only peered out curiously upon them from our holes and hiding-places;
but when, gathering courage, we ventured to come forward, we seemed to
frighten them as much as they had frightened us.

"Look there-- there, Bob!" screamed the younger child, clinging more
closely to his brother.

"Them bees rats," said the other one more quietly. His poor thin little
face looked as if the life and spirit had been so starved out of it,
that he could not be much astonished at anything.

"I don't like staying here, Bob, amongst the rats!" cried the terrified
little one, attempting to pull his brother towards the entrance by the
sleeve of his jacket. The wretched rag gave way even under his weak
pull, and another rent was added to the many by which the cold crept in
through the poor boy's tattered dress. "I won't stay here; let us go,
let us go!"

"We've no-wheres to go to," replied Bob, in the same dull, lifeless
tone. "Never you mind the rats, Billy, them won't hurt you," he added.

Hurt him! not we! If ever I felt pity it was for those ragged little
urchins. We were well-fed, but they were hungry; Nature had given us
sleek warm coats, but they trembled with cold. It was very clear that it
was much harder to them to support life than if they had been rats.
I wondered if in this great city there were many such helpless children,
and if there were none to care for them!

"I say, Ratto," observed Oddity, licking his soft coat till the
beautiful polish upon it made one almost forget its ugly colour, "'tis a
pity that these children are so dirty; but may be they are not so
particular about such matters as we rats."

In time a sort of acquaintance grew up between me and the ragged boys.
We ceased to fear each other, and I would venture almost close to
Billy's thin little hand when he had a crust of bread to eat, for he
always broke off a little bit for me. The poor little fellow was
crippled and lame, so he rarely left the shed. Bob often went out in
the morning, and returned when it was growing dark, sometimes with food,
and sometimes without it; but whenever he had anything to eat, he always
shared it with his little lame brother. I see them now, crouched close
up together for the sake of warmth. Sometimes Billy cried from hunger
and cold, and his tears made long lines down his grimy face. Bob never
cried, he suffered quite quietly; he patted his little brother's shaggy
head, and spoke kindly to him, in his dull, cheerless way. I felt more
sorry for him than for Billy.

The little one was the more talkative of the two. Perhaps he was more
lively in his nature; or perhaps, from having been a shorter time in a
world of sorrow, he had not learned its sad lessons so well. I certainly
never heard him laugh but once, and then it was when Oddity, who was
more shy than I, ventured for the first time since Billy's coming to
cross the shed.

"Oh! look-- look, Bob! what a funny rat! what a beauty rat!" he cried,
clapping his bony hands together with childish glee.

It was comical to see the expression on Oddity's blunt face on hearing
this unexpected compliment, perhaps the first that he had ever received
in his life. It was enough to have turned the head of a less sober rat;
but he, honest fellow, only lifted up his snub nose with a sort of
bull-dog look, which seemed to say, "Well, there's no accounting for
taste."

"Bob," said little Billy one evening, with more animation than usual,
"I'se been a-watching the rats, and I saw-- only think what I saw!"

"Eh, what did ye see?" replied Bob, drowsily, rubbing his eyes with the
back of his hand. He looked very hungry and tired.

"I was a-watching for the fat spotted one which ran across yesterday,
when out came creeping, creeping, two others" --the child with his
fingers on the floor suited his action to his words,-- "and one had some
white on its back; it looked old and weak; and Bob, I saw as how it was
blind."

"A blind rat!" cried Bob; "'twould soon starve, I take it."

"But there was the other rat at its side, with such shining eyes, and
such a sharp little nose!" I plead guilty to vanity; I could not hear
such a description of myself with Oddity's sober composure. "And the old
blind rat had a little bit of stick in its mouth, just as the blind man
in the lane has a stick in his hand, and the pretty black rat took the
other end in his teeth, and so pulled the old un on his way."

"I'se never heard of rats doing that afore," said Bob.

"That's not all that I saw about 'em," continued Billy. "Out comes the
funny spotted rat from its hole; so I keeps very quiet, not to frighten
it away. And it pattered up to the place where I put the little crumbs;
and what do you think as it did?"

"Ate them," was Bob's quiet reply.

"No, but it didn't though!" cried Billy, triumphantly; "it pushed them
towards the old blind rat. Neither the black un nor the spotted un ate
up one crumb; they left 'em all for the poor blind rat! Now wasn't them
famous little fellows!"

"So rats help one another," said Bob. He did not speak more; but as he
leant back his head, and looked straight up at the roof of the shed,
(there was a great hole in it which the stars shone through, and now and
then a big drop of water from the top came plash, plash, on the muddy
floor below,) he looked up, I say, and I wonder whether he was thinking
the same thing as I was at that moment: "Rats help one another; do none
but human beings leave their fellow-creatures to perish!"




CHAPTER IV.

HOW I MADE A FRIEND.


I always ate my supper in the warehouse, but I need hardly say that
Oddity and I carefully avoided the spot where the tragedy of our six
brothers had occurred. We were by no means the only rats who found a
living in the place at the expense of our enemy, man. There were a good
many of the species of the large brown Norwegian rat; but as I have
mentioned before, we usually kept out of their way, from a tender regard
for our own ears.

There was one brown rat, however, whose fame had spread, not only in his
own tribe, but in ours. For quickness of wit, readiness in danger,
strength of teeth, and courage in using them, I have never yet met with
his equal. Whiskerandos was a hero of a rat. Was it not he who in single
combat had met and conquered a young ferret! an exploit in itself quite
sufficient to establish his fame as a warrior. They had been opposed to
each other in a room lighted by a single window. Whiskerandos, whose
intelligence at once showed him the importance of position, took his
station beneath this window, so that the light was in his enemy's eyes,
and compelled him to fight at disadvantage. For two long hours the
battle lasted, but at length the ferret lay dead upon the floor!

Several scars upon the neck of Whiskerandos bore witness to this
terrible encounter, and many others in which he had been engaged. He had
lost one ear, and the other had been grievously curtailed of its
proportions, so that altogether he had paid for fame at the price of
beauty; but he was strong and bold as ever, and his appearance one night
in our warehouse created quite a sensation in the community of rats.

There was one brown rat, in particular, that seemed to wait upon him,
and pay him court, as though, having no merit of his own, Shabby fancied
that he could borrow a little from a distinguished companion. I have
often seen this in life, (I am now an old and experienced rat,) I have
seen a mean race following and flattering their superiors, ready to lick
the dust from their feet, not from real admiration or attachment, but,
like a mistletoe upon a forest tree, because they had no proper footing
of their own, and liked to be raised on the credit of another. It is
easier to them to fawn than to work, to flatter the great than to follow
their example.

I own that I was afraid of Whiskerandos, and yet he passed without
touching me, quite above the meanness of hurting a creature merely
because it was weaker than himself. But Shabby gave such a savage snap
at my ear that I retreated squeaking into a corner. I almost think that
I should have returned the bite, had not his formidable companion been
so near; and it was probably this circumstance which gave the mean rat
courage thus to attack me without provocation. From what I have heard of
boys tormenting cats, mice, birds, anything that they can easily master,
while they pay proper respect to bulldogs and mastiffs, I have an idea
that there are some Shabbys to be found even amongst "the lords of
creation."

I was busy at my supper, when, chancing to look towards the fatal hole
in which my six brothers had been caught, I saw Whiskerandos and his
follower merrily advancing towards it, doubtless attracted, as the
former victims had been, by a very enticing scent.

I do not know how man would have behaved in my position. These certainly
were no friends of mine; but then they were rats; they were of the race
of Mus. I could not see them perish without warning them of their
danger.

"Stop! stop!" squeaked I, keeping, however, at a respectful distance;
"you are running right into a trap!"

Whiskerandos turned sharp round and faced me. I retreated back several
steps.

"Bite him,-- fight him,-- shake him by the neck!" cried Shabby; "he
knows there is a dainty feast there, and he would keep it all for his
ugly black rats!" Shabby was a great fighter with words; those of his
character usually are; nor was he in the least particular, when he gave
his bad names, that they were in the least suitable and appropriate, or
he would never have applied the term "ugly" to us.

"You'll pay for your dainty feast if you go one foot farther!"
I exclaimed; feeling, I confess it, very angry.

"Who's afraid!" cried the boaster, flinging up his hind legs with a
saucy flourish as he scampered on. Clap! he was caught in the trap!

Poor rat! had he possessed the courage and skill of Whiskerandos
himself, they would have availed him nothing. His miserable squeaking
was louder than that of all my six brothers put together. He would not
take advice, and he found the consequences. He thought himself wiser
than his neighbours, and only discovered his mistake when it had led him
to destruction. Had he only listened to the counsels of a little black
rat!

Whiskerandos remained for some moments quite still, looking towards the
dismal prison of his companion. He knew too well that it was impossible
to rescue him now. Then, with such bounds as few rats but himself could
make, he sprang to where I was standing.

"Rat!" he exclaimed, "you have saved my life, and I shall never forget
the obligation. Though you are black and I am brown, no difference
between us shall ever be regarded. Let us be friends to the end of our
days!"

"Agreed!" I cried; "let's rub noses upon it!" and noses we accordingly
rubbed.

He never flinched from his word, that bold Whiskerandos. I never feared
him from that hour; no, not even when I knew that he was hungry, and had
tasted no food from morning till night; I knew that no extremity would
ever induce him to eat up his friend; and many a ramble have we had
together, and through many strange paths has he led me. I ventured even
into the haunts of the brown rats, for his presence was a sufficient
protection. None would have dared to attack me while he was beside me,--
I should hardly have been afraid of a cat!

I had naturally a fancy for roving, and a great desire to know more of
the world; and what better guide could I have had than the heroic
Whiskerandos? He had not, however, been so great a traveller as Furry,--
he had never yet crossed the water; but he and I determined, on some
favourable opportunity, to take our passage in a ship, and explore some
foreign region together.

There was but one subject on which Whiskerandos and I were ever in
danger of quarrelling. I had made up my mind-- and Furry, who was a very
learned rat, was quite of the same opinion-- that the ancestors of the
brown rats came over from Hanover to England with George I. We liked to
call them Hanover rats, but this gave great offence to the race, as it
made their antiquity so much less than that which we claimed for
ourselves.

"You affirm," Whiskerandos would exclaim, "that you came over from
Normandy in 1066, and we from Hanover in 1714, and that nothing was ever
heard of us before that time. I affirm that it is a calumny, a base
calumny! We came from Persia, from the land of the East; an army of us
swam across the Volga, driven by an earthquake from our own country.
Depend upon it, we were known there in ancient times, and went over
Xerxes' great bridge of boats, and nibbled at his tent-ropes and gnawed
his cheese while he fought with the Greeks at Thermopylae."

"After all," thought I-- I did not say it aloud, for the great weakness
of Whiskerandos was his pride of birth, his anxiety to be thought of an
ancient family-- "the great matter is not whether our ancestors do
honour to us, but whether by our conduct we do not disgrace our
ancestors."




CHAPTER V.

HOW BOB MET WITH AN ADVENTURE.


I was often puzzled by the conduct of Bob; that was to be expected,
seeing that I was a young and ignorant rat, quite inexperienced in the
doings of man. Once or twice Bob had brought to the shed things which he
could not eat and did not wear. I could neither imagine where he had got
them, what he intended to do with them, nor what possible use he could
make of them. He seemed inclined to hide them; and once, when he was
showing to Billy a red handkerchief covered with white spots (though the
weather was bitterly cold, he never attempted to tie it round his neck),
the little boy looked up gravely into his face and said, "Oh, Bob, arn't
you afeard?"

"What am I to do; we can't starve, Billy." He looked so wan and so
woe-begone, as he bent over the little lame child, that it seemed to me
that never was a creature so wretched as that desolate boy. The next
morning he took away the handkerchief, and in the evening he brought
home bread.

Once when he returned, the snow was fast falling, drifting through the
roof, and in at the door, till Billy could scarcely find a clear spot on
which to rest his languid little frame. He was always on the look-out
for his brother, as soon as the sky began to darken. Well might he watch
on that day, for he had not broken his fast since the evening before;
and his lips were blue with hunger and cold, and he was lonely, very
lonely, in the shed.

Presently Bob came hastily in; we had not heard his step on the soft
snow. The flakes were resting on his rags and whitening his hair, as he
threw himself down by his brother.

"Oh! Billy!" he exclaimed, and burst into tears.

"What have you got?" cried the little one joyfully. "A big loaf!" and he
tore it asunder in his eager haste, and ate like a famished creature.

"And see this!" said Bob; and he wrapped round the shivering child a
warm cloak which he had carried on his arm.

Billy opened his eyes with an expression of astonishment, which
brightened into joy as he felt the unwonted warmth. "Oh! Bob!" he
exclaimed, with his mouth full of bread; "where did you get this?
Did you steal it?"

"No; and I'll never steal no more; never, never!" and the boy sank his
head down upon his chest, and sobbed. I had never seen him shed a tear
till that day.

"Tell me all about it, tell me!" cried Billy, almost frightened by his
brother's unwonted emotion; but it was a little time before Bob made
reply.

"I followed he-- a fine, tall gemman. I had my fingers in his pocket,
and he clapped his hand on 'em, and catched me!"

"Oh!" exclaimed Billy, with eyes and mouth wide open, in alarm. "And
did he not call the beaks, and have you up?"

"No; he spoke to me; he spoke so kind-like. He told me that I was about
a sin-- a great sin. Nobody never spoke so to me afore!" Again the boy's
feelings seemed ready to burst forth. "And he took me to a baker's, and
got me this; and to a shop, and bought me that; and says he, "Has no one
taught you to know right from wrong?" And says I, "Nobody never taught
me nothing!" Then he takes me a good way round, down a little lane,
right into a Ragged School."

"What's that?" inquired Billy curiously.

"A place where a great many poor boys were together in a big room, where
there were wooden benches, and pictures and other things hung on the
walls. I should never have dared to go in; but that good gemman took me,
and led me right up to a man who was standing with a row of little chaps
afore him. And the gemman put his hand on my shoulder, and spoke for me,
and said a many things that I can't remember; but one thing I remember
quite well: "You come here every evening," says he, "and you'll be
taught your duty, and how to do it. I am leaving London soon; but I will
be back in a few weeks, and I'll come and ask the master how you have
been behaving; and if I find that you've been trying to become a better
boy, I will not lose sight of you, my friend."

"Did the gemman say all that?" exclaimed Billy.

"And a great deal more. Such beautiful talking! And to see how gentle
and kind he looked, as if he didn't think me such a bad un after all!"

"Did you tell him of me?" asked Billy anxiously.

"Yes; I told him that I had one little brother, and he was lame; and
that mother was dead and father in jail, and that we had no one to care
for us, and that we were often hungry, and always cold; and he looked
quite sorry to hear it."

"Did he though?" cried Billy, much surprised. "And will you go to the
Ragged School, Bobby?"

"Won't I!" cried the boy, with a little more energy than I had seen in
him before; "why, if I don't, I won't see that good gemman again!"

"And won't you take me with you too?" said little Billy.




CHAPTER VI.

HOW I VISITED THE ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS.


That night I set out with Whiskerandos on more extended travels than any
which I had yet attempted. Oddity might have accompanied us, but he
preferred, as he said, home comforts and a nibble in the warehouse.
I knew that he would look after old Furry, whose infirmities were sadly
increasing upon him, so that I had no fear of the blind rat being
neglected.

I suspected that more than one reason induced my pie-bald brother to
decline the tour. He had struck up an acquaintance with Bright-eyes,
a lively little rat, and probably found his society more agreeable than
that of Whiskerandos, of whom he always stood somewhat in awe. I shall
not pause on the description of our underland journey through the
wondrous labyrinth of passages which, like a net-work, spreads in every
direction under the foundations of London. I saw more rats in these
gloomy lanes than I had ever imagined existed in the world. I should
have been afraid to have passed them, so fierce they looked, so ready to
attack an intruder, had not Whiskerandos been at my side. He neither
provoked contests, nor feared them-- neither gave offence willingly, nor
took it readily-- but had withal so resolute an air, that few would have
been disposed to have quarrelled with him. I was heartily glad, however,
when again we emerged into the light of day; and I was full of
astonishment at the sight of green grass and trees, such as I had never
beheld before.

"Ah!" said Whiskerandos, smiling at my delight, "you should see this
grass in the fresh spring, and those black bare trees when the bright
young leaves are upon them. The branches of yonder row seem dropping
their blossoms of gold; and how sweet is the scent of the hawthorn!
But I would not have you pass through that iron paling to examine more
closely the beauties of the garden; the square would be a charming
place, no doubt, if it were not haunted by cats."

I had never seen a cat in my life, but I started instinctively at the
name. "Take me anywhere," I exclaimed, "take me anywhere that you will,
so that I never come in sight of one of those terrible creatures!"

"I am going," said Whiskerandos, "to take you where there are cats so
huge that one could take a man's head in her mouth, or strike him dead
by a blow of her paw!"

"Oh, for my shed! Oh, for my quiet hole! for Furry, and Oddity, and my
peaceable companions!" thought I. "What folly it was to venture into the
world with such a guide as this desperado, Whiskerandos!"

I suppose that the bold rat read my thoughts in my frightened face, for
he hastened to reassure my mind. "The big cats," said he, "some with
long flowing manes, some spotted, some striped black and yellow, have no
power to harm us. They are kept in barred cages by man, and spend their
lives in wearisome captivity, denied even the solace of amusing
themselves by catching a mouse for supper."

It was the dawn of a winter's morning, when with my comrade I merrily
made my way across the park. The grass was whitened with hoar-frost,
which also glittered on the leafless boughs of the rows of trees which
lined the long straight avenue. We entered the gardens without paying
toll, or in any way obtruding ourselves on the notice of man.

"See here!" exclaimed Whiskerandos, half pettishly, as we passed a pond
with a curious wire-fence all round it. "What a dainty breakfast we
should make of some of the delicate young water-fowl, but for the
extraordinary care which has been taken to shut us out! We can look in,
to be sure, and see our prey, but the ducks do not even flutter, or move
a wing, so secure are they that we cannot reach them!"

The season being winter, we were unable to see many animals from
tropical climes, whose health would have suffered from exposure to cold.
I however regretted this but little. The white bear was shaking his
shaggy coat, the wolf pacing uneasily up and down his den, birds pluming
their feathers in the dull red light, while the monkeys' ceaseless
jabber sounded from the walls of their prison.

"Whiskerandos," said I to my guide, "I care little for making
acquaintance with cats, whether they be little or big; but if any
foreigners of the race of Mus be kept here, might I request you to
introduce me to them?"

Whiskerandos pointed with his nose towards a building. "You will find
relations there," he said, "some of the forty-six classes of our race,
known by the family likeness in their teeth.* For me, I'm going to pay a
visit to the monkeys' house; I'm sure there to find some provision,
always a matter of importance to a rat. The door is shut, but I'll not
trouble the keeper to open it for me!" So saying, with wonderful agility
he began to climb the building, and soon vanished through a hole in the
roof.

Food was to me a subject of at least as great importance as to
Whiskerandos. Even my curiosity had to wait attendance on my appetite.
I was fortunate, however, in discovering half a bun, which had probably
been dropped by some child; and cheered and refreshed I proceeded to the
building in which I was to make my affectionate search for distant
relations. I carefully examined the walls, till I discovered a hole,
probably made by some rat of the place, and through this I entered the
house, and proceeded at once with eagerness to a small barred division,
from whence a feeble squeak proceeded.


    [* I am not aware whether the Zoological Gardens at present
    contain specimens of the curious rats described in the following
    chapter.]




CHAPTER VII.

FINDING RELATIONS.


"Well, this is at length such weather as a creature may live and breathe
in! I've been half stifled all the autumn with the heat, but now the
fresh keen air seems like a breeze from my own dear Lapland!"

"Lapland! oh! there is nothing like Lapland," said a very dolorous voice
in reply. I lifted up my eyes to get a glimpse of the speaker.

Within the cage were two beautiful little Lemmings, (I learnt their name
afterwards as well as those of other inhabitants of the place.) They
were not much more than half my size, had pointed heads, very short
tails, and whiskers uncommonly long. Their coats were black and tawny,
but yellowish-white beneath. I heard subsequently that their race
inhabit Siberia, Norway, and other cold climes, moving in large bodies
like locusts, and like locusts eating up every thing green. But this
pair, as was evident from their conversation, had been natives of a
country called Lapland.

"Oh for a sight of the icy lakes, the snow-covered plains and the
reindeer moving lightly over them; while the rosy Aurora Borealis throws
its bright streamers across the sky!"

"And the strange little huts," rejoined the other, "made of briers,
bark, felt, and reindeer skins, where, when we peeped under the curtains
which made the door, we saw the tiny people, in their sheepskin
doublets, sitting on their heels round the fire! I don't wonder that the
Lapps love their land; I don't wonder that when long exiled from it,
they die of intense longing to return. That will be my fate, oh! that
will be mine!"

"Allow an English rat, gentle strangers," said I, "to offer a little
word of comfort. I grieve that you feel your captivity so much, that you
so deeply mourn your absence from your dear native land. But is it not
better to meet misfortune with courage, and bear it with patience? You
are yet left the society of each other, you can yet talk over old days
together, while the white bear growls in his prison alone, and the lofty
camel has no companion near him."

I was interrupted by some animal near dashing itself passionately
against the bars of its cage, and, turning round, I beheld a very savage
rat, which bore the name of the German Hamster. His head was thick,
blunt, and garnished with plenty of whiskers; he had big eyes, and
large, open, rounded ears. His back and head were of a reddish-brown
colour, his cheeks red, his feet white, and he had three odd white spots
on each side of his chest. But the funniest thing which I noticed about
him, (I was always an observant rat,) was that he had a claw on his
forefeet in addition to four toes, which I had never before seen in the
tribes of Mus.

"'Tis easy to talk of comfort!" he exclaimed angrily, "when a rat has
freedom and everything else that he cares for! But here-- why I have not
even the comfort of going to sleep after the fashion of my country!"

"Not going to sleep!" I repeated in some surprise, thinking to myself
that so peevish a creature must certainly be best in his sleep.

"No; who can sleep on bare boards, or a poor sprinkling of straw!" he
exclaimed, striking contemptuously the floor of his cage. "I who used to
burrow deep in the earth, and enjoy a long nap all during the winter,
shut up in my snug little home, I know what comfort is! There is nothing
like lying some feet under the earth, as quiet as if one were dead, and
know that there is a good magazine collected of grain, beans, and pease,
to feast on when one awakes in the spring."

"But at any rate here you are well fed," I suggested.

The words, however kindly intended, had only the effect of increasing
the Hamster's passion to a shocking extent. To my amazement and horror
he blew out his cheeks till the size of his head and neck exceeded that
of his body. He raised himself on his hind legs, and but for the bars of
his cage I believe that he would really have flown at me.

"Well fed!" he exclaimed, as soon as he could speak; "I should like to
know what you call being well fed! Since I have come to this hateful
country, not once have I had an opportunity of filling my cheeks with
grain. Man, stingy man, thinks it enough to give me a wretched pittance
from day to day,-- to me who have had a hundred pounds of corn packed up
in my own deep hole,-- to me whose delight it was to carry three ounces
weight of it at once in these bags with which Nature has provided my
face!"

"Most curious and convenient bags they are," said I, willing to appease
him by a civil word, though I thought that thus puffed out with air,
they anything but added to the beauty of his appearance.

"They were the cause of my being taken," cried the fierce Hamster, whose
savage complaints had quite silenced the gentler murmurs of the pretty
little Lemmings, and had done more perhaps to make them submissive to
their lot than anything which I could have said.

"How were your pouches the cause of your being taken?" inquired I.

"I can fight savagely-- I will fly even at dogs," replied the Hamster
(no one could have looked at him and have doubted it,) "but I cannot
bite when my cheeks are stuffed full of grain, which was the case when a
German peasant seized me; I had no time to empty them, not a moment, or
wouldn't I have bitten him! oh, would not I have bitten him!"

I felt so much disgusted at the words and manner of this most ferocious
of rats, that I was glad to turn away from his cage; reflecting to
myself how hideous and how hateful any creature is rendered by violent
passion.

A perfume, rather more powerful than agreeable, drew my attention
towards a division occupied by a Musk-Rat, a native of Canada. I saw
within it a creature of the size of a small rabbit, quiet and staid in
his demeanour, who welcomed me with a grave courtesy strangely in
contrast to the rudeness of the Hamster.

"May I venture to look upon you as belonging to the race of Mus?"
I inquired, looking doubtingly at his large size, soft fur, and long
flat tail.

"Well," he replied, good-humouredly, "some naturalists, and I believe
the great Linnaeus amongst them, class me with the Castor or Beaver
race, and dignify me with a very long and learned-sounding name,
Zibethicus. But I am quite content, for my part, to own my relationship
to the race of Mus, and to be known by the simple name Musk-Rat, which
they give me on the lakes of Canada."

"I am delighted," said I, with a wave of my whiskers, "at this
opportunity of paying my respects to so dignified a relation."

"Ah!" replied Zibethicus, "I only wish that I could have received you in
my own house upon the Lake Huron. If you could but have seen the pretty
round dwelling raised by myself and my companions-- the neat dome-shaped
roof which covered it, formed of herbs and reeds cemented with clay.
So prettily it was stuccoed within! A great deal of trouble it cost us,
to be sure, but I often think there's no pleasure without trouble; and
there's nothing in my captivity which I miss so much as the power to
labour and build."

"May I ask," said I, "whether you be of the same family with the Musk
Cavy, which I have heard of as inhabiting Ceylon and other places in the
East?"

"I believe not," answered my courteous companion, "but we doubtless
belong to the same race, however our habits and appearance may differ."

Our pleasant conversation was here unfortunately interrupted by the
keeper's opening the door. I had barely time to hide myself under some
straw, resolving not to show myself again till darkness should render it
safe for me to creep out.

Soon various visitors arrived, and I was vastly amused by watching the
different varieties of the human species, of which there must be nearly
as many as of the race of Mus. For the first time in my life I saw
ladies all bedizened in velvets and silks, and the furry spoils of many
an unfortunate ermine or sable. I saw gentlemen too, and I confess that
a creeping uncomfortable feeling came over me when I looked at the hats
which they had on their heads, the fine black gloss was so exceedingly
like that of the coat which I wore. I have since learnt that my
conjecture was but too close to the fact-- that numberless hapless rats
are slaughtered in France on account of their fatal beauty; and that man
not only manufactures their fur into hats, but uses their soft and
delicate skins to make the thumbs of his best gloves. Alas, for the race
of Mus!




CHAPTER VIII.

HOW I HEARD OF OLD NEIGHBOURS.


In the afternoon a gentleman entered the building, whose noble and
commanding appearance struck me. After a short examination of the
captives in their cages, he sat down to rest himself nearly opposite the
place where I was hidden.

He was almost directly joined by a bright-haired boy, in whose cheeks
health was glowing, and whose blue eyes sparkled with intelligence and
enjoyment.

"Papa-- please-- I want more money to buy buns for the animals!"

"My dear boy," replied the gentleman, in an expostulating tone, "you
have had a whole dozen already; I do not think it right to spend more on
pampering well-fed animals, when so many of our fellow-creatures are
suffering from hunger."

"Oh, papa! do you think there are many?"

"I believe that in this city of London alone there are thousands,-- yes,
tens of thousands, who know not, when they rise in the morning, where
they shall find a morsel of food during the day. I did not tell you what
happened to me when I was in the city, Neddy."

"Do tell me now," cried the boy, seating himself by his father, "while
we rest a little quietly here."

"I was walking along a narrow gloomy lane on my way to the
shipping-office, when suddenly I felt a hand at my pocket. Mine was
instantly down upon it, and I captured a little thief who appeared to be
about your own age."

"The little rogue!" exclaimed Neddy, indignantly. "And what did you do
with him, papa? Did you give him over to the police, or thrash him
soundly with your stick?"

"I grieved to see one so young already plunging into crime."

"Yes, that is the worst of it," said Neddy. "If he is so bad as a boy,
what will he be when he is a man! He will be sure to end on the gallows!
I hope you punished him well, papa."

I pricked up my ears on hearing this conversation; I could not help
connecting it with what Bob had told his lame little brother;
I therefore listened with peculiar interest. Not that, as a rat, I could
understand the word _crime_, or know why human beings feel it wrong to
seize anything that they want and can get. It was evident to me that
they are governed by laws and principles quite incomprehensible to my
race. For as man has no scruple in taking from rats their lives and
their skins, so rats, on the other hand, have no manner of scruple in
taking all they require from man.

But to return to the gentleman and his son.

"No, Neddy, I did not punish the child," replied the former gravely.
"I looked at his meagre form clothed in rags, his wasted countenance
prematurely old in its expression of sorrow and care, his hollow eyes,
his sunken cheeks,-- and I thought of you, my son!" the gentleman added,
with a sigh.

"Well," said Neddy, "I hope there's a precious deal of difference
between me and a beggarly thief!"

"What has made that difference?" said the gentleman, laying his hand on
the shoulder of his beautiful boy. "I questioned that unhappy child.
I found him ignorant of the first principles of virtue. His mother is
dead, his father in jail; if he has learnt anything from those around
him it is only a knowledge of vice. Pinched by hunger, homeless,
friendless, ignorant even that he has a soul, it would be a miracle
indeed if he followed the straight path of which he has not so much as
heard! What can we expect him to be but a thief,-- what would you have
been in his place?"

Neddy looked thoughtful and was silent. Then raising his blue eyes to
his father's face he said, "And what did you do to the boy?"

"I first tried to relieve a little his pressing bodily wants; to take
from him, at least for one day, the temptation to commit a theft. But I
knew that the temptation would recur again, and as long as he continued
in blind ignorance, there could be small hope that he would even wish to
resist it. I remembered that my watchmaker had given me the direction of
a Ragged School at which his daughter taught; spending her time and
energies as so many do now, in this noblest labour of love. This school
was not very far off, and I resolved to take this opportunity of paying
it a long-intended visit. I took the poor little fellow with me, and
spoke to the superintendent, who readily agreed to receive him. He will
there learn some way to earn his bread honestly; he will be taught to
know right from wrong; he will hear, perhaps for the first time, the
voice of kindness; and he may yet live to be respectable, useful, and
happy."

"Oh! papa, do you think that after once being a thief he is ever likely
to turn out good for anything!"

"The experiment has been tried over and over again, Neddy, and many
times it has been mercifully attended with success. The idle _have_
become industrious, the thieves honest, the vicious been reclaimed, the
lost found and saved! I will tell you a striking occurrence which really
took place in a reformatory for thieves. Not one of the inmates there
but had broken the laws of his country, and committed the crime of
theft. But mercy was giving them a chance to redeem the characters which
they had lost, and they were learning various trades, by which to
support themselves in honest independence. A subscription, as you may
remember, was raised at the time of the war with Russia, to help the
widows and orphans of our gallant soldiers. From the Sovereign on her
throne, to the labourer in the field, from rich and poor, high and low,
contributions to the Patriotic Fund poured in.

"The thieves in the reformatory heard of the subscription; they longed
to aid it, but what could they do? they had no money, they owed their
very bread to charity, for they had not yet acquired sufficient skill in
the trades which they were learning, to pay even their necessary
expenses."

"They could not give what they had not got, papa, if they wished to be
generous ever so much."

"Where there is a will there is a way, Neddy. These poor fellows were so
anxious to help the widow and the orphan, that they asked and obtained
leave to go a whole day without food, that the money so saved upon them
might be paid into the Patriotic Fund."

"And did they really starve a whole day?-- have neither breakfast, nor
dinner, nor supper,-- and all go hungry to bed?"

"They did, Neddy, _all_ the thieves in that reformatory* did; and I
doubt if amongst the hundreds of thousands of subscriptions to the
Patriotic Fund, any showed so much real generosity and self-denial as
the contribution of the reformed thieves!"

"Oh! there was hope for such men indeed!" exclaimed Neddy, the moisture
rising into his eyes. "There must have been good in them, papa, and I
should not wonder if some of them turned out really fine fellows."

"I have no doubt of it," said his father with a smile.

"And that poor boy-- yes, I hope that he may amend. Shall we hear
anything more of him, papa?"

"You know that we go out of town to-morrow. On my return I shall make
inquiries regarding him at the Ragged School, and if I find that he is
improving under the instruction which he will receive, I shall try to do
something for him."

"May I go with you?" said Neddy eagerly, "I should like to visit the
school."

"I think that I shall take you with me," replied his father.

"What a glorious thing it is," exclaimed the boy after a pause, "to
raise ragged schools and reformatories, to give the poor, the ignorant,
and the wicked, a chance of becoming honest and happy! How I should like
to build one myself!"

"It would be more practicable for you," observed the gentleman, smiling
as he rose from his seat, "to support those which are built already."**

"But, papa, I can do so little!"

"Every little helps, my son; the vast ocean is made up of drops. You may
do something yourself, and try to interest others in the cause of the
desolate poor. Were all the children of the middle classes in England to
give each but one penny a-week, no wretched boy need wander about
desolate in London, to perish both here and hereafter because no one
cared for his soul!"


    [* The Reformatory in Great Smith Street, Westminster.]

    [** The office of the "Ragged School Union" is at 1 Exeter Hall,
    London. By this admirable society twenty-two thousand poor
    children have received instruction during the past year, while
    five hundred of the most destitute have been provided with homes
    in refuges and reformatories. To show the habits of prudence
    inculcated in the schools, it is only necessary to state that in
    the same year ragged scholars placed in saving-banks a sum of no
    less than three thousand four hundred and thirty-nine pounds!
    Seventy of those who now teach in the schools, were once ragged
    scholars themselves, thus imparting to others the benefits which
    they had received when poor ignorant children.

    But the funds of the society are by no means sufficient for the
    work before it, though many of its teachers are unpaid, seeking no
    reward upon earth. There are numbers of ragged children in London,
    as desolate as those whom I have described, who have never known
    the blessing of a ragged school, and who, if they implored the
    shelter of a refuge, must implore in vain, for they would find no
    room.]




CHAPTER IX.

HOW WE FOUND A FEAST.


I remained in the Zoological Gardens for a few weeks, improving my
acquaintance with the mild Zibethicus and the gentle Lemmings. As for
the German Hamster, he became so drowsy as the weather grew colder,
that it became evident that he could sleep day and night upon boards,
though he never fell into the perfectly torpid, almost dead state
that he would have done, could he have been humoured by being buried
alive.

I should willingly have remained longer in the gardens, but the keepers
were taking such stringent measures to get rid of rats, that we thought
it better to remove on our own four feet while we could, instead of
being carried in a bag, a kind of conveyance for which we had no fancy.
We therefore set out on our journey homewards.

We again chose the underland route, lest we should meet with dogs and
cats in the streets, or be crushed beneath rolling wheels. We had not
gone far, however, when Whiskerandos suddenly stopped.

"I feel hungry," said he.

"So do I," rejoined I.

"We must find our way into one of the houses," observed the bold rat;
"let's turn down this passage, it doubtless leads to some kitchen."

Down the passage we accordingly turned, Whiskerandos, as usual, going
first; but we were met, almost at the entrance, by two savage brown
rats, who did not seem disposed to allow us to pass.

"Pray, does this passage lead to a kitchen?" said Whiskerandos, not
appearing to notice their sharp teeth and gleaming eyes.

"Yes," replied one; "but the passage, and the house, and the kitchen,
belong to us, and we let no one share in our rights."

"Any one who attempts to pass," cried the other, very fiercely, "has to
pay us toll with his ears!"

"Well, my good friends," replied Whiskerandos, "notwithstanding the
darkness I have no doubt but that your bright eyes have observed that I
have paid that toll already, and that is a kind of toll which no one is
expected to pay twice." The brown rats looked at the warrior with keen,
wondering gaze, while Whiskerandos calmly continued, "I lost my ears in
single combat with a ferret; he who exacted the toll lost his life in
exchange, and I feel somehow persuaded that you will rather politely
guide me into your house and share with me whatever I get there, than
try the experiment whether a rat can fight as well without ears as he
once did with them."

This little speech had a most wonderful effect in subduing all
unfriendly and inhospitable feelings on the part of the brown rats
towards the valiant Whiskerandos. They, however, looked very
suspiciously at me, and I fancied that I heard one whisper to the other,
"There's a black rat-- an intruder-- an enemy-- we must tear him in
pieces!"

I felt uncommonly uncomfortable, and much inclined to turn round and
scamper for my life; but Whiskerandos soon ended the difficulty. "Let me
introduce to you my friend Ratto," said he, "my very particular friend,
who goes where I go, shares what I find, and whose safety I value as my
own."

Nothing more was said about tearing me in pieces, so we all proceeded
amicably on our way, till the brown rats led us through a small hole,
and we found ourselves in a large, airy kitchen.

The place was perfectly quiet; the loud ticking of the clock was the
only sound heard, the swing of its pendulum the only motion seen, except
that a few black beetles were creeping on the sanded floor. The fire,
which must have been a very large one, had almost burnt out; but a few
red embers still were glowing, and served to light us on our way,
though, as I have mentioned before, light seems unnecessary to rats.

We peeped about, under the dresser, on the shelves, and snuffed at the
locked door of the larder, but nothing could we discover fit for food.
A jar on a shelf looked tempting enough, but being made, cover and
all, of crockery ware, it defied even our sharp little teeth.

"I've made a discovery!" exclaimed I at last, and at my shout the three
other rats came eagerly running towards the place where I stood
rejoicing by a flask of oil.

"I've seen that flask a dozen times," exclaimed one of the Brownies, in
a tone of angry disappointment; "I have longed to taste its contents,
but how is a rat to get at them?"

Here was a puzzler indeed. But Whiskerandos was ever ready at
expedients. With neat dexterity he extracted the stopper; but here the
difficulty did not end, for the neck of the bottle was too narrow by far
to admit the head of a rat; and the position of the flask, in a wooden
box, rendered it impossible to alter its position so as to pour out its
contents.

"Mighty little use that flask is to us!" exclaimed one of the Brownies,
impatiently.

But my clever rat was not easily discouraged In a moment he had dipped
in his long tail, and then whisking it out again, scattered around a
fragrant shower of oil!

There was no end to the praises and commendations which Whiskerandos
received for this simple device. He took little notice of them, however,
and only playfully observed, "It is Ratto who should have thought of
this, since nature has furnished black rats with two hundred and fifty
distinct rings in their tails, while brown ones have only two hundred."

"Ah, Whiskerandos!" exclaimed I, "this oil is a nice relish to be sure,
but my appetite craves something solid;" and I looked piteously up at
the jar. The other rats looked up piteously also.

"Let us see what we can do!" cried my spirited companion; and he
clambered for the second time up on the shelf on which stood the
tantalizing jar. This time he did not even attempt to nibble at the hard
polished crockery, he wasted not his energies in any such fruitless
endeavour; but, putting his mighty strength to the task, he pushed the
whole jar nearer and nearer to the edge of the shelf, then over it, till
at length it fell with a tremendous crash which made every one of us
leap up high into the air with amazement!

We might have leapt for joy also, for from the broken crockery what a
feast of delicious dried fruits rolled forth! With what glee we set to
our supper, while Whiskerandos sprang from his shelf, too eager to
partake of the tempting repast to take the slower method of climbing.
I must confess that of all pleasures upon earth there is none to a rat
like eating; if such be the case with any of the lords of creation, why
I can only say that they must be content to be reckoned like rats.

We were in the midst of our feast, our mouths full, and our whiskers
merrily wagging, when we were startled by a faint noise at the kitchen
door. A stealthy sound, as of human feet moving slowly and cautiously
along; a timid hand laid softly on the handle of the door; and then a
whispering murmur of voices. We pricked up our ears and stopped eating.

"I am sure that the noise came from the kitchen;-- listen!" said a
timorous voice. So those without listened, and so did we within, when
the clock suddenly striking One, made us all start, and so frightened
the Brownies, that off they scampered into their hole. Whiskerandos and
I retreated some steps, and then remained in an attitude of attention,
while again the whispering began.

"Would it not be safer to call in a policeman?"

"No, no,-- my blunderbuss is loaded, and the villains cannot escape.
You are nervous-- go back, Eliza."

"Dearest-- I'll never leave you to meet the danger alone!"

The handle creaked as it was slowly turned round, and Whiskerandos
exclaiming, "We'd better be off!" followed the example of the Brownies.
Strong curiosity made me linger for a moment, as the door was opened
inch by inch, and I had a glimpse of what to this day I cannot remember
without laughing. One of the lords of the creation slowly advanced
through it, robed in a long red dressing-gown, a candle in one hand,
a loaded blunderbuss in the other, and with a most ludicrous expression
on his pallid face, as though he were making up his mind to kill
somebody, but was a little afraid that somebody might kill him instead!
His wife, looking ghastly in her curl-papers with her eyes and mouth
wide open in fright, was trying to pull him back, and was evidently
terrified to glance round the kitchen, lest some midnight robber should
meet her gaze. Away I scudded, my sides shaking with mirth, leaving the
broken jar and the scattered fruits to tell their own tale, and
wondering with what stories of midnight alarms the valiant husband and
his devoted spouse would amuse their family in the morning.




CHAPTER X.

THE WANT OF A DENTIST.


I was glad to see Oddity's kind ugly face again in our native shed. How
much I had to tell him! how much older I now felt than one who had never
wandered a hundred yards from his home! Who knows not the pleasure of
returning even after a brief absence, full of information, eager to
impart it, and sure of a ready and attentive listener? I talked over my
adventures to my brother, till any patience but his would have been
exhausted; but he was the most patient of rats, quite willing to have
all his adventures second-hand, without the slightest wish to become a
hero, but ready, without a particle of envy, to admire the exploits of
others.

"And how is old Furry?" I asked, when at length I came to the end of my
narration. Furry had now taken up his quarters in the warehouse, but
sometimes visited our shed.

Oddity looked very grave. "You know," replied he, "that poor Furry had
the misfortune some time ago to lose one of his upper front teeth."

"I know it; he struck it out when gnawing at the hoop of a barrel. But I
do not see that the misfortune is great; old Furry has other teeth
left."

"_That_ is his misfortune," added Oddity.

"How?-- what do you mean?-- what does he complain of,-- losing his teeth
or keeping them?"

"Both," said Oddity. I should have thought him joking, but Oddity was
never guilty of a joke in his life. "You see," he continued, observing
my look of surprise, "that gnawing is necessary to us rats, to keep down
the quick growth of our teeth. If they are not constantly rubbing one
against another, they soon get a great deal too long for our mouths. As
poor old Furry's upper tooth is gone, of course the one just under it is
now out of work, and having nothing else to do, is growing at such a
pace, that it is actually forming a circle in his mouth!"

"You don't say so!" I exclaimed "I have often noticed the strange length
of that tooth, but I had no notion of the extent of the evil."

"It has much increased since you left us," sighed Oddity, "and where it
will end I really don't know. The poor fellow is blind, he had no
pleasure but in nibbling and chatting, and now his dreadful long tooth
is actually locking his jaw."

"Shall I go to see him?" said I.

"Do as you please," replied Oddity. "There is little pleasure in seeing
him now, poor fellow."

And so I found when I went. Poor old Furry's misfortune had by no means
sweetened his temper. He was ready to bite any one who approached him,
only biting was now out of the question. He could hardly manage to
swallow a little meal which Oddity had procured, and certainly took it
without a sign of gratitude. One would have thought, by his manner
towards the piebald rat, that it was he who had knocked out the unlucky
front tooth, instead of having kindly attended to Furry's wants for so
long, and borne with his temper, which was harder. But Oddity was,
without a doubt, the most patient and steady of rats. While Bright-eyes,
full of fun, made many a joke at the expense of the blind, crabbed old
rat, who had been so fond of talking, and now could scarcely utter a
squeak-- of eating, and now could not nibble a nut,-- Oddity never
thought the sufferings of another the subject for a smile, or the
peevishness and infirmities of age any theme for the ridicule of the
young. He had been often laughed at himself; that was perhaps the reason
why he never gave the same pain to others.

I was really glad to escape back to my shed from the atmosphere of a
peevish temper. I was accompanied to it by Oddity.

"And now, dear old rat," said I, when we were alone, "how go on our
little ragged friends? What has become of Bob and Billy?"

"They still live, or rather starve, in the old shed," said he; "but now
they go out each day together. I expect them here every minute."

"So then they are as poor as ever?" inquired I.

"I have heard something of occasional treats of warm soup at the school,
but I don't think that they get anything certain. I suppose that now and
then, when some good folk sit down to a comfortable meal, beside a
roaring fire, they just happen to remember that seventy or eighty
half-famished children are gathered together in a street near, and send
them a welcome supply. But both Bob and Billy have hope now, if they
have nothing else; they expect soon to be able to do something for
themselves, and to be helped on by the kind friends whom they have found
at the school."

"Has Bob brought home any more red handkerchiefs with white spots?"
inquired I.

"Not a rag of one," answered my companion; "but he brings back something
which puzzles my brain-- something white, with black marks upon it. He
and little Billy sit poring over it by the hour. They don't eat it, they
don't smell it, they don't wear it: I can't make out that it is of any
use to them at all; and yet they seem as much pleased, as they study it
together, as if it were a piece of Dutch cheese!"

"What are these odd things scattered about the shed?" said I; "I don't
remember seeing them before."

"Ah! I forgot to say the little one is beginning to make baskets, and
neat fingers he has about it: it seems quite a pleasure to the child.
The very talk of the boys is growing different now; the elder--"

He stopped at the sound of a distant cough, which became more
distressing every minute, till our two poor boys entered the shed,
and Bob sank wearily down on the floor.

"Oh! that cough, how it shakes you!" cried Billy.

"Never mind, 'twill be over soon," gasped his brother.

I was so much surprised at the change in the boys' appearance, that at
first I could hardly believe my eyes. They both looked much whiter than
I had seen them before; their hair was cut closer, and brushed to one
side, instead of hanging right over their eyes. Neither of the brothers
was in rags; the old worn clothes indeed were still there, but neatly
patched and mended; some one had given Bob a pair of old shoes, but it
was Billy who wore the warm cloak.

"His brother always makes him wear it," whispered Oddity, "except at
night, and then it covers them both."

"Now you must have it, Bob; isn't it comfy?" said the lame child,
pressing the cloak round his brother, whose violent cough for the moment
prevented his reply, and brought a bright colour to his cheek, which I
never had seen there before. "I'll creep very close to you, Bobby, and
then we'll both have it, you know. There! are you better now?" he said,
softly, laying his thin cheek against that of his brother.

"I don't think I'll ever get better here." The boy shivered and closed
his eyes as he spoke.

"Oh, Bob! Bob!" cried the child, in accents of fear, "you're not a-going
to be ill like mother; you're not a-going to-- die, and leave me!"

There was something very gentle in the tone, and sweet in the uplift
eye, of the poor destitute boy, as he replied, "I can't say if I'm
a-going to die, Billy; but don't you mind what Miss Mary told us about
dying? I used to be afeared when I thought on it, but now-- I think I
could die and be happy!"

"But you must not-- you shall not go and leave me! Oh! what should I do
without you?" cried Billy, bursting into tears.




CHAPTER XI.

A REMOVAL.


A manly voice was heard on the outside, speaking to a porter who was
passing at the moment.

"Can you tell me, pray, whether two boys of the name of Parton live near
this place? From the direction which was given me, I think that we must
be near their dwelling."

"Parton?-- well," began the porter, in a doubtful voice; but little
Billy was up in a moment: "Yes, here they are! here's where we live!"
shouted he, and the next minute the shed was entered by the gentleman
and his son whom I had seen at the Zoological Gardens.

The father almost started as he glanced round the miserable place, and
the look of pity on his face deepened into one of pain, while Neddy
appeared even more shocked. He had, I suspect, known little of poverty,
but by hearsay; and the bare, terrible reality took him by surprise.

Bob had risen from the heap of dirty rubbish which served him for a bed.
His thin cheek glowed with a bright flush of pleasure as he recognised
his benefactor.

"Is it possible that you live here?-- sleep here?" exclaimed the
gentleman; "exposed in this wretched shed, without a fire, to all the
severity of winter?"

Bob attempted to speak, but was stopped by his cough. Billy, who was at
all times more talkative and ready to reply, answered, "Yes, we lives
here, and sleeps here too, when the cold don't keep us awake!"

"And does no one ever come to visit you?"

"No one but the rats!" replied the child.

"The rats!" exclaimed Neddy, with a gesture of horror and disgust, which
irritated my vanity not a little. Oddity had none, so he looked tranquil
as usual.

"Oh, papa!" cried Neddy, "they must not stay here; this horrible hole is
only fit for rats!"

His father was bending over Bob, feeling his wrist, asking him questions
regarding his health, with a gentle kindness which goes farther to win
confidence and affection than the cold bestowal of the greatest
benefits.

"You are not well; you must be cared for, my boy. I think that I could
manage to get you into an hospital; you would have every comfort there."

"Please, sir," began Bob, and stopped; he looked at his brother,
and then raised his earnest eyes to the face of his new friend, and
gathering courage from the kind glance which he met, faltered forth,
"Please, sir, would they take Billy too?"

The gentleman shook his head.

"Then-- please, sir, I'd a much rather stay here: we han't never been
parted, Billy and me."

I saw Neddy eagerly draw his father aside, very near to my hiding-place
behind the canvass, so that I could hear some of his words, though they
were only spoken in a whisper.

"Could we not get a lodging?-- see here!" He pulled something out of his
pocket, and spoke still lower; but I caught a sentence here and there:
"My Christmas-box, and what aunt gave me, would it be enough?" his voice
was very earnest indeed.

I saw something which reminded me of sunshine steal over the father's
face as he looked down on his blue-eyed boy. Then he replied in a quiet
tone, "Yes, enough to provide one till warmer weather comes. I would
myself see that food and needful comforts were not wanting."

"And, papa, I have an old suit of clothes; that poor boy is dying with
cold;-- just see, his jacket will hardly hold together. Might I give him
my old suit, papa?"

I read assent in the gentleman's smile; then, turning to the poor
motherless children, he told them that he could not leave them one night
longer in that miserable place; that he would take them at once to the
dwelling of an honest widow whom he knew, who would watch over the sick,
and take care of the young, for she herself had once been a mother.

Poor Bob, weakened and exhausted by poor living, looked bewildered at
the words, as though he scarcely understood them, but was ready, without
question or hesitation, to go wherever his benefactor should guide him.
One only doubt seemed to linger on his mind. "Shall I," said he, in a
hesitating tone, "shall I still be able to go to my school?-- 'cause I
shouldn't like to be a-leaving it now!"

"Assuredly you shall attend it, my boy, as soon as your health will
permit. I have no means of permanently assisting you; my stay in England
is but short; I can only give you help for a time. But at the school you
will learn to help yourself, and soon, I hope, be independent of any
human aid. I should do you an injury, and not a kindness, were I to
teach you to rest on others for those means of living which a brave and
honest boy desires to earn for himself. Now let us go on to the
comfortable lodging which I mentioned."

Billy uttered an exclamation of childish delight, as though the word had
called up before his mind's eye a warm hearth, a blazing fire, and
smoking viands on a table beside him.

They all now quitted the place, Neddy appearing if possible more happy
than the delighted little child. But Billy was the last to leave the
shed, in which he had passed so many days of suffering and want. He
lingered for a moment at the door, and looked back with a pensive
expression.

"You never wish to see that place again, I am sure?" cried Neddy.

"No, not the place; but-- but I should ha' just liked a last peep of the
pretty spotted rat who used to lead the old blind un by the stick!"




CHAPTER XII.

A NEW ROAD TO FAME.


It may have been but my fancy,-- it probably was so,-- but it seemed to
me that Oddity felt a good deal the departure of his little human
friend. I thought that he missed the lame child who had taken such
pleasure in watching him, and who had found beauties even in his
ungainly figure and piebald skin. It certainly was not that he needed
the crumbs which the half-starved little Billy had stinted himself to
throw to him; but I suppose that it is possible even for rats to grow
attached to such as show them confidence and kindness. I often rallied
poor Oddity upon his melancholy after the boys had been taken away.
Bright-eyes told him that he ought to have been a cat, to sit purring on
a mat before the fire, and lick the hand of some old maiden lady, who
would feed him with porridge and milk. I said that he should be kept in
a gentleman's house, with a bell round his neck, as rats sometimes
are in Germany, to frighten their brethren away.

Oddity took all our taunts very quietly, nibbled his dinner in the
warehouse, but spent most of his time in the shed; where, as he snuffed
along the ground, and fumbled amongst the chipping and the straw, we
used to say that he was searching for little lame Billy, whom he never
would see any more.

Winter at length passed away. Down the roof of the shed, and through the
hole in it, ran little streams of water from the melted snow. The west
wind blew softly, bending the columns of smoke from the tall chimneys on
shore, and the black funnels of the steamers that went snorting and
puffing down the river.

On one of the first mild days we found poor old Furry dead in the
warehouse. Life had long been a burden to him, which his unhappy temper
rendered yet more galling.

I have heard that the rats of Newfoundland bury their comrades when they
die, laying the bodies neatly one beside another, head and heels placed
alternately together. I do not know whether this be true: it is not the
custom of rats in England. We therefore left old Furry where he lay,
close behind a barrel of salt meat, where he was discovered the next day
by one of the men of the warehouse.

Now, if there be one thing which men usually think more worthless lumber
than another, it is the body of a dead rat. Our skins are not in England
collected and valued as they are in France; the only thought is usually
how to get rid of the unpleasant presence of the dead creature. And yet,
strange to say, the porter did not throw away the body of poor old
Furry: he carried it off to his master. I was very curious indeed to
know its fate; and, after many fruitless inquiries, at length I
discovered it.

The tooth which had been Furry's torment in life, was destined to make
him famous after death. Learned men-- I know not how many-- examined the
head of the rat, looked, wondered, consulted together; and the end of
the matter was, that it was placed as a great curiosity in some building
which is called a museum. There, amidst fine vases and ancient weapons,
old manuscripts and precious stones, and noble busts of the wise and
great, is the head of poor old Furry preserved, with the mouth wide
open, to display the extraordinary tooth! Fame is a strange thing, after
all. I believe that our friend the rat was not the first, nor will be
the last, to pay a heavy price for the bubble!

Early in spring, one sunny morn, I received a visit from my old comrade
Whiskerandos. He was full of life and spirits.

"Ratto," cried he, "I have often heard you say that you and I should
visit foreign countries together; we've a capital opportunity now.
A vessel is to weigh anchor to-morrow. I have been talking to a ship-rat
of my acquaintance, who intends to sail in her, as he has done so
before. He says that she is a capital old vessel, full of first-rate
accommodation for rats; that Captain Blake keeps a very good table; that
there is never any scarcity of pickings; and, in short, I am off for St.
Petersburg, and mean to embark to-night: just say that you will go
with me."

"I'm your rat!" I exclaimed, highly delighted. "Would there be room for
Oddity too?"

"I daresay that there is plenty of room; but-- well, well, Oddity's an
excellent old fellow in spite of his ugly skin; and I'll take care that
nobody insults him."

Off I scampered to Oddity, half out of breath with excitement; and
giving him the news which I had just received, I begged him to accompany
Whiskerandos and myself on a pleasure excursion to Russia.

The piebald one bluntly declined.

"Now this is nonsense, Oddity," cried I; "you must not stay moping here
any longer, pining after a child, and watching for his return, when he
is never likely to come back."

"I know he will not come back!" sighed Oddity.

"Then why don't you come and shake off this silly gloom? To tell you the
plain truth, Oddity, your mind really requires opening, and there is
nothing like travelling for that. You are, I am afraid, not a
well-informed quadruped. I insist upon your embarking with us to-night,
and we'll make a rat of you, my good fellow!"

Oddity shook his head.

"What! you are resolved not to travel?"

"Not by water," was his short reply.

"He is going into the country with me," cried Bright-eyes, springing
with a few light bounds to my side. "We're going to my birth-place, near
the sea-side. We will feast amongst the young corn there; and when the
pea-blossom has faded, and the ripe pods hang temptingly down, we'll
climb up the stalks and shell them, and banquet on the sweet green
seeds! We'll revel in the strawberry beds, and try which peach is the
ripest! Oh! merry lives lead the rats in a kitchen-garden, beneath the
bright sun of summer!"

"I've half a mind to go with you myself," said I, charmed with the rural
description. But I remembered my engagement with Whiskerandos, and
repressed the rising longing to feast upon English fruits, whose names
sounded so tempting.

"Then farewell, Oddity," cried I; "I fear I shall never meet you again."

"I'll come back to the old shed in winter," said he.

"But I-- ah! where shall I be then? How do I know, once crossing the
sea, whether I shall ever be able to return?" I had not the faintest
idea where Russia might be, or what sort of a place I should find it;
whether its rats are black, brown, or white, fierce as the Hamster, or
gentle as Zibethicus. A feeling of misgiving came suddenly over me; one
fear above all others depressed my heart, and unconsciously I uttered it
aloud: "I wonder whether in Russia rats find plenty to eat!"

The snub face of Oddity grew very grave at a question which he could not
answer, and whose importance he felt. But light-hearted Bright-eyes
quickly relieved our apprehensions.

"If we are to judge of what is in Russia by what comes from it," he
cried, "I should say that you have little to fear. I examined the cargo
of a Russian ship once, and never did I see a finer collection of
everything that could charm a rat. I say nothing of the furs,-- skins of
all kinds of creatures, sables, black and white foxes, ermines, lynxes,
hyaenas, bears, panthers, wolves, martens, white hares--"

"Stop, stop!" I exclaimed, "we do not want any furs beyond those with
which nature has adorned us."

"There was copper, iron, talc, (a mineral resembling glass--)"

"We don't care about them; no rat ever lived upon minerals."

"Linen, flax, hemp, feathers--"

"If there is nothing more nutritious to be had in Russia, why I'd rather
stay at home," cried I, with a little vexation.

"What do you say, then, to oil, both linseed and train-oil? to delicious
honey, corn without end, soap, isinglass, and, to crown the whole,
hogsheads upon hogsheads of-- tallow!"

"Enough, enough!" I exclaimed with delight, "Russia is the country
for me."




CHAPTER XIII.

HOW I SET OUT ON MY VOYAGE.


When the passengers of the Nautilus went on board, the bright sun was
glittering on the water, the whole river was full of life, covered with
vessels of all kinds,-- the light boat, the lugger, the steamer, with
her gaily-coloured paddle-boxes and long dark stream of smoke; the heavy
coal-barge, scarcely moving at all, sunk down almost to a level with the
water: and there were sounds of all sorts, both from the vessels and the
shore-- puffing of steam, dipping of oars, creaking of rigging, ringing
of bells, shouts and calls, and the sailors' musical "yo, heave, yo!"

But when we went on board a few hours before, all was comparatively
quiet, though the great pulse of life in London never quite ceases to be
heard, even in the middle of the night. When we crept down to the edge
of the shore, the yellow lamps were gleaming around, and the quiet stars
twinkling above, and the young moon was looking down at her own image
dimly reflected in the river.

"Where is our vessel?" whispered I to Whiskerandos.

"Yonder; don't you see her black hull?"

"But how are we to get to her?" said I. nervously; "I have no great mind
to swim."

"Do you mark that dark line that cuts the sky? That is the rope which
fastens her to shore. We will make our way easily along that."

I had a tolerably intimate acquaintance with ropes, and the feat was not
a difficult one for a rat; and yet-- shall I confess it?-- my heart
quaked a little as I followed my leader across this trembling suspension
bridge. I was, however, always unwilling to show fear in the presence of
Whiskerandos, so I concealed even the relief which I felt when I reached
the vessel without a ducking.

It was indeed a delightful home for rats, and many of my race had
thought so, for the number of us on board certainly trebled that of the
sailors. The majority of our brethren in the vessel were ship rats,
whose appearance so much resembled my own that terms of friendship were
at once established between us. The brown rats kept together in quite a
separate part of the ship,-- a wise precaution to avoid the quarrels and
fights which must otherwise have constantly ensued. I consequently saw
less of Whiskerandos during the voyage than I otherwise should have
done.

I managed to establish myself, audacious rat that I was, in Captain
Blake's own cabin. I knew that it was a spot of danger,-- that much
skill and caution would be required to avoid detection; but I employed
myself industriously in enlarging a small hole, till I had secured for
myself a passage for escape in case I should be discovered, and also the
means of free communication with the other parts of the ship.

I need not describe the cabin more than by saying that it appeared to be
a very snug little place. It held both a swinging-cot and a hammock; and
I examined with great curiosity these and other articles of furniture,
as this was the first opportunity which I had had of observing how man
makes himself comfortable. Assuredly his wants are not so few nor his
requirements so simple as ours.

Early in the day the captain came on board with his son, and after he
had given sundry orders on deck, they both descended to the cabin.
Imagine my surprise when, on their entrance, I recognised my old
acquaintance of the Zoological Gardens, the blue-eyed boy and his
father! I instinctively looked, though in vain, to see if they were
followed by Billy and Bob.

Soon afterwards the anchor was weighed, and the vessel began to move. It
was to me a strange and new sensation. I had never before experienced
any motion but that of my own little feet.

Towards evening the motion grew stronger. The vessel heaved up and down,
rocked to and fro; the creaking sounds above grew louder, and were
mingled with a constant splashing noise. Neddy, who had been very merry
and active all day, now on deck, now in the cabin, asking questions,
and examining everything upon which he could lay his hands, appeared now
quite heavy and dull. He complained of headache, and lay down in his
hammock. I thought that the boy was ill. However, he was lively as ever
in the morning.

Our sea life was rather a same one, after the first excitement of
starting was over. Neddy spent some hours every day in the cabin, poring
over things which I found were called books. I could not at first
comprehend why, when his eyes were fixed on the pages which to me seemed
exactly alike, he should sometimes look grave, sometimes merry, and
sometimes laugh outright, as though some one were talking with him out
of the book. When, however, his father read aloud to the boy, or he read
aloud to his father, I could imagine why they were amused, though I
never could find out by what means the book could make itself heard.
I have often snuffed round the volumes, and even touched them with my
whiskers, but they seemed to me dead as clay. It must be some wonderful
talent, possessed only by man, which enables him to hear any voice from
them.

There was one large volume in particular, which Captain Blake called
"Shakespeare," from which he sometimes read extracts to his son. I heard
him say once that this very Shakespeare had been dead for more than two
hundred years. Is it not marvellous that his thoughts, preserved in
leaves of paper in some manner inexplicable to a rat, should survive
himself so long,-- that he should make others both laugh and weep when
he himself laughs and weeps no more?

As may be supposed, I took no great interest in the reading until my ear
was caught one evening by an allusion to my own race in Shakespeare,
"Rats, and mice, and such small deer." We had then a place in the
wondrous volume; this made me all attention, and more than once that
attention was rewarded by hearing of the race of Mus. One mention both
surprised and puzzled me. The rhyme still rests on my memory:

  "But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
  And like a rat without a tail,
    I'll do-- I'll do-- I'll do!"

The _do_, of course, represents _nibble, nibble, nibble_; but the rat
without a tail is of some species of which I had never before heard,
and have certainly never met with.

When Neddy read to his father, it was from a different book; he called
it "History of the French Revolution." It might have been a history of
my race, for it seemed to be all about rats: democ-rats and
aristoc-rats; "doubtless," thought I, "tribes peculiar to France." Most
savage fellows the first seemed to have been-- to our race what tigers
are to cats, still more powerful, bloody, and destructive. I, like
others who jump at conclusions, and do not understand half of what
they hear, had made a ridiculous mistake. My vanity had led me to
over-estimate the importance of my family; but a conversation between
Neddy and his father undeceived me, and made me a sadder and a wiser
rat.

_Neddy._-- "Well, papa, I fancy that we shall have a great deal to see
at St. Petersburg-- palaces, churches, gardens, all sorts of sights! But
what I most want to see is the czar himself, the great autoc-rat of all
the Russias."

I gave such a start at this, that I dreaded for a moment that I had
betrayed my hiding-place. Here was another rat, and one so singular and
so great, that he was thought more worthy to be seen than all St.
Petersburg besides! I really felt my whole frame swelling with pride;
every hair in my whiskers quivered!

"Is he really so powerful, papa, as people say that he is?"

"Very powerful indeed, my boy."

"And he's despotic, is he not? He has no Parliament?"

"No Parliament!" I repeated to myself; "well, that's no great matter in
a country so abounding with other good things! But what a rat of rats
this must be, to be so spoken of and thought of by the lords of
creation!"

"It must be a fine thing to be an autoc-rat, papa, and have no law but
one's own will!"

"It is a giddy elevation, Neddy, which no truly wise man, conscious of
human infirmity, would ever covet to attain."

"Wise man! human infirmity!" exclaimed I. These few words, like a touch
to a bubble, had burst my high-blown ideas of family dignity. It was a
man, then, one of human race, who chose to add rat to his name; and
these democ-rats and aristoc-rats in France-- why, they must be men too,
nothing but men, after all!




CHAPTER XIV.

A TERRIBLE WORD.


When I met my old friend Whiskerandos, it was usually at night, as
moving about by day was dangerous; for who ever showed mercy to a rat,
or even thought of inquiring whether he possessed qualities which might
render him deserving of it?

"How do you like your quarters?" said Whiskerandos to me one starry
night, when all was still upon deck, and, save one sailor on the watch,
all of humankind were sleeping.

"They please me well enough," I replied.

"For my part," said Whiskerandos, "I shall be heartily glad when our
voyage is over; and I am half vexed that I ever led you to make it."

"Why so? We do not fare ill; we have plenty to eat." As I have mentioned
before, this is ever the first consideration with a rat.

"The sailors don't starve," said Whiskerandos more slowly; "yet they
think of adding another dish to their mess."

"Glad to hear it," said I; "you know that I am curious about dishes,
and should like to have my whiskers in a new one."

"Oh! but they won't be contented with your whiskers!" cried my friend,
with a funny, forced laugh.

"What do you mean?" said I quickly.

"Well, I heard Jack and Tom, two of the sailors, talking together to-day
down in the hold; and there was one word of their conversation which,
I own, struck me like the paw of a cat. That word was--"

"What was it?" cried I nervously; for if a hero like Whiskerandos felt
anything approaching to fear, I might be expected to be half-dead with
fright.

He drooped his head for a moment, and uttered one word-- "_rat-pies!_"

I started as though I had seen a tabby pounce down from the rigging!

"'Tis impossible!" I faintly exclaimed; "human beings never, never eat
rats!"

"Oh! I beg your pardon!" replied Whiskerandos, regaining his usual brisk
manner; "don't you remember old Furry telling us that his reason for
quitting China was, that he was afraid of being dished up for the
dinner of some mighty mandarin, whose hair hung in a long tail behind
him? Amongst the lowest classes in France, and the gypsies in England,
we poor rats are known as an article of food; and I have heard that in
the islands of the South Seas we were held in so much esteem, that
'sweet as a rat' passed as a proverb."

"I don't like such compliments!" exclaimed I, beginning to tremble all
over.

"Come, Ratto, you must pluck up a little courage, and show yourself
worthy of the race of Mus! There is never any use in meeting misfortune
half way. To be caught, killed, and put into a pie, is, I grant it,
a serious evil; to be always afraid of being so is another. The first we
may or we may not escape; but the second-- which is perhaps the worse of
the two-- lies in some degree within the power of our own will. We need
not make ourselves wretched before the time, about some event which
never may happen."

Good philosophy this, I believe, but not a little difficult to act upon.
When I have seen the younger members of that race which proudly styles
itself "lords of creation," trembling, shrinking, nay-- I shame to say
it-- even _crying_, at fear of some possible evil, a little
disappointment perhaps, or a little pain, I have thought of Whiskerandos
and the pies, and fancied that reasoning mortals might learn something
even from a rat.

I was so terribly afraid of being caught by the sailors, that I confined
myself more than usual to the cabin, keeping close to the hole that I
had made, that I might always be ready for a start should the blue eyes
ever happen to rest upon me; but those books, those famous books,
happily gave them other occupation.

"Papa," said Neddy to his father one day, "I should rather have gone to
some other place than St. Petersburg, I feel such a dislike to the
Russians."

"Why should you dislike them," said the captain.

"Oh! because they were our enemies so long, and killed so many of our
fine fellows!"

"They were but obeying the orders of their czar-- doing what they
believed to be their duty."

"But they were horribly cruel, papa."

"It would both be ungenerous and unjust to charge upon a whole nation
the crimes of a few individuals. It is singular that one of the most
striking examples of mercy to a foe of which I have ever heard, was
shown by a Russian. The story is given as a fact, and I have pleasure in
relating it, not only from its own touching interest, but from the hope
that it may teach my son what our conduct should be towards those who,
though our foes, are our fellow-creatures still.

"In the time of the first Napoleon, the French invaded Russia, from
whence they were obliged to retreat, suffering the most fearful
hardships, not only from the usual privations of war, but those caused
by famine and the fearful cold of that northern clime. Thousands and
thousands of brave troops perished in this fatal retreat. The splendid
army which had marched into Russia so numerous and strong, melted away
like a snow-ball! The fierce Cossacks hovered around the lessening
bands, cutting off the weary stragglers who, unable to keep up with the
rest, sank down upon the snow to die!

"At this fearful time two poor French officers, separated from their
comrades, helpless and exhausted, sought refuge at the house of a lady,
beseeching her to preserve them from the terrible death with which they
were threatened, either from cold and hunger, or the swords of their
enemies. The lady was a Russian,-- the officers were her foes,-- she had
probably suffered from the devastating march of the French army,-- but
she had the heart of a woman. She dared not conceal the officers in her
own house for fear of her servants and the rage of her countrymen, who
would probably have not only slain the fugitives, but have wreaked their
vengeance also upon her for seeking to protect their enemies. The
Russian lady hid them in a wood, at some little distance from her
dwelling, and thither every night, braving both the danger of discovery
and the peril of being attacked by wolves, did this noble-hearted woman
go alone, to bear food and necessaries to the suffering Frenchmen."

"Oh! papa, just fancy hurrying along the snow, with the sharp winter's
wind cutting like a knife,-- and then perhaps to hear a distant howl,
showing that a wolf was on one's track! Oh! I should not have fancied
those night expeditions!"

"It would have been noble," resumed the captain, "to have ventured thus
for a friend,-- the Russian lady did so for her enemies."

"And were the French officers saved at last?"

"Yes; by freely giving her money as she had freely risked her safety,
after a while the lady contrived the escape of the fugitives beyond the
frontier. When a considerable time had elapsed, a present of a piece of
plate, which she received from France, showed that the officers were not
ungrateful to their preserver."

"She was a generous enemy, papa, and a noble woman. But are not the
common people in Russia very ignorant and bad?"

"Very ignorant I believe they are, but it would be harsh and wrong to
call them very bad. They are cheerful and good-tempered, and even when
intoxicated they do not show the ferocity which disgraces a drunkard in
England."

"But are they not dreadful thieves?"

"They are said to be very skilful in cheating, and singularly dexterous
in picking pockets. But here again it would be unjust to brand a whole
nation with a disgraceful stigma.* I have another true story for you,
Neddy, and this time it shall be of a poor Russian, a messenger, or as
they call him, an Isdavoi.

"An English lady living at St. Petersburg gave five hundred rubles** in
charge to an Isdavoi to deliver to her daughter, who dwelt at some
distance. On the following day the Russian returned, kissed the lady's
hand after the fashion of his country, and said, 'Pardon me, I am
guilty. I cannot tell how it has happened, but I have lost your money,
and cannot find it again. Deal with me as you please.'"

"The poor fellow," continued the captain, "probably expected a severe
flogging, or dismissal from his office, but the lady had no inclination
to punish him with such rigour. Unwilling to ruin the Isdavoi, she
made no mention of his offence, considered the money as gone for ever,
and after a while lost sight of the messenger entirely. After six years
had elapsed he came to her one day with a joyful face, laden with six
hundred rubles, which he brought in the place of those which had been
intrusted to his care. On inquiry it was found that this honest Russian
had for those six years been denying himself every little pleasure, and
by resolute economy had saved up his wages until he had collected about
half of the sum required. He had then married a wife whose feelings of
honour appeared to have been as delicate as his own, for not only her
dower of one hundred rubles was added to his hard-earned savings, but
her little valuables had been sold to make up the full amount of the
money that had been lost!"

"Oh, papa! what honest people! But did the English woman take all their
money!"

"No entreaties on her part could induce the poor Isdavoi to take back
the rubles to save up which had been for so long the object of his life.
The lady, however, generously placed the money in a public bank to
accumulate for the benefit of his children."

"Bravo!" exclaimed Neddy, clapping his hands; "that was just how a lady
should behave; and as for the poor Isda-- what do you call him?-- he was
a fine fellow, and quite worthy to have been an Englishman!"


    [* The materials for my little sketch of Russian manners, &c.,
    have been chiefly drawn from the translation of a work by the
    German traveller Kohl.]

    [** A Russian piece of money.]




CHAPTER XV.

FIRST VIEW OF ST. PETERSBURG.


"Cronstadt! Cronstadt!" I heard the shout from the deck one evening when
the sun was going down, and his red disk seemed resting on the heaving
waters, while to the east the strong fortifications stood clearly
defined against the sky, bathed in his glowing light. Being quite alone
in the cabin, for every human being was on deck, I was taking my survey
of the place from the open port-hole before me.

It was a very gay scene upon which I looked. Not even on the Thames,
our own river, have I seen a greater variety of craft. Steam-boats, and
sailing-boats, schooners, cutters, brigs and gondolas,-- paddled along
the water, or spread snowy wings to the breeze. I gazed upon them, and
upon the formidable batteries, bristling with guns, which defend the
"water-gate of St. Petersburg" as Cronstadt has been called, till the
shadows of night fell around, and I could without risk of observation,
join Whiskerandos in the hold.

He was in company with another rat, of rather a foreign appearance.

"My friend Dwishtswatshiksky here," said he, "tells me that we shall
soon arrive at the capital of Russia."

"I am very glad to hear it!" cried I; "I long to be again on shore. If
we had any means of landing here, I should not care if I stopped short
of St. Petersburg." I had not forgotten the pies.

"You would doubtless, little brother, from natural association, like to
visit Rat Island," said the stranger with the unpronounceable name.

"Rat Island!" exclaimed Whiskerandos and I at the same moment.

"That fortified island opposite to Cronstadt, lying across the bay upon
which the place stands, and giving to its waters the appearance of a
lake, was called Ratusare, or Rat's Island in the days of old."

"Not the only Rat's Island in the world," observed Whiskerandos;
"we have one off the coast of Devon."

"And doubtless it still bears that name," said the Russian rat, with a
graceful wave of his whiskers. "But things, alas! were altered here when
the warriors of Peter the Great drove the Swedes from this island in
1703. The vanquished left behind them nothing but a great kettle, which
in default of other trophy the Russians reared in triumph on a pole; so
the name of the place has been changed since that time, and Rat Island
is called Kettle Island."

"It is fortunate for us, sir rat," said I, (I did not venture to attempt
to call him by his name,) "it is fortunate for us that before landing
in a strange country, we have met with a friend so intelligent and
well-informed as you appear to be."

He made me so many polite assurances of the gratification which he felt
in making my acquaintance, the pleasure which it would give him to
conduct us to the house in which he usually quartered in the city, and
the pride which he would feel in showing us everything which he could
hope would interest us, that we blunt English rats felt almost
abashed at his excessive courtesy. He only followed the manners of his
country, where the poorest labourer is quite overwhelming in his
politeness.

Dwishtswatshiksky (we soon shortened his name to Wisky) was as good as
his word. We kept close while the passengers landed at a magnificent
quay at St. Petersburg; while the rapid tread of feet, loud voices,
shouts and hurried movements, were heard above, not a rat ventured forth
from his hiding-place. Alas! with every precaution, when we mustered
before landing, our numbers were sadly diminished, though of rat pies we
had heard no more. In darkness we a second time made a suspension bridge
of the rope which bound the vessel to the shore, and with delight I
found myself again upon land, a free denizen of earth, no longer cooped
up in the narrow, dangerous prison of a vessel.

Wisky led the way, closely followed by Whiskerandos. They moved on so
fast that I was in danger of losing sight of my guides, so apt was I to
linger on my way to look at the wonders around me. It is a beautiful
city, St. Petersburg; at least so it seemed to me in the moonlight. With
its streets of palaces, its lively green roofs, sky-blue cupolas dotted
with stars, gilt spires, columns, statues, and obelisks, it is a place
not soon to be forgotten. If I might venture to suggest a fault, it is
that all looks too perfectly new. Antiquity gives added interest to
beauty,-- at least such is the opinion of a rat. That which looks as
if it had risen but yesterday, appears as though it might fall
to-morrow.

"Would you believe it," said Wisky, "a great part of this splendid city
is built upon piles! The foundation alone of yonder great church cost a
million of rubles! There is a constant fight going on here between water
and the efforts of man. To look at the fine buildings around us, you
would say that man had secured the victory. He has thrown over the river
a variety of bridges, stone, suspension, and pontoon, that can be taken
to pieces at pleasure, to connect the numerous islands together, and has
raised the most stately edifices on a trembling bog! But the water is
not conquered after all! I have known houses burst asunder from the
foundations giving way. I have seen a palace separated from the very
steps that led up to its door. And in spring, when the snow melts which
has been collecting for months, the horses can scarcely flounder along
through the rivers of mud in the streets!"

"Does the water ever rise very high?" inquired Whiskerandos. This was no
idle question on his part; he made it as a practical rat, who knew what
it was to live in a cellar, and had no desire to be drowned.

"Ah, my dear brother!" replied the Russian rat, "many stories are still
told of the fearful inundation which happened in 1824. Impelled by a
furious west wind, the waters then rose to a fearful height, streamed
through the streets, floated the carriages, made boats of the carts,
nay, lifted some wooden houses right from the ground, and sent them
floating about, with all their inhabitants in them, like so many
men-of-war! Horses were drowned, and so, alas! were rats in terrible
numbers. The trees in the squares were crowded with men, clinging to
them like bees when they cluster! It is said that thousands of poor
human beings perished, and that the inundation cost the city more than a
hundred millions of rubles!"

"Well, St. Petersburg is a splendid place!" cried I; "but after all,
the merry banks of the Thames, and dear dingy old London for me!"




CHAPTER XVI.

A RUSSIAN KITCHEN.


Under the guidance of Wisky we took up our abode in a Russian house.
House did I call it!-- if ever there was a palace this was one. We
established ourselves in the kitchen; a warm, comfortable place we found
it, where we had much opportunity for observation, both of the denizens
of the place and their various occupations.

"It seems to me, Wisky," said I, on the night following that of our
arrival, "that there is no end to the number of servants that pass in
and out of this dwelling! Who is that fellow in the blue cloth caftan,
fastened under his left arm with three silver buttons, and girded round
the waist with a coloured silk scarf? His fine bushy beard seems to
match the fur with which his high four-cornered cap is trimmed."

"That is the Tartar coachman," replied Wisky; "a dashing fellow is he,
and a bold driver through the crowded streets of the city. The pretty
youths yonder are the postilions. Young and small they must be, to suit
the taste of a Russian noble. The worse for them, poor boys, as they are
less able to endure the bitter cold of a winter's night, when, if they
drop asleep on their horses, they are never likely to awake any more!"

"And are their masters actually cruel enough," I exclaimed, "to expose
them to such suffering and risk?"

"My much esteemed brother," replied the Russian rat, "doubtless your
clear mind has already come to the conclusion that selfishness is
inherent in the human race. A young noble is at a ball; must he quit its
bright enchantments, and the society of the fair whom he admires,
because a bearded coachman is freezing without? A beauteous lady,
wrapped in ermine and velvet, is weeping in the theatre over the woes of
some imaginary heroine; would you have her dry her tearful eyes, and
leave the scene of touching interest and elegant excitement, because
icicles are hanging from the locks of her little postilion, and his
head is gradually sinking on his breast, as the fatal sleep steals over
him? Selfish!-- yes, all human beings are selfish!"

"There are exceptions to that rule," thought I, for I remembered the
stories which I had heard in the cabin; and I also recollected the
conduct of their narrator, Captain Blake, towards the starving little
thief in London.

"I have been trying," said Whiskerandos, "to count the servants in this
house; but no sooner do I think that my task is done, than in comes some
new one, speaking some different language, wearing some different
costume, and puts all my calculations to fault."

"It would puzzle even one possessing the talents of my brother to count
the number of the servants here," replied Wisky. "Why, even I, who,
before my visit to England, spent months amongst the household, can
scarcely number them now. To begin with the inmates of a higher rank,
who never appear in the kitchen, there are the French governess and the
German tutor, to polish up the minds of the children, and the family
physician to look after their health. Then there are the superintendent
of accounts, the secretary, the dworezki-- he who has charge of the
whole establishment, the valets of the lord, the valets of the lady,
the overseer of the children, the footmen, the buffetshik or butler, the
table-decker, the head groom, the coachman and postilions of the lord,
the coachman and postilions of the lady,--"

"What!" cried Whiskerandos, "are their carriages so small that they will
not hold two, or are the grandees afraid of quarrelling, that husband
and wife cannot travel together!"

"Surely, Sir Wisky," exclaimed I, "you must have come to the end of your
list!"

"Pardon me, little brother, not yet. There are the attendants on the
boys and on the tutor, the porter, the head cook and the under cook, the
baker, brewer, the waiting-maids and wardrobe-keeper of the lady, the
waiting-maid who attends the French governess, the nurses that take care
of the children, and the nurses that once took care of the children, the
kapell-meister or head musician, and all the men of his band!"

"Well!" cried I, much amused, "at any rate a Russian noble must be well
served. If he calls for his shoes, I suppose that half-a-dozen servants
start off in a race to fetch them, and knock their heads together in
their eagerness to get them!"

A valet at this moment entered the kitchen, where, secure in our
hiding-place, we were watching all that passed.

"Where's Ivan?" said he, "where's Ivan?" The coachman, who was playing
at draughts with the head groom, looked up for an instant, then silently
made his move.

"My lady's a-fainting, and my lord's calling for water! Where's Ivan,
I say? 'tis his business to fetch it."

"There's Ivan," said the cook, pointing contemptuously to a sandy-haired
figure fast asleep under the table.

"Get up, ye lazy fellow!" exclaimed the valet; "my lady's fainting,
my lord's calling for water; take a glass of it on a silver salver
directly."

Ivan got up slowly, yawned, stretched himself, rubbed his eyes; then,
taking a tumbler off the dresser, he leisurely filled it with water.

"And where am I to get the silver salver?" said he.

"That's in keeping of Matwei the buffetshik," observed the table-decker.

"And where is Matwei to be found?"

"Here you, Vatka," pursued the valet, turning to another attendant, who
was busy over his basin of kwas, "go you to Matwei and tell him that we
want a silver salver on which to carry a tumbler, for my lady's fainting
up stairs, and my lord is calling for water."

A loud ring from above was heard, as if to enforce the order. "Sei
tshas! sei tshas!-- directly, directly!" called out Vatka; but he
nevertheless finished his kwas, and wiped his mouth before he went to
Matwei the butler to procure the silver salver on which Ivan the footman
would carry the tumbler of water which Paul the valet had been ordered
to bring.

Before all was ready another messenger came to tell Ilia the bearded
coachman to put to the horses, for the lady was ready for her drive.
It was evident that she had managed to recover from her fainting fit
without the aid of the glass of water,-- a happy thing for one who had
the misfortune to keep fifty or sixty servants.

Wisky laughed at my look of surprise. "I believe that one pair of
hands," said he, "often serve better than a dozen. The Russian proverb
says that 'directly' means _to-morrow morning_, and 'this minute' _this
day week_."

With quiet night came our feasting-time, and when the kitchen was
deserted by the crowds of servants, Whiskerandos, Wisky, and I, crept
softly out of our hole, provided with pretty sharp appetites for our
meal.

"I am curious to taste that liquor which you call kwas," said I; "Vatka
seemed to relish it exceedingly."

"Relish it, brother! I should think so!" exclaimed Wisky. "Kwas is to a
Russian what water is to a fish; rich or poor could hardly bear
existence without it."

"Not bad at all," said I, dipping my whiskers carefully into a bowl that
had been set aside by the cook.

"Mind you don't tumble in, old fellow!" cried Whiskerandos, "and be
drowned in kwas as I have heard that a duke once was drowned in wine."

"And what may this kwas be made of?" inquired I, after another approving
sip.

"I ought to know, little brother," replied Wisky, "for many and many a
time have I seen it brewed. A pailful of water is poured into an earthen
jar, into which are shaken two pounds of barley-meal, half a pound of
salt, and a pound and a half of honey. The whole is then placed in an
oven with a moderate fire, and constantly stirred. It is left for a time
to settle, and in the morning the clear liquor is poured off. In a week
it is in the highest perfection."

"I wonder that kwas is not made in England," observed I; "but honey is
not so plentiful there."

"Sugar would make a good substitute, I should think," said Wisky; "the
beverage would not then be an expensive one. But here is our beloved
Whiskerandos busy with his shtshee, the dish of all dishes in this
country, that which nothing, I believe, could ever drive from the table
or the heart of a Russian. When in a foreign land, it is said, it is not
the remembrance of native hills or plains, or the tender delights of
home, that draws tears into an exile's eyes, but the loss of his beloved
shtshee, the favourite dish of his childhood."

"Leave a little for me!" I cried eagerly to Whiskerandos, who had nearly
finished, by dint of steady perseverance, a portion which had been left
in a plate. "Why," I added, as I tasted the liquid, "this seems to me
simply cabbage soup!"

"Whatever my brother may think of it," observed Wisky, dipping his
whiskers into the nearly empty plate, "he is now tasting that which
forms the principal article of food of forty millions of human beings!
Better live without bread than without shtshee."

"And the ingredients?" said I, for I always delighted to pick up any
scrap of information interesting to a rat.

"There are almost as many ways of making shtshee as of cooking potatoes.
I have seen six or seven cabbages chopped up small, half a pound of
butter, a handful of salt, and two pounds of minced mutton added, the
whole mixed up with a can or two of kwas. But it is now time, brothers,
for us to sally forth. I must do the honours of this our city, and show
my illustrious guests whatever I may deem worthy of their observation."




CHAPTER XVII.

A RAMBLE OVER ST. PETERSBURG.


"What a nation of painters Russia must be!" exclaimed I, as we quietly
moved through the silent streets. Every shop had a picture before it,
expressive of the occupation of its owner. Here was a tempting board
covered with representations of every loaf and roll that a painter's
fancy could devise; there a tallow-chandler did his best to make candles
appear picturesque. Even from the second and third floors hung portraits
of fiddles, and flutes, boots, shoes, caps, bonnets, and bears' grease,
and on one board a sad likeness of a rat in a trap made us quicken our
steps as we passed it.

We moved through a deserted market. Here whole lanes are devoted to the
sale of a single kind of article. There is the stocking row, the shoe
row, the hat row, at which it appeared that a whole nation might have
provided covering for head and for feet.

"I wish, dear brother," said Wisky, "that your visit had been in the
season of winter. I could then have led you to a market which strangers
must indeed have surveyed with surprise. You would then have seen
beasts, fishes, and fowls, all frozen so hard that the hatchet is
required to divide them. You would have passed through rows of dead
sheep standing upon their feet, motionless oxen that seemed ready to
low, whole flocks of white hares appearing actually in motion, reindeer
and elks on whose mighty horns the pigeons fearlessly perch!"

"The cold must then be fearful in winter," said I.

"Oh! the houses are kept so warm with stoves that there but little
suffering is known. But woe to the men who loiter in the streets when
they are paved with ice and glistening with snow! The passengers run for
their lives, with the sharp wind rushing after them, as a cat after a
mouse! Men cover even their faces with fur; but should an unlucky nose
peep out from the warm shelter, the bitter frost often bites it on a
sudden. "Father-- father! thy nose!" thus will one stranger salute
another as he passes; and if not speedily rubbed with snow, the nose of
the poor passenger is lost! Men's very eyes are sometimes frozen up, and
they have no resource but to beg admission at the first door to which
they can grope, to unthaw their glued lashes at a stove!"

"All this is very curious," observed I, "but still I have little desire
to witness it. The long winter must be dreary indeed!"

"The Russians are lively fellows," observed Wisky, "and instead of
grumbling at dark skies and piercing blasts, they make merry where
others would murmur. When winter must perforce be their companion, they
oblige the grim old giant to add to their amusements. You should see the
gay sledges as they dash at full speed over the frozen surface of the
River Neva! and the ice-mountains which the people raise, and down which
they glide swift as lightning, laughing, shouting, and singing! I have
seen snow piled up to the very roof of a house; and down its steep
slope, merely seated on a mat, a large merry party glide gaily to the
ground. But," he cried, suddenly interrupting himself, "have a care
where you tread, my brother, or you will be down into that ice-pit!
Never was there such a place as St. Petersburg for these,-- no large
house is deemed complete without one. If Russians _cannot_ be without
abundance of ice in winter, they show that they _will_ not be without it
during their brief hot summer,-- the quantities consumed could scarcely
be believed!"

Whiskerandos, who had been lingering behind us, in a tempting quarter of
the market, now scampered up and joined us. We were passing at the time
a large building, and I could not avoid looking up in wonder at its
strange columns. Of these there were no fewer than a hundred, and the
capital of each was formed by three cannon, with their round open mouths
yawning down into the street.

"This," said our guide, following the direction of my eyes, "is the
Spass Preobrashenskoi Sabor; a church greatly adorned with the spoils of
nations vanquished by Russia."

"Well," said Whiskerandos, who in the course of his adventurous life had
both seen cannon and learnt their use, "perhaps those big instruments of
war are just as well up there, where they are seen, and not heard or
felt. Man is the only creature, I fancy, who, not content with what
powers of destruction nature has given him, cuts down trees from the
forest, digs iron from the mine, sets the furnace glowing, and the
engine working, to fashion means of killing his brothers in a wholesale
manner."

"Yonder," said Wisky, pointing with his nose, "are the father of the
Russian fleet and the grandmother of the houses of St. Petersburg."

"Let's see them by all means!" I exclaimed; "I have viewed plenty of
Russian ships and Russian houses, and I have a lively curiosity to see
the father and the grandmother of so famous a family!"

Wisky rapidly led the way to a hut, into which with little difficulty we
entered, for locks and bars do not keep out rats, nor surly porters
refuse them admission.

"Is this the father of the Russian fleet!" exclaimed Whiskerandos rather
contemptuously, running, audacious rat that he was, along the edge of a
boat about thirty feet long. "Is Russia a child, that she should amuse
herself with a toy, and keep a big boat under a roof where there is no
water to float it, as if it were some delicate jewel!"

"On no jewel in the Emperor's crown," replied Wisky, "would a Russian
look with the same interest as on that poor boat. Peter the Great helped
to fashion it himself! He found his country without a navy, and he gave
her one; he laboured himself as a common ship-wright: and now, as a
mighty oak springs from a single acorn, in that one boat his people view
with reverence "The father of the Russian fleet."

"And where is the grandmother of the houses?" inquired I.

"That is hard by," replied Wisky. "It is nothing but a small wooden
cottage which Peter built for himself by the Neva, before a single
street stretched across the dreary bog upon which he founded this city
of palaces!"

And so we rambled on, light-hearted rats that we were, picking up scraps
here and there, and exchanging observations, till a faint blush in the
eastern sky warned us that it was time to go home. Before we reached the
house already criers were abroad in the streets, screaming, "Boots from
Casan!"-- "Pictures from Moscow!"-- "Flowers, fine flowers!" as they
wandered on, carrying their wares on their heads. Fierce-looking
fellows, with long shaggy hair and beards, wrapped up in skins were
passing about, exchanging good-natured greetings, strangely in contrast
with their appearance. "Good-day, brother! how goes it? what is your
pleasure? how can I serve you?" Smiling, bowing, baring their rough
heads to each other, these poor Russians appeared the very pictures of
politeness shrouded in sheepskin. But remembering that even amongst the
most civilized nations of the world, rats are considered as quite beyond
the pale of courtesy, and that the most good-natured Musjik in this city
would have thought nothing of hitting one of us over with his shoe, we
thought it better to retreat while our skins were whole, and regain our
comfortable quarters in the kitchen.




CHAPTER XVIII.

HOW WE WERE TRANSPORTED.


It was my intention, as well as that of Whiskerandos, after hearing of
the cheerfulness of a Russian winter, and the comfort preserved in the
houses, to remain to witness the ice-mountains, the frozen Neva, and,
above all, the wonderful market which Wisky had described to us on that
night.

Our intentions, however, were frustrated, and our projects of amusement
defeated by an incident which suddenly altered the whole course of our
affairs.

Whiskerandos, who was of a very bold and independent disposition, cared
not to place himself constantly under the guidance of his Russian
companion. He made forays by himself into the streets, moon or no
moon, it was all one to him. He brought us back accounts of many
singular adventures,-- how he had been seen by a dog, chased by a cat,
and nearly run over by a drosky, the name given to the vehicles which in
St. Petersburg take the place of our London cabs.

"Have a care, brother, have a care! Even the brave may dare too much,
and the fortunate venture once too often!" with such exclamations as
these our courteous Russian rat would listen to the tales of such
hair-breadth escapes.

The effect of his words upon me was to render me cautious,-- timid
perhaps you will call it. The only motives which usually roused me to
encounter danger, were hunger, or overpowering curiosity. I liked to see
all, hear all, and know all, and picked up scraps of general information
with the same relish that I would have picked up scraps of cheese.

Once Whiskerandos came home in high spirits. He had made such a
discovery, found such treasures,-- been in the very place where of all
others a rat might rejoice in boundless content.

Directly behind the Exchange he had found a large open space, fenced
round with iron railing, which, while keeping out man, offered
everywhere a door of welcome to rats. Here, protected by nothing but
tarpaulin, was collected a quantity of goods, both those which had been
imported into Russia, and those with which she paid back from her own
productions the contributions of the world.

"Oh, the mountains of tallow which I saw there!" exclaimed Whiskerandos,
executing a somerset in the air, in the excess of his admiration and
delight.

"There may well be mountains, brother," observed Wisky, "since, besides
the quantities which she uses herself, Russia is said to export every
year about _two hundred and fifty millions of pounds_ of tallow, of
which above one half is shipped from St. Petersburg."

"Two hundred and fifty millions!" I exclaimed, almost breathless with
amazement, "why, surely that is enough to light up the whole world, and
feast every rat that is in it! I would give anything to see the place
where such glorious mountains are to be found?"

"Trust yourself with me to-morrow night, and I will guide you to the
place," said Whiskerandos.

Now commenced a conflict in my mind, caution pulling me one way,
curiosity the other, while a discussion took place between my comrades,
Wisky backing caution, Whiskerandos curiosity,-- and the English rat won
the day.

So that night off we two scampered together, and without accident or
adventure reached the space at the back of the Exchange. Truly I was in
a world of wonders! I actually revelled in everything that can charm the
palate or the nose of a rat! Here was the division for Russian
imports,-- various and curious were they. There were chests of tea from
China, coffee from Arabia, sugar from the West Indies, and English
cotton goods, bales on bales piled up to a marvellous height. There
was a quantity of tobacco, heaps of cheese, spices of all sorts and
kinds. Now we came upon the odour of cinnamon or cloves; then the strong
perfume of musk betrayed an importation from India.

No wonder that the hours passed unheeded while we lingered in this
wonderful place! We passed on to the portion of the area devoted to
Russian exports, and here we were, if possible, still more delighted!
All the articles which Bright-eyes had mentioned as coming from Russia
were here; we were bewildered amongst heaps of furs, piles of leather,
barrels of tallow, and prodigious quantities of corn! Morn was breaking,
indeed, but we could not tear ourselves away, till the sounds of life,
and the signs of motion around us, alarmed me with the idea that it was
too late to retreat.

"Let's bury ourselves in this corn-sack," cried I, "we can sleep here
very well during the day, and recommence our explorations after dark."

Whiskerandos acceded to my proposition. Quiet we kept, very quiet.
Noisier the world seemed to grow, till at length voices were heard so
alarmingly near, that I crouched closer to my companion in terror!

Then-- oh! the horrible sensation which I experienced,-- never shall I
forget it! I felt that our sack was roughly pushed by some one, then
suddenly lifted on high!

"We are lost!" I gasped to Whiskerandos. Then another sort of motion
succeeded, accompanied by a heavy rumbling sound, like that of the
rolling wheel of a truck. Every hair of mine quivered with fear!

"Whiskerandos! oh, Whiskerandos! if they should be carrying us to a
mill!-- if we should be ground into powder between two great stones!"

"Be quiet and never despair," was the answer of the bold-hearted rat.

I believe that that terrible journey did not last long, but to me the
time appeared an age! Every turn of the grating wheel beneath me sent a
pang of anguish through my frame! At last the truck, if such it were,
stopped; in a few minutes the sack was again rudely moved, carried
aloft, and then tumbled, with its living contents, down-- down-- we
could not tell where!

What a shock it gave me, that tumble! I lay for some seconds quite
stunned. My first impulse, when I recovered a little, was bitterly to
bewail my condition, and to reproach him who had brought me into it.

"Oh that I had been content with my kwas and my shtshee! Oh that I had
never left the kitchen! that I had never ventured forth with a reckless
companion, who would, I believe, play at hide and seek with a cat, or
nibble at the pocket of a rat-catcher!"

My tone was, I knew, both peevish and provoking; and many a brown rat,
in the position of my companion, would have stopped my doleful squeaking
at once by giving me something to squeak for. But Whiskerandos, whatever
were his faults, was above that mean one of quarrelling with those who
found them out, or attempting to screen and defend them.

"Ratto, I am sorry that I have led you into trouble," said he. "I wish
that I could suffer alone for my self-will and imprudence. But since no
regrets can recall the past, let us not make our miseries greater by
reproaches and dissension between those who may soon die, as they have
lived, together."

His mildness quite overcame any feeling of bitterness in my heart;
and hope revived as some time elapsed without fresh cause for alarm
occurring.

"I wonder where we are!" exclaimed I, shaking myself into a more easy
position.

"I fancy that I hear the creaking of a windlass!" cried Whiskerandos.

"And the flapping of canvass!" added I. "And I smell tar."

"A strong odour of tar! Depend upon it, we are down in the hold of a
ship!"

"Ha! that's the ripple of water! she moves,-- she moves!"

We were again afloat on the waters!




CHAPTER XIX.

A STORM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.


"Farewell St. Petersburg, stately city! with thy flat green roofs, and
star-spangled domes! Farewell merry-hearted, sandy-haired Russians,
bearded Tartars, gay Circassians,-- never may we behold you again!
Farewell kwas and shtshee, and all the luxuries for too brief a time
enjoyed! Where are we going now,-- where!"

Such were the complaints which I was wont to pour out during the long
tedious voyage which succeeded. Whiskerandos never grumbled, it was not
in his nature; he quietly fed on his corn without uttering one
melancholy word: but I suspected that he, like myself, associated
sailors with rat pies; and to hear any one approach the hold, drove me
almost wild with terror.

That was a horrible voyage! A fearful tempest came on before the vessel
readied the place of her destination, whatever that might be. The winds
whistled and raged, and the ship reeled and plunged like a restive
horse; and again and again torrents of salt water came sweeping down
into the hold! Then, as the furious storm continued, the very seams of
the ship seemed to open like pores, to let in the sea, which was
knocking and raging without for admittance, till at length the hold
became like a ditch, which we rats could not cross but by swimming!

Then the pumps were set to work-- I could hear the men toiling at them
day and night; yet the water gained on them notwithstanding their
efforts. There were tremendous noises on deck; I fancied once or twice
that I could distinguish human cries; and what with the constant
splashing of the water as the vessel rolled heavily from side to side,
and the bumping and thumping of some casks that had got loose, and were
smashing against one another, and the shouting, and the roaring of wind
and waves, there was enough to stun and terrify any creature, be he
quadruped or biped!

Such of the corn as remained in our sack was becoming so soft from salt
water that it had acquired the consistence of a pudding. But we had now
no heart even to eat!

We had so often heard the captain's voice raised to give loud orders,
that we had ceased to pay any particular attention to them, little
dreaming that any would concern us further than as they regarded the
safety of the vessel. But at length the result of an order to lighten
the ship was speedily felt in the hold! Our sack (for we still made it
our hiding-place) was suddenly lifted with others; and before we had
time even to guess what was intended, splash we went into the sea!

Ugh! how the water bubbled in our ears! What frantic efforts we made to
free ourselves from the sack! Nor were those efforts without success,
for we had long ago gnawed the string which fastened its mouth: it
opened with the motion of the waves, and corn, rats and all, floated
upon the surface of the raging billows!

Down in two seconds went the corn, swallowed up by the sea; still we
struggled, drowning rats that we were, to save ourselves by desperate
swimming. Of course our strength must soon have been exhausted, and the
mighty green waves must have swept us to destruction, had not a barrel,
thrown out from the ship, been happily floating near us!

Whiskerandos saw this little island of hope. As for me, I was too much
frightened and confused to look around me; but I instinctively followed
where he led, and soon found myself, shivering, shaking, dripping with
wet, and looking as wretched as a rat can look, on the floating barrel
beside my friend!

How we shook our glistening sides, and shuddered and gazed
disconsolately round us on the wide waste of waters, lashed into long
streaks of angry foam! Alas! there was no land in sight; but then the
white mist rested on the horizon, which shut out the distant view.

"If we are not drowned we shall be starved!" exclaimed I, very
piteously, to Whiskerandos. Alas! our barrel was empty.

Oh! the misery endured that day, and the terrible night which succeeded!
We had no resource but to gnaw at the tasteless wood. We were surrounded
with water, yet perishing with thirst! pinched by hunger, without hope
of relief! Better to have been drowned at once; better to have fallen by
the paw of a mouser, or to have been caught like my brothers in a trap,
than to be dying thus by inches on a barrel, tossed in the midst of the
sea!

But with the gray morning hope dawned! We perceived that our little
island had drifted near to some shore. The waves were now much more
quiet, and leapt on the beach with a pleasant murmur, and strove to roll
on, each farther than the other, like children merrily racing together.

"Could we not swim to the shore?" said Whiskerandos.

But I recoiled from the dangerous attempt. "No, no; some wave will roll
the barrel on the beach," I replied; "no more struggling in the water
for me!"

And the waves, bearing the barrel on their green backs, seemed often
ready to land it safely on shore, but each time changed their minds,
and kept it bobbing up and down, while they retired back with a grating
noise over the pebbles, as if mocking our distress and impatience.

"We are farther off now than we were ten minutes ago," said
Whiskerandos. "Perhaps the tide is on the turn. Pluck up a brave heart,
and let's dash in like rats!" and he plunged fearlessly into the water.

But for the sharp spur of hunger, I fear that I should have left him to
make the bold attempt alone; but, famished as I was, I resolved to swim
for my life. With a sudden effort I sprang into the waves; and so,
following in the wake of my companion, I struggled in safety to the
shore!

Oh! the delight of feeling dry ground again!-- of standing once more on
the firm, solid earth! Never, never again, I firmly resolved, would I
venture in any vessel, or trust my life to the mercy of the billows that
had so nearly accomplished our destruction.




CHAPTER XX.

CATCH HIM-- DEAD OR ALIVE!


We made a hasty breakfast off a star-fish that we found stranded on the
beach; but this rather increased our painful thirst, and to find some
means of quenching it we hurried inland at the utmost speed which our
weakened powers could command. We had not run far before we came to a
large house.

"There is sure to be a supply of water here," said Whiskerandos. "Let us
explore the place."

"I fancy that I hear a dripping!" I cried eagerly, as we approached the
door of the back-yard.

The door was indeed closed, and sharp bits of broken bottles, on the top
both of it and the brick wall, rendered it impossible to climb over
them; but I-- my wit quickened by my painful thirst-- discovered in a
moment that, at the bottom of the door, part of the wood had been broken
away, either by time or perhaps the teeth of our brethren, leaving an
opening just large enough for a rat easily to creep through.

I was not one to venture on an unexplored region, so I looked anxiously
through into the yard.

At the opposite side of it there was-- oh, joyful sight!-- a pump, from
which drop by drop fell, with a most inviting sound, into a trough
below. And yet, faint with thirst as I was, the place had an aspect
which alarmed me, and made me fear to venture across the yard. Not far
from the pump, and between it and us, was an open green door, which led
into a garden or pleasure-ground, and though I could see nothing to
alarm me, my quick ear distinguished suspicious sounds in that
direction.

"In with you!" exclaimed Whiskerandos, impatiently. "Don't keep me here,
dying with thirst at the hole."

I drew back with a gesture of caution. "Whiskerandos," said I, "I don't
like the green door open yonder. If any one came through it into the
yard and cut off our retreat!"

"Nothing dare, nothing win!" he exclaimed; "I am thirsty and I must have
water:" and, hurrying through the little opening which I have mentioned,
he was soon eagerly drinking at the trough.

Hesitating, doubting, I was about to follow him, and already my nose was
through the hole, when a sight, at the remembrance of which I shudder
still, made me withdraw it instanter. Through the fatal green door near
the pump, a young man, with his hands in his pockets and his cap cocked
on one side, followed by several dogs, leisurely sauntered into the
yard.

I saw in an instant that for Whiskerandos escape was impossible. He had
the whole length of the yard to cross; his foes were far nearer to him
than me. His only chance was that of not being perceived; but this in
broad daylight, with the noses of three or four dogs not two yards from
him, was a miserable chance indeed. The dogs instantly found him out,
and were at him in a moment. My unhappy companion darted behind the
trough, quick as a flash of lightning. I felt assured that he would
there bravely defend himself to the last; but what could one poor rat
do, albeit the boldest of his race, against such terrible odds!

"Ha! a rat!" exclaimed the young man, looking quite amused and pleased--
barbarian that he was!-- at the prospect of seeing a poor defenceless
creature torn to pieces before him. "Ha! Carlo, give it him!-- shake him
by the ear!" The young man actually laughed aloud with delight!

I could not see Whiskerandos, for the trough was between us: I fancied
his look of fierce despair as he faced the foes from whom he could not
flee, and from whom he could expect no pity. He had evidently got into
some corner, from which the dogs could not easily dislodge him; for they
stood yelping and barking, showing their white teeth, with their greedy
eyes all turned to one point.

So the human savage came to their aid. Having taken up a stick which
happened to be lying on the ground near, while the dogs retired a step
to allow their master to give his ungenerous assistance, he pushed the
stick behind the trough, and by its means dragged poor Whiskerandos from
his last place of refuge!

"Ha! the fellow's dead! I must have killed him with the stick!" cried
the young man; and stooping down he lifted up the poor rat by the tail,
and held him aloft to examine him more closely, while the dogs leapt and
barked around, eager to tear their victim limb from limb!

"He's been in the wars-- lost his ears!" laughed the young man, still
holding the stiffened body on high by the tail. "I'm sorry I poked him
with the stick; he'd have given us some sport with the dogs!" Did ever
such a heartless monster walk on two feet before!

"Oh! Whiskerandos! Whiskerandos!" thought I, as, almost rooted to the
spot with horror, I stood gazing on the pitiful sight. "I am glad that
you are dead! oh, I am glad that you are dead! bravest, noblest of rats,
they can torture you no more!"

The dogs showed by their impatient movements that they considered that
their master took a great deal too much time in his survey of a lifeless
rat I suspect that he only did so to tease and tantalize them, for
suddenly raising Whiskerandos still higher, to give more force to his
fling, he cried, "Now Carlo-- Rover-- Caesar-- who's first!" and swung
the body away towards the door behind which I stood a trembling,
shuddering spectator!

But lo and behold! no sooner did the seemingly dead rat touch the
ground, than he found life, strength, and speed in a moment! The dogs
were after him like the wind, but the very force of the fling had given
him a good start, and he was through the opening under the door,
knocking me over as he pushed past, almost before I could recall my
scattered senses sufficiently to understand that he was actually alive!
I have some remembrance of the young man's exclamation of amazement as
the dead rat found his feet and disappeared,-- his shout, and the yells
of the disappointed dogs,-- but I recollect no more, for I heard no
more. Whiskerandos and I had a fair start, and we made the best of it,
and scampered off as rats scamper for their lives. Well for us that that
door was locked!-- well for us that there were broken bits of bottles on
the top! well for us that the hole was too small for the passage of any
thing larger than a rat!

I do not think that we were pursued: perhaps the unlocking of the door
took our foe too much time, perhaps he did not think it worth while to
hunt down such ignoble game, or perhaps he considered (but this I much
doubt) that the cleverness which a rat had shown in making so
extraordinary an escape, entitled him to a little indulgence. But we ran
as though a whole pack of hounds were behind us; we never paused to take
breath or look behind us, till we had buried ourselves in a corn-field.

"And are you really unhurt?" I exclaimed, when we stopped at last,
panting and exhausted.

"Unhurt? yes!-- only bruised by the fling,-- it was well that the yard
was not paved with stones."

"And you were really alive and had your senses while that savage was
holding you up with your head hanging down! Why, you looked as like a
dead rat as ever I saw one!"

"I was wide awake all the time," said Whiskerandos, "but I knew that it
was my only chance to feign death. This has been a narrow escape, Ratto;
I was never so near being torn to pieces before, not even in my fight
with the ferret!"

"I'll never go near a house in daylight again!" exclaimed I, still
trembling with excitement and terror. Whiskerandos appeared to feel the
effects of the fright less than I did, though his danger had been so
much greater.

"It is your thirst that makes you so nervous," said he; "you have not
yet recovered from our voyage on the barrel. There seems to be a wet
ditch around this field; come and moisten your nose in the water."

The relief was certainly great, and as I drank the cool liquid, I felt
my spirits revive.

"I wonder where we are now!" said I.

"I have no doubt on the subject,-- we are in old England again! The look
of the house, the hedges, the fields, that young fellow--"

"Oh! don't speak of him!" I exclaimed, "cruel, barbarous monster that
he is!"

"You are too hard on him," said Whiskerandos, in his own frank,
good-humoured manner. "He may be no worse than the rest of his species,
who think that there is no harm in being cruel to a rat. I suspect that
even your blue-eyed friend would shout with joy to see a cat worry a
mouse!"

"I don't believe it!" I replied indignantly; "a generous and noble heart
can never take pleasure in seeing pain inflicted on a poor defenceless
creature!"

"Ah, but--" Whiskerandos commenced, but our conversation was suddenly
interrupted by a little squeak from the hedge close behind us.

"I think that I know that voice!" exclaimed I, and I had hardly uttered
the sentence ere from the thick covert sprang the well-remembered form
of Bright-eyes!




CHAPTER XXI.

A NEW KIND OF WATCH-DOG.


What a rubbing of noses ensued! after all my travels and perils it was
such joy to see again the face of a friend! I had so much also to
relate, (I have ever been a loquacious rat,) that I almost lost breath
in my long narration. I wound up my account with a description of the
last adventure of Whiskerandos, who was now, in my eyes, ten times more
a hero than before.

"And now that I have told you my news," said I, "let's hear a little of
yours. In the first place, where is old Oddity?"

Bright-eyes hung down his head, and drooped his long tail in a touching
and melancholy manner. Such conduct in so lively a rat showed me at once
that my last surviving brother was dead!

"How did it happen?" was all that I could say.

"Not a week after our arrival in these parts, he was caught in a
hay-rick by a farmer!" faltered Bright-eyes. "I saw him seized by the
neck, I heard his despairing cry; I could not stay to see the poor
fellow killed, and I was afraid of sharing his fate, so I made off as
fast as I could."

"Poor Oddity!" sighed I very mournfully, "never was there an uglier nor
a better-hearted rat! Ah! what pleasure I vainly promised to myself in
relating to you all my adventures! I have been across the deep waters,
encountered various perils, now in danger of being cooked in a pie, now
shivering on a barrel in the ocean, and yet here am I safe and sound
after all; while you, remaining quietly in England, have ignominiously
perished in a hay-rick!"

Whiskerandos, who, being a brown rat, could not be expected to feel the
same regret as myself, now turned towards Bright-eyes, and asked him how
far we were from London-- "For I long to be back in my old quarters,"
said he.

"A fortnight's journey for a rat, should he travel by land," replied
Bright-eyes: "we came down very comfortably in a river boat, which
carried us to within five miles of this spot."

"I have had enough of water for some time," said Whiskerandos; "and now
that the fields are full of ripe corn, and the gardens of fruit, nothing
so pleasant as a journey by land! What say you, friend Ratto?"
inquired he.

"I have no mind for a long journey either by land or by sea," replied I
in a melancholy tone; "I'll keep company with you for a day or two,
Whiskerandos, but I would rather not return now to London. I will settle
quietly for a time in the country near the spot where poor Oddity died!"

"And you?" said Whiskerandos, turning to Bright-eyes.

The lively rat shook his ears with all his natural vivacity. "Pardon
me," he cried, "but I'm of Oddity's opinion,-- heroes like Sir
Whiskerandos are the very worst travelling companions in the world! How
Ratto has escaped with his life I cannot imagine, but I shall certainly
not try the experiment of following your fortunes for an hour! I've no
fancy to be baked in a pie, or starved on a barrel, crushed by a drosky,
or worried by a dog, drowned in a sack, or suspended by my tail! No, no,
valiant Whiskerandos, I'm quite content to admire your courage at a
distance, but I don't want to share your exploits, and would rather have
my ears than your fame!"

And off skipped the merry little rat, before we could say a word to stay
him.

Whiskerandos and I, being weary enough with the adventures through which
we had passed, slept for the greater part of that day in the field, and
wandered about during the night in a not vain search for food.

The next day was remarkably hot. It was the season of harvest, and we
felt the necessity of keeping quietly concealed, as many men, and women
also, were busily engaged in the fields. The heat, however, produced
thirst, and no water was near in which we could quench it.

"I say, Ratto," observed Whiskerandos, "do you see yonder object, near
that sheaf, that glitters so brightly in the sun?"

"It is a can," replied I, "doubtless belonging to one of the reapers."

"I should not wonder if there were a hunch of bread and cheese beside
it," said Whiskerandos.

"I should not be surprised if there were."

Whiskerandos remained for a minute in silence, then said, "I want to
compare English beer with Russian kwas."

"You are not going into the field!" I cried in alarm.

"I am going,-- why, there is nothing to fear; there is not a reaper
near, and if there were, he would need to be a sharp fellow who could
catch a rat in an open field!"

So the daring fellow went on his way, and I, after peeping cautiously on
this side and that, to make sure that no human being could see us in the
stubble, hurried after my companion, being to the full as curious as
himself to make acquaintance with the contents of the can.

There was a bundle of something beside it, tied up in a large red
handkerchief, something of a very inviting odour. But scarcely had
Whiskerandos, who was foremost, touched the reaper's dinner with the end
of his whiskers, when something jumped up suddenly from behind the
bundle, and the voice of a rat fiercely exclaimed,-- "Keep off, or I'll
bite you!"

Whiskerandos looked surprised at the unexpected defiance, but my
feelings of amazement can scarcely be conceived when I recognised,
(could it be!) the dumpy form, blunt head, and piebald skin of my lost
brother Oddity!

I rushed forward with a squeak of delight! No doubt, though less eager
and excited in his manner, Oddity also was greatly pleased at meeting
with his brother again. He looked, however, suspiciously from the
handkerchief to Whiskerandos, and again desired him to "keep off," with
a resolution of which I had never dreamed the piebald rat capable.

"What is in that bundle, that you guard it so carefully?" said I, after
we had rubbed noses again and again, with every expression of affection.

"The property of my master," replied my brother.

"Master!" exclaimed both Whiskerandos and I in amazement, "who ever
heard of the master of a rat! Since when have you taken upon yourself
the office of a watch-dog, to guard what belongs to our enemy, man?"

"Since man first showed mercy to one of the race of Mus, since he spared
a defenceless rat when in his power. I know you, Whiskerandos, I know
you," continued Oddity, the hairs bristling up on his back, as my
companion, either in jest or earnest, took the corner of the
handkerchief between his sharp teeth: "you are reckoned a hero amongst
rats, but I too can fight in defence of what is confided to my charge;
you have killed a ferret, and you may kill me, but while I have a tooth
in my jaw, or a drop of blood in my body, you shall not touch a crumb
belonging to my master!"

Whiskerandos would have been more than a match for three Odditys, for
the piebald one had neither his strength, nor agility, nor experience in
fighting; but the strong rat seemed at this juncture to have no
inclination to give battle to the weak one. I hope that it will be
considered no sign of cowardice on his part, that he quietly dropped the
corner of the handkerchief, and never even attempted to examine the
contents of the can.

Of course I was all curiosity to know every particular of my brother's
deliverance. In his own quiet, homely way, he told me his simple tale,
keeping, however, all the time, a watchful eye upon the bundle beside
him, while Whiskerandos acted the part of a sentinel to give me timely
warning if any human being should approach so near as to endanger our
safety. I will tell the story of Oddity as nearly as I can in his own
words, I only wish that I could describe the expression of his bluff,
honest face, at various parts of his narration.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE FARMER AND HIS BRIDE.


"I was caught one evening in a hay-rick. A swift-footed creature like
you, Whiskerandos, might perhaps have escaped, but I was never
remarkable for agility or speed. I felt a strong hand grasping me by the
back of my neck, and I gave myself up for lost.

"'Well, here's an odd creature,-- a piebald rat! I take it that's quite
a curiosity!' cried the farmer who held me in his grasp. I expected that
he would dash me against the wall the next moment, and then set his heel
upon my poor body!

"'I wonder whether Mary ever saw the like of it before,' he continued,
examining me with attention; 'I'll put it in the empty wire-cage, and
try if I cannot tame it for her.'

"Here was a reprieve, and a most unexpected one. No one who has not
believed himself to be just on the point of being smashed, can tell how
glad I was when I was set loose from the farmer's terrible gripe, though
only to find myself in a cage!

"But soon the longing for liberty came. I attempted to gnaw through the
wires, but they resisted my utmost efforts. The farmer watched me, spoke
to me, gave me food-- treated me like a creature that could feel. That
man has a gentle and kindly heart! At length I grew accustomed to my
master, and to see him approach my prison with food was the only
pleasure of my life. He ventured his finger between the bars, and I
never attempted to bite it. He released me at last from my cage,
and gave me a far warmer, snugger home-- in the pocket of his own
great-coat!"

At this point in the story Whiskerandos and I uttered expressions of
amazement.

"Wherever he went," continued Oddity, "I went too. He taught me many
things altogether new to a rat. It is our nature to take what we can
get,-- he taught me to see food and not to touch it! He never
suffered me to feel hungry: he conversed with me as though I were a
little companion, and never one blow did I receive from his hand, or one
kick from his heel! It was not in the nature of a quadruped to be
insensible to kindness like this!"

"And yet you owed it all to your piebald coat!" exclaimed I. "Never was
beauty such an advantage to a four-footed beast as ugliness has been to
you!"

"I found," pursued Oddity very quietly, "that Will Grange, my master,
was going to London, to be married to the young woman whom he had spoken
of as Mary. We travelled to the city together, I snugly sleeping, coiled
up in his pocket."

"And were you given to the lady?" said Whiskerandos.

"I was placed before her on a table, in a quiet little back-parlour, in
which she and my master sat together. She admired my appearance."

"No, no!" interrupted I, "that's impossible, I can believe anything but
that!"

"Well, then, she wished to gratify my master by appearing to do so. She
praised me, and fed me from her hand, and said that such a rat she never
had seen in her life. Then I crept under my master's chair, and there
very quietly remained, while he and his Mary talked over future plans
together.

"He told her of the various things that he had bought to make his home
more comfortable for his wife. How he had planted the garden himself
with all her favourite flowers, and twined honeysuckle over his porch.
Then he took her hand within his own, and in a lower and softer voice
asked her if she were happy.

"'Very happy,' she replied, looking on the ground, while her cheek grew
like a cloud at sunrise; 'only I cannot help feeling sorry,' --her voice
trembled a little as she spoke,-- 'sorry to leave father, and home, and
the dear children in the ragged school whom I have taught so long!'
I fancy," continued my brother, "that something like a dewdrop
glistened on her lashes.

"'Well, Mary,' said the farmer heartily, 'father will come and see us;
and as for your old home, why, you get a new one in exchange, and fair
exchange is no robbery, you know. Then for your ragged children, why,
I'm wanting an active, steady boy on my farm, and though I've no great
fancy for your pale-faced Londoners, yet if you know any really good
one, we'll take him down with us into Kent.'

"You should have seen how much pleased the young teacher looked! She
knew one, she said, a poor motherless boy,-- she would be so glad to
give him a helping hand. He was one of the best boys in the school,--
she would trust him in a room full of gold!

"So it was agreed between them that she should speak to the lad, and
tell him to call in the evening.

"In the evening he accordingly came. I had again taken my place under
the farmer's chair, and was just falling into a doze, when I was
roused by a gentle knock at the door. Mary's cheerful 'Come in!' was
followed by the entrance of,-- whom do you think?"

"Bob and Billy!" I exclaimed at a venture.

"Yes, Bob and Billy!" repeated Oddity, with a look of great glee; "I had
never thought to have seen them again! And they were so changed,
I should scarcely have known them. Bob, in particular, looked so much
taller, and stronger, and oh! so much happier than he had done last
year! He was no more the wretched, joyless, hopeless creature, cowering
in rags, one that even rats might look on with pity; he had a bright,
fearless eye, and hopeful smile; and if ever a face expressed gratitude
and affection, it was his when he looked on his gentle young teacher!

"'I beg pardon for bringing Billy,' said he, modestly but frankly,
'I was afraid to let him go home quite alone.'

"The farmer spoke in his kindly manner to the boy. He offered him a
place on his farm, and Bob's eyes sparkled, and his cheek flushed with
pleasure. It was but for a minute; the brightness and the glow faded
away as he glanced down at his little lame brother. I saw that Billy was
squeezing his hand,-- that squeeze served all the purpose of words.

"'Thank 'ee, sir,' said the boy, glancing first at the farmer, then at
his teacher, 'but I think as how-- I should rather-- leastways I had
better stay and earn my bread here in Lunnon.'

"'And how do you earn it?' inquired the farmer.

"'Please, sir, I clean boots,'* answered the boy; 'I am one of the
yellow brigade.'

"There was such a look of cheerful independence on the little fellow's
face, that no one could have glanced at him and doubted that his bread
was honestly earned.

"'And would you rather stay here and rub in blacking,' said the farmer,
'than be out in the open fields? Yours is an odd taste, I take it! Would
you not rather come with us?'

"'Oh, sir!' said Bob, uneasily, shifting from one foot to the other,
while Billy was squeezing his hand harder than ever, and looking half
ready to cry, as he pressed closer to his side; 'you see I could not
leave him behind,-- poor lame Billy, he's no one to care for him
but me.'

"'That's it, is it!' cried the farmer, clapping his knee. 'Well, Mary,
what say you? could we take the two with us do you think? If they've
always been together, poor fellows, 'twould be a pity to part them now!'

"Bob's only answer was a look of pleasure and gratitude, but little
Billy almost burst into tears of delight as he exclaimed, 'Oh, yes!
please, sir, take me too!-- take me too! I'll do anything,-- I'll
work,-- I'll make baskets for your fruit.'

"'And coops for my poultry, hey? We'll find some way of making you
useful.' And he turned to Mary with that smile which I think that all
human beings wear when they are doing some act of kindness.

"I was so much pleased," continued Oddity, "at this conclusion to the
affair, that I ran out from my place beneath the chair. Billy uttered a
cry of surprise:

"'There-- look! if that an't my own pretty spotted rat!'"

Here I rather rudely interrupted my piebald brother. "Pretty! did he
call you pretty? well, well, I shall be obliged to think you so myself,
I suppose. Spared by a man, petted by a woman, admired by a child,-- and
all for your beauty,-- Oddity's beauty!" I could not help laughing
outright at the thought.

"My ugliness has at least done me no harm," he replied, with a meekness
which made me more ashamed of my rudeness than if he had fired up at my
ridicule.

"And so you live all together here?" said Whiskerandos; "this farmer,
his wife, the two boys, and you?"

"Yes, and we are as happy as the day is long."

"Humph!" said Whiskerandos; "I should prefer my wild freedom; but it is
different, I suppose, with man. And as for you, Oddity, you were never
like other rats; you were always intended for a watch-dog. And you
really guard that can and parcel for hours, and resist the temptation to
nibble?"

"I am trusted," was the simple reply.

"Now, Oddity," said I, "I should much like to see you in your new home,
surrounded by all your human companions."

"Yonder is my master's house," answered Oddity, pointing across the
field with his nose. "You have but to clamber up to the window in the
evening, and peep through the clustering roses, and you will see us all
there together."

"I'll have a peep," said Whiskerandos, "and then off to old London
again!"

"You must take nothing from my master's house," cried Oddity.

"Not a potato paring!" laughed our valiant companion.

"And now I would advise you to be off," said my brother; "here's my
master coming for his dinner."

Away we scampered at full speed, my light-footed comrade and I; for well
we knew what was certain to be our fate if caught even by the
kind-hearted farmer. We were only rats after all.


    [* In the course of a single year no less than _two thousand nine
    hundred and eighty-one pounds_ were honestly earned in this manner
    by 132 boys connected with ragged schools!]




CHAPTER XXIII.

A PEEP THROUGH THE ROSES.


That night, when the round harvest moon was throwing her soft light on
the earth, we climbed up the rose-tree by the window, and, quietly
pushing aside the fragrant flowers, peeped in upon such a scene as
rarely meets the eye of a rat.

There was a neat little kitchen, with a sanded floor and white-washed
walls, so clean, so perfectly clean, that not even the sharp eyes of the
race of Mus could have detected a speck upon them. Rows of plates lined
the shelves on the wall, pans burnished till they shone like silver,
a framed sampler hung over the mantelpiece, and a large clock merrily
ticked behind the door. Near the wide hearth there was a table, on which
a substantial supper was spread on a cloth white as new-fallen snow.

Round this table were seated the farmer, his wife, and our two old
friends, Bob and Billy, in their clean smock-frocks, with country roses
on their once sickly and sunken cheeks. One might have read Will
Grange's character in his kind, honest face; and his wife looked like a
morning in May, all sweetness, brightness, and beauty,-- such beauty as
is not merely skin-deep.

The farmer tapped gaily on the table, and at the signal, Oddity, whom I
had not at first perceived, clambered up to his knee, and from thence
jumped on the cloth, to be fed from his master's hand. He made his round
of the party,-- every one had something to give him; and I heard the
merry voice of Billy as he patted his favourite's snub nose,-- "He's a
pretty little fellow! now, an't he? I wonder what's become of the old
blind rat that he used to lead about in the shed?"

"Whiskerandos," said I, pensively, to my companion, "I could almost wish
myself in Oddity's place!"

"So do not I," he replied quickly, as he turned from the window. "One
rat in ten millions may be petted and trusted, and show himself worthy
of the trust; but our race was never intended by nature to hold the
position of lap-dogs or cats."

"And are we always to be hated by the lords of creation, never to be
useful to man?"

"We are useful to man," said my companion.

"Ah! in those places where he bakes us in pies, or makes hats or
glove-thumbs of our poor skins. But in London--"

"When you join me in London I will show you, friend Ratto, how, by
acting the part of a scavenger, and clearing away that which, if left,
would poison the air, the race of Mus does good service to man."

"Little man thanks us for it!" cried I.

"Well, Bob," said the farmer, as he leant back in his chair, and
watched, with an air of amusement, his piebald favourite nibbling at a
nut, "is it true what my good wife here tells me, that the post this
morning actually brought a letter for you?"

"From Master Neddy," exclaimed Bob, with sparkling eyes.

"He's come back from Russy, and so has his father, and they're so glad
to be in old England again," cried Billy, as in old times the most ready
to speak. "The letter was sent first to the school,-- the dear old
school!-- for they warn't to know that missus was married, and we so
snug down here in the country. Oh! won't they be pleased to hear it? And
is it not good in them, after all their travels, not to forget poor boys
like us? Do you know, there was money in the letter?" he added, lowering
his voice.

"Ah! Captain Blake did you some good turn, did he not?" said the farmer
to Bob.

"He saved me from--" the boy coloured and paused,--

"From want, I suppose," said Grange, ending his sentence for him, and
stroking back Oddity's sleek ears.

"From worse," said Bob, looking down.

"Not from death?"

"Worse than that," murmured the boy.

"Eh?" said the farmer, in surprise.

"But for him what should I have been now! Oh sir!" cried Bob, suddenly
raising his eyes, "I've often thought I should have told you this
before,-- before you took me in here,-- me and my brother too,-- and
treated us so kindly, and trusted us and all. You should have known what
I was before that day when Captain Blake-- bless him for it!-- first
took me into a ragged school."

"My business is with what you are, not what you were," said the farmer,
kindly; but Bob did not seem to hear the interruption, for he continued,
in an agitated voice, the tears rising into and then overflowing his
eyes:-- "He found me a poor, ignorant, miserable creature, not knowing
so much as that it was a sin to take what was not my own. He found me
with no comfort and no hope, going on the broad way which leads to the
prison and the gallows; and worse,-- worse beyond,-- I know that now. He
found me a wretched thief, and he did not hate me, despise me, despair
of me: he gave me a chance, he gave me a friend! Blessings on him!-- he
saved me from ruin!"

Here let me drop the curtain, here let me close my tale. These are
feelings, these are scenes, into which higher beings alone can enter;
they are too solemn for a story like mine.

And here I and my companions divide;-- I to luxuriate for awhile in the
plenty with which rich autumn crowns the fields around; my bold comrade
to return to the city, and there, in new adventures, to display a
sagacity and courage which even the lords of the creation would admire
if belonging to any race but ours; Oddity, in the happy home of his kind
master, remains to share the board and the hearth,-- an instance that
even a rat can show fidelity to man, where man can show mercy to a rat!

Perhaps the human race would despise us less proudly, and persecute us
less severely,-- perhaps even boys would take less pleasure in
torturing, worrying, and hunting us down,-- if our characters and
instincts were better known. Who can say that some truth may not be
learned, some lesson of kindliness gained, even from a narration simple
as mine,-- the history of

  THE RAMBLES OF A RAT.


  [Decoration]




       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's note:

"The Family of Mus" (Chapter VII):

By some classifications, all the animals that appear in this chapter
are part of the superfamily _Muroidea_ within the rodent family.

  German Hamster: _Cricetus cricetus_, the black-bellied hamster.
    _The European hamster is at least twice the size of the Syrian
    or golden hamster. Its personality is much as described._
  Musk-rat: _Ondatra zibethicus_
  Lemming: _Lemmus lemmus_
  "... the Musk Cavy, which I have heard of as inhabiting Ceylon and
  other places in the East"
    _Possibly the hutia, _Capromys pilorides_, although hutias are
    indigenous to the West Indies, especially Cuba, not Asia._


Errors and Inconsistencies noted by Transcriber:

The inconsistent handling of nested quotes, with single ' or double "
quotation marks for the inner quote, is unchanged. Where two closing
quotation marks are expected, only one was printed:

  Ch. V. ... I will not lose sight of you, my friend."
  Ch. XVII. ... father of the Russian fleet."

The word "invisible" means that the letter or punctuation mark is
absent, but there is an appropriately sized empty space.

Ch. V.
  He told me that I was about a sin-- a great sin.
    [_text unchanged: missing words?_]

Ch. VIII.
  "I looked at his meagre form clothed in rags  [open " missing]
  How I should like to build one myself!"  [close " missing]
  [* The Reformatory in Great Smith Street, Westminster.]  [. missing]

Ch. IX.
  to nibble at the hard polished crockery,  [, invisible]

Ch. XVI.
  With quiet night came our feasting-time,  [, invisible]

Ch. XVII.
  had both seen cannon and learnt their use,  [. for ,]

Ch. XVIII.
  above one half is shipped from St. Petersburg."  [close " missing]
  the place where such glorious mountains are to be found?"
    [_text unchanged: ? may be error for !_]

Ch. XXI.
  a hunch of bread and cheese beside it
    [_spelling unchanged_]

Ch. XXII.
  the farmer's terrible gripe
    [terribe gripe: _error corrected, archaic form retained_]
  "'And how do you earn it?' inquired the farmer.  [farmer.']
  my light-footed comrade and I  [invisible hyphen at page-end]

Ch. IX, Reconstructed Text:
  A pair of facing pages are slightly damaged:
  pg 60:
  We therefore set out ...  ["fore" obscured]
  dogs and cats in the streets  ["he" in "the" reconstructed from
    facing page]
  pg 61:
  my good friends ...
  notwithstanding the darkness ...
    [word "good", "w" in "notwithstanding" reconstructed from
    facing page]
  observed that I have ...  ["d" in "observed" invisible]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAMBLES OF A RAT***


******* This file should be named 29863.txt or 29863.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/9/8/6/29863



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

