Project Gutenberg's Washington's Masonic Correspondence, by Julius F. Sachse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Washington's Masonic Correspondence
       As Found among the Washington Papers in the Library of Congress

Author: Julius F. Sachse

Release Date: September 10, 2009 [EBook #29949]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WASHINTON'S MASONIC CORRESPONDENCE ***




Produced by Curtis Weyant, Stephanie Eason, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









=THE MASONIC PORTRAIT OF
BROTHER GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON.

ORIGINAL PASTEL PORTRAIT FROM LIFE BY WILLIAM WILLIAMS, PHILADELPHIA,
SEPTEMBER 1794, PAINTED AT THE REQUEST OF ALEXANDRIA LODGE, No. 39, A.
Y. M., WARRANTED BY THE GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA, FEBRUARY 3, 1783,
NOW THE ALEXANDRIA-WASHINGTON LODGE, No. 22, A. F. & A. M. OF VIRGINIA.
REPRODUCTION FROM THE UNIQUE COPY IN THE MUSEUM OF THE R. W. GRAND
LODGE, F. & A. M. OF PENNSYLVANIA.

COPYRIGHTED BY ALEXANDRIA-WASHINGTON LODGE, No. 22, VIRGINIA, AND
PRINTED BY ITS PERMISSION.=




  Washington's
  Masonic Correspondence

  AS FOUND AMONG THE
  WASHINGTON PAPERS
  IN THE
  LIBRARY OF CONGRESS


Compiled from the original records, under the direction of the Committee
on Library of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, with annotations.


  BY
  JULIUS F. SACHSE
  LIBRARIAN, MASONIC TEMPLE PHILADELPHIA


  PHILADELPHIA
  1915




Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1915, in the Office of
the Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C., by J. HENRY WILLIAMS,
R.W.G.M.



  COMMITTEE ON LIBRARY

  JOHN WANAMAKER, _Chairman_,
  SAMUEL W. LATTA,
  NORRIS S. BARRATT,
  HARMAN YERKES,
  HENRY DARRACH,
  WALTER T. TAGGART.

  JULIUS F. SACHSE, _Librarian_.



_An Edition of One Thousand Copies has been printed, of which this is
No._ 355



  PRESS OF
  THE NEW ERA PRINTING COMPANY
  LANCASTER, PA.



  =J. HENRY WILLIAMS
  Grand Master
  1914-1915.=




  J. Henry Williams,
  R. W. Grand Master

  Office of the
  R. W. Grand Master
  F. & A. Masons in Pennsylvania,
  Masonic Temple Philadelphia,

The position of eminence, the great respect and the profound reverence
in which the name of WASHINGTON is enshrined in the hearts of the
American people, and particularly so, with the members of this
Fraternity, and of all true lovers of liberty and freedom wheresoever
dispersed, is the reason, if any be needed, why everything relating to
this great man and worthy brother should be preserved for the future
generations, to be used by them as a guide, in the cultivation of those
cardinal virtues of Honor and Integrity, that should ever characterize
the conduct of a good man and a good Mason.

The collection and reproduction of the letters of Brother WASHINGTON,
together with the text of this book, have been prepared under my
supervision, and its publication is heartily approved.


  J. Henry Williams
  _Grand Master._
  FEBRUARY 22, A.D. 1915--A.L. 5915.




CONTENTS.

                                                                       PAGE

  Foreword                                                                1

  The Masonic Correspondence of Washington                                5

  I
  Correspondence with Watson and Cassoul                                 19

  II
  Correspondence with Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, 1783                     28

  III
  Correspondence with Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, 1784                     34

  IV
  Correspondence with King David's Lodge, No. 1, Newport, R. I., 1790    37

  V
  Correspondence with St. John's Lodge, No. 2, Newbern, N. C., 1791      44

  VI
  Correspondence with Prince George's Lodge, No. 16,
    Georgetown, S. C., 1791                                              51

  VII
  Correspondence with Grand Lodge of South Carolina, 1791                57

  VIII
  Correspondence with Grand Lodge of Georgia, 1791                       65

  IX
  Correspondence with Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, 1792                  69

  X
  Correspondence with Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, 1792                 80

  XI
  Correspondence with Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, 1796                  86

  XII
  Correspondence with Alexandria Lodge, No. 22, Virginia, 1797           95

  XIII
  Correspondence with Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, 1797                102

  XIV
  Correspondence with Grand Lodge of Maryland, 1798                     111

  XV
  Correspondence with G. W. Snyder, 1798                                117

  XVI
  Index                                                                 141



ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                                       PAGE

  Masonic Portrait of Washington                            _Frontispiece_.

  J. Henry Williams, R. W. Grand Master                                 iii

  Washington's Headquarters at Newburgh on the Hudson    _Facing page_   22

  Wise's Tavern, Alexandria, Virginia                         "  "       35

  Moses Michael Hays (Portrait)                               "  "       15

  Washington, (Houdon Portrait), 1786                         "  "       36

  Mordecai Gist, (Portrait)                                   "  "       57

  Residence of President Washington in Philadelphia           "  "       69

  Fac-Simile of Address                                       "  "       72

  Jonathan Bayard Smith, (Portrait)                           "  "       76

  Rev. William Smith, D.D., (Portrait)                        "  "       88

  Mount Vernon, 1783-1799                                     "  "       95

  Paul Revere, (Portrait)                                     "  "      105

  Washington, (St. Memin Portrait), 1798                      "  "      117

  Draft of Letter to Grand Lodge of Maryland        _Between pages_ 112-113

  Press copy of Washington's letter to G. W. Snyder,
    September 25, 1798                                        "  "  124-125

  Press copy of letter, October 24, 1798                      "  "  130-131




FOREWORD


WASHINGTON's Masonic correspondence as found among the Washington papers
in the Manuscript department of the Library of Congress, affords an
insight of the great esteem in which WASHINGTON held the Masonic
Fraternity, of which since his early days he had been an honored member.

This is further shown by his great courtesy to the Brethren, in his
replies to their addresses, no matter whether they were from a Grand or
Subordinate Lodge. In this collection, were also found some of the
original drafts of WASHINGTON's replies, together with copies of the
various masonic addresses and letters to him, and in the case of Dominie
Snyder, press copies of his answers.

In the present work an attempt has been made to group this matter
together in chronological order, also to show some of the surroundings
and conditions under which this correspondence was made, and of the
Brethren who were prominent in the presentation of these Eleven
Addresses, which came to him from Seven of the Thirteen Colonies.

A complete set of photostatic fac-similes of these documents in the
Library of Congress, has been secured for the Museum of the Grand Lodge
of Pennsylvania. Efforts were also made to obtain photographic copies of
such of the WASHINGTON Masonic letters as were still in existence, which
were successful except in two instances as noted in the text.

It will be noted that on April 30, 1789, WASHINGTON, while Master of his
Lodge, was inaugurated President of the United States; this is the only
instance where one of the fourteen Presidents, who were Members of our
Fraternity was a Master of a Lodge during their term as President.

The esteem in which WASHINGTON held the Masonic Fraternity, is shown by
the fact, that in almost every case he had both the address and his
reply, copied upon opposite pages of one of his folio letter-books, now
in the Library of Congress. These copies are respectively in the
handwriting of WASHINGTON's private secretaries, viz:--Major William
Jackson: Tobias Lear: Bartholomew Dandridge and G. W. Craik.

In addition to the above copies we have WASHINGTON's original drafts of
his letters to Watson and Cassoul, to the Grand Lodges of Massachusetts,
South Carolina, and Maryland, to Paul Revere, and as before stated
press copies of his answers to Mr. Snyder.

A perusal of these original documents, as here presented, affords an
excellent illustration of the _entente cordiale_, which existed between
WASHINGTON and his Masonic Brethren.

Upon the other hand, how the Masonic Fraternity, during WASHINGTON's
lifetime, venerated their august Brother, is shown by the addresses of
this correspondence as retained by WASHINGTON.

Also by the various Masonic Memorial services held, after WASHINGTON's
death, the chief of which was in Philadelphia, under the auspices of the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. The Masonic services held in every State of
the Union, the many Eulogies and Sermons delivered and printed are
matters of history.

How this veneration of the great WASHINGTON continued during the past
years, is shown by the fact that there are no less than 53 Masonic
Lodges in the United States, named after the illustrious Brother. This
is independent of the numerous Royal Arch Chapters, Commanderies, and
other Masonic bodies, that bear the name "WASHINGTON."

Washington Lodges are found in thirty-eight of the forty-eight States of
the American Union.

The other ten States, which thus far have no "Washington Lodge" within
their Jurisdiction, are Mississippi and Texas, together with the newer
western States lately admitted into the American Union, viz:--Nevada,
North Dakota, Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Utah, New Mexico and Arizona.

In addition to the fifty-three Washington Lodges, there is also one each
in Canada, the Island of Cuba and the District of Columbia.

In the Masonic Fraternity throughout the world, the name of WASHINGTON
is ever kept in remembrance, as one of the brightest luminaries in the
Masonic constellation, one of the most prominent examples, being his
full length oil portrait in Masonic clothing in the Hall of the Grand
Lodge of England at London.

Acknowledgments are due to the Hon. Herbert Putnam, Librarian of
Congress, for placing these documents at the disposal of the writer, and
giving permission to have photostat copies made of same; also to J.
Henry Williams, Esq., R. W. Grand Master of Masons in Pennsylvania and
Masonic Jurisdiction thereunto belonging, for suggestions and
encouragement in the preparation of this work.

  Julius F. Sachse.
  PHILADELPHIA, FEBRUARY 22, A.D. 1915--A.L. 5915.




The Masonic Correspondence of Washington


Much has been written pro and con about WASHINGTON and his connection
with the Masonic Fraternity. Thus far no complete set of his Masonic
writings have been compiled or published. Such portions as have been
printed were fragmentary, and issued for what may be called local
purposes.

How careful WASHINGTON was of his Masonic correspondence is shown by the
fact that he had copies made, in his private letter books, of most all
letters sent him by the various Masonic Grand and Subordinate bodies,
and his answers thereto, usually upon opposite pages. He thus had both
the addresses and his reply at hand for easy reference. This fact shows
the esteem in which WASHINGTON held his Brethren of the Masonic
Fraternity, as well as his own opinion of Freemasonry.

These letter-books are now in the Library of Congress, and photostat
copies of such as relate to Freemasonry have been made for the Library
of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

As to the authenticity of the Washington Letter Books, and how they came
into the possession of the United States Government is explained by the
following statement by Mr. Galliard Hunt, chief Manuscript division,
Library of Congress:[1]

     "They are a part of the Washington papers in
     "the Government's possession, purchased from the
     "Washington family, one lot in 1834 and the re-
     "mainder in 1849, and deposited in the Department
     "of State until 1903, when, by the President's order,
     "they were sent to this Library. They range in date
     "from 1754 to 1799. Some of them are partly
     "or wholly in Washington's hand-writing, and others
     "in the writing of his secretaries and their clerks.
     "There are no volumes of press copies, but there are
     "some press copies among the papers."


WASHINGTON in writing his answer to the various greetings, in most cases
would first make a rough copy of his reply, then digest, alter, correct
or change such parts or sentences as he thought proper. Then after
deliberate consideration, a fair copy would be made either by WASHINGTON
or one of his Secretaries and signed by him, and sent to the Masonic
bodies for which they were intended.

Fortunately some of the original drafts of these Masonic letters have
come down to us; thus far five autographic copies have been found among
the Washington papers in the Library of Congress at Washington.

1. Draft of letter written at Newburg, New York, August 19, 1782, to
Watson and Cassoul of Nantes, France, thanking them for the Masonic
Apron, embroidered by the nuns at Nantes, and which is now in possession
of Alexandria-Washington Lodge, No. 22, at Alexandria, Virginia.

2. To the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts.

3. To the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

4. To the Grand Lodge of South Carolina.

5. To the Grand Lodge of Maryland; this draft is a two-page letter
written upon a letter sheet and shows many changes and corrections; it
is dated 1798.

In addition to the above original drafts there were found several
addresses and the accompanying answers, which thus far have never been
published, in fact no mention of them has ever appeared in print, viz:--

1. An address from the Grand Lodge of Georgia, together with
WASHINGTON's reply.

2. A letter to Paul Revere, Grand Master of Massachusetts and his Grand
Officers.

3. An address from the Brethren of Prince George's Lodge, No. 16,
Georgetown, South Carolina, presented to President WASHINGTON during his
visit to South Carolina, April 30, 1791, also his reply to same.

4. An address from the Brethren of St. John's Lodge, No. 2, of Newbern,
North Carolina, and the reply to same.

Photostat copies of the above have also been obtained which make the
most complete collection of the Masonic Correspondence of WASHINGTON
which has thus far been compiled.

A careful study of this correspondence so carefully cherished by
WASHINGTON puts an entirely new phase upon WASHINGTON's connection with
the Masonic Fraternity, and his esteem of Freemasonry.

These papers absolutely thrust aside all of the statements, arguments
and libels, brought forth by our misguided enemies at the time of the
Anti-Masonic craze during the last century, and in a small way kept
alive even down to the present day by some people who are blinded by
their ignorance or malice.

Referring to some of their published statements that WASHINGTON never
belonged to the Masonic Fraternity, and that there were no authentic
Masonic letters nor copies thereof among his records so frequently made
during the political Anti-Masonic craze, which swept over New England
and the Middle States about eighty-five years ago, the following
quotations from the Masonic literature of the period will prove
interesting examples.

One of the chief statements made by these people, and brought before all
their conventions and heralded in the public prints was: "That though
General Washington caused to be carefully copied in books kept for that
purpose, all his letters on every subject, no trace whatever of any of
the five letters under consideration,[2] nor any letters to any other
Lodge or Masonic body whatever, are to be found among the records of his
correspondence."[3]

The chief authority upon whom the leaders of the Anti-Masonic movement
at that time depended in their defamation of WASHINGTON, was Jared
Sparks of Boston, who at the time was engaged writing a life of
WASHINGTON, and then had access to all the Washington letter-books and
papers, and from his connection with the Washington correspondence, was
supposed to be the best qualified to pass upon their authenticity.

Another of the charges made by the Anti-Masonic bigots whose chief
object was to controvert facts was:

     "That although WASHINGTON was _extremely scrupulous_ in preserving
     his correspondence with all public or private bodies, there is not
     a line of his _relating to Freemasonry_, to be found among all his
     papers, except the correspondence with Mr. Snyder![4] It is also a
     fact, that WASHINGTON was equally scrupulous in dating his letters,
     and it is believed that not one can be found, which is without a
     date."[5]


It appears that the chairman of a committee of citizens of Boston called
upon the officers of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts to submit their
two Washington letters to Jared Sparks for his inspection. This the
Grand Officers refused to do.

In return Sparks sent the following letter to the Chairman:

     "Boston, February 18, 1833.

     "_Sir_,--I received this morning your letter of the 15th instant, in
     which you inquire:

     "Whether I have yet seen or had in my possession any original letter
     or letters, in the hand writing of General Washington, addressed to
     any body of men denominating themselves Freemasons.

     "In reply, I can only state that I have seen no letters from General
     Washington of the kind described in yours, nor received any
     communication on the subject, either verbal or written.[6]

        "I am, Sir,
          "Very respectfully,
            "Your ob't servant,
              "JARED SPARKS."


How Sparks could have overlooked the numerous entries in the letter
books whose numbers and folios are here quoted, also the drafts of
replies in WASHINGTON's hand-writing and signed by him (copies of which
are here given in this work), can only be accounted for by the fact that
he must have been carried away by the political excitement of the day.

WASHINGTON's connection with the Masonic Fraternity has been
exhaustively traced by Brother James M. Lamberton, Past Master of
Perseverance Lodge, No. 21, in his address "WASHINGTON AS A FREEMASON,"
from the day of his entrance into Fredericksburg Lodge, No. 4, of
Virginia, September 1, 1752, until the day of his death, December 14,
1799, before the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, at its celebration of the
Sesqui-Centennial Anniversary of the Initiation of Brother GEORGE
WASHINGTON into the Fraternity of Freemasons,[7] held in the Masonic
Temple, in the city of Philadelphia on Wednesday, November 5, 1902.

It must also be remembered that WASHINGTON made a public profession of
his membership in Philadelphia, Monday, December 28, 1778, when he
walked in procession with his brethren of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania, from the College at Fourth and Arch Streets to Christ
Church on Second Street above Market Street, Philadelphia, where, after
a prayer by Rev. William White, a sermon was preached for the "[Benefit
of the POOR] by appointment of and before | The General Communication |
of | Free and Accepted | MASONS | of the | State of PENNSYLVANIA, | on
Monday, December 28, 1788, | Celebrated, agreeable to their
Constitution, | as the Anniversary of | ST. JOHN the Evangelist, | by
William Smith, D.D., | Provost of the College and Academy of
Philadelphia." |

This Sermon was printed and dedicated to Brother WASHINGTON and a copy
sent to him, which was bound with other pamphlets in a volume lettered
"Masonic Sermons," and is so mentioned in the inventory of his estate
and now in the Boston Athenaeum.[8] At this service over four hundred
pounds were collected for the relief of the poor.

Rev. Brother William Smith, D.D., preached a number of Masonic Sermons
in Pennsylvania, Delaware and Maryland; three of which delivered at the
request of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania were printed, viz.:

_Sermon 1._--On Brotherly Love, &c. Preached on the Anniversary of St.
John the Baptist, June 24, 1755,

_Sermon 2._--Preached on Monday, December 28, 1778, celebrated as the
Anniversary of St. John the Evangelist. With an Appendix on the
Character of Lucius Quintius Cincinnatus,

_Sermon 3._--Preached before the Grand Lodge of Communication, on St.
John the Baptist's day, June 24, 1795.

Original copies of the above are in the Library of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania.

Rev. Brother Smith reprinted the above in a Volume of Sermons with the
following note:[9]

    "N. B. The above three Sermons were preached at the request of the
    Grand Lodge of Communication, for Pennsylvania, and contains in
    substance all that the Author thinks it necessary to bequeath to the
    Brotherhood, by way of Sermons, preached at different times and in
    sundry of the neighboring States, during 48 Years past."


By referring to the following letters and Documents it is shown that
WASHINGTON's interest in Freemasonry and the Fraternity continued until
the time of his death.

These documents cover the period from 1782 to 1798.

As these copies in our possession are photostat fac-similes of the
original documents in the Library of Congress, there can never be any
question of correctness or of their authenticity.

The finding and collating of this material will settle for all time to
come the question of WASHINGTON's connection with the Ancient
Fraternity, and his opinion and esteem of Freemasonry.

The earliest record we have of any Masonic Body proposing a masonic
address to General WASHINGTON, was the resolution offered in King
David's Lodge, No. 1, at Newport, Rhode Island, during WASHINGTON's
visit to Newport in March, 1781, while the French Army under Rochambeau
was quartered there. WASHINGTON arrived in Newport on the sixth of March
and remained there until the thirteenth, when he left for Providence by
way of Bristol.

It was in anticipation of this visit that the Brethren of King David's
Lodge, of which Brother Moses Michael Hays[10] was Worshipful Master,
that a masonic greeting to General WASHINGTON was proposed. The
following entry from the old Minute Book of the Lodge will explain why
the project failed to materialize.


=MOSES M. HAYS

W. M. KING DAVID'S LODGE, No. 1, NEWPORT, R. I., 1780-1781. GRAND MASTER
OF MASONS IN MASSACHUSETTS, 1788-1793.=


    EXTRACT FROM THE RECORDS OF KING DAVID'S LODGE.

    "Regular Lodge night, held at the house of Mr. James Tew, Wednesday
    evening, the 7th February, 1781. 5781.

    "A motion being made that as our worthy brother, his Excellency
    General Washington, was daily expected amongst us, a committee
    should be appointed to prepare an address in behalf of the Lodge, to
    present him. Voted, That the Right Worshipful Master (Moses Michael
    Hays) together with brothers Seixas, Peleg Clark, John Handy, and
    Robert Elliot, be a committee for that purpose, and that they
    present the same to this Lodge at their next meeting for their
    approbation."

    "At a Lodge held by request of the Right Worshipful Master, Feb.
    14th, 1781. 5781,

    "The committee appointed to draught an address to our worthy
    brother, His Excellency General Washington, report, that on inquiry
    they find General Washington not to be a Grand Master of North
    America; as was supposed, nor even Master of any particular Lodge.
    They are, therefore, of opinion that this Lodge would not choose to
    address him as a private brother at the same time, think it would
    not be agreeable to our worthy brother to be addressed as such.

    "Voted, That the report of the committee be received, and that the
    address be entirely laid aside for the present."[11]


Now as to the cause for this uncertainty how to address Brother
WASHINGTON, it will be recalled that just at that time, the proposition
sent out by the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania nominating General
WASHINGTON as Grand Master of all the Colonies, was then before the
various grand bodies, but did not find favor in New England, in fact the
Grand Lodge of Massachusetts was the chief objector, and finally
defeated the scheme to elect WASHINGTON the Grand Master General.[12]

The means of intercourse between the different Masonic Bodies at that
early day were so limited and uncertain that it offers a clear
explanation for the uncertainty under which the brethren of King David's
Lodge, No. 1, at Newport labored at that time.

During the Anti-Masonic craze in the last century, the above minute was
extensively used by the political leaders of the Anti-Masonic party to
strengthen their claim that WASHINGTON had never presided over any
Masonic Lodge.

Following is a complete list of the Washington Masonic Correspondence,
thus far found among the Washington papers in the Library of Congress.

Draft of Letter to Watson and Cassoul, Nantes, France, August 10, 1782.

Letter to Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, Virginia, December 28, 1783.

Address from King David's Lodge, No. 1, Rhode Island, August 17, 1790,
and WASHINGTON's Reply.

Address from St. John's Lodge, No. 2, Newbern, North Carolina, April 20,
1791, and his reply.

Address from Prince George's Lodge (Moderns) Georgetown, South Carolina,
April 30, 1791, and his reply.

Draft of reply to Grand Lodge of South Carolina, May 5, 1791.

Address from Grand Lodge of Georgia, May 14, 1791, and his reply.

Address from Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, March, 1792, and his reply.

Address of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, December 27, 1792, and his
reply.

Address from Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, December 27, 1796, and his
reply.

Address from Alexandria Lodge, No. 22, Virginia, April 4, 1797, and his
reply.

Letter to Paul Revere and Grand Officers, April 24, 1797.

Draft of Letter to Grand Lodge of Massachusetts in reply to an address,
April 1797.

Draft of a reply to an address from the Grand Lodge of Maryland,
November 8, 1798.

Letter from G. W. Snyder to WASHINGTON, August 22, 1798.

WASHINGTON's Reply to Snyder, September 25, 1798.

WASHINGTON's Reply to Snyder's letter of October 17, 1798.


=ELKANAH WATSON

B. PLYMOUTH, MASS., JANUARY 22, 1758, D. AT PORT KENT, N. Y., DECEMBER
5, 1842, WHO, TOGETHER WITH HIS PARTNER CASSOUL, PRESENTED TO WASHINGTON
A MASONIC APRON MADE BY THE NUNS AT NANTES, FRANCE.

NOW IN THE POSSESSION OF ALEXANDRIA-WASHINGTON LODGE, No. 22,
VIRGINIA.=



Footnotes:

[1] Letter to Julius F. Sachse from Manuscript Division, December 19,
1914--in Library of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

[2] The letters referred to by the Anti-Masons were the one to King
David's Lodge at Newport, two to the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, and
one to Charleston, S. C., and to the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. The
above five Masonic Letters were all that were known to the Anti-Masons
at that time.

[3] "Vindication | of | General Washington | from the stigma | of
adherence to | Secret Societies | by | Joseph Ritner | Governor of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, | communicated | by | request of the House
of Representatives, to that body,| on the 8th of March, 1837."

This address during the Anti-Masonic period was regarded as an important
state paper.

[4] Letter press copies of the Snyder letters were retained by
WASHINGTON. Photostat copies of same are in the Archives of the Grand
Lodge of Pennsylvania.

[5] "Proceedings of the Third State Anti-masonic Convention, of
Massachusetts, Worcester, 1832," p. 27.

[6] Vindication of Washington before quoted, p. 13.

[7] The Ancient Minute Book and Ledger of Fredericksburg Lodge, No. 4, in
Virginia, of which we have a photostat, is still in possession of the
Lodge, showing that "GEORGE WASHINGTON was entered November 4, 1752, and
on November 6, paid for his entrance L2. 3. 0, March 3, 1753, GEORGE
WASHINGTON was passed to Fellow-Craft; August 4, 1753, GEORGE WASHINGTON
was raised Master Mason."

[8] Catalogue of Washington Collection in Boston Athenaeum, Boston, 1897,
p. 185.

[9] Cf. "Works of William Smith, D.D.," Philadelphia, 1803, Vol. II, pp.
27-88, also "Life and Correspondence of Rev. William Smith, D.D.,"
Philadelphia, 1880, Vol. II, p. 9. _Et seq._

[10] For an exhaustive sketch of Brother Moses Michael Hays, see _The
American Freemason_, Vol. V, p. 576.

[11] "Newport, ss. Newport, August 18th, A.D. 1832. I certify that the
extracts taken from the records of King David's Lodge, Newport,
contained in the above and three foregoing pages, have been by me
compared with the minutes contained in two books purporting and
appearing to be the original records of said Lodge, and found to be true
and accurate copies of the same.

  "Quid attestor,         "GEO. C. MASON.
                    _"Jus. Peace and Pub. Not'y."_

Cf. "Anti-masonic Republican Convention of Massachusetts held at
Worcester, September 5-6, 1832," p. 23.

[12] For a full account of this episode, see "Freemasonry in
Pennsylvania," Barratt and Sachse, Philadelphia, 1908, Vol. 1, Chapter
XII; "WASHINGTON as General Grand Master," p. 393 _et seq._




I

CORRESPONDENCE WITH WATSON & CASSOUL, NANTES, FRANCE, AUGUST, 1782.


The earliest letter of General GEORGE WASHINGTON of Masonic Import known
is the one written while in camp at Newburgh in New York, dated State of
New York, August 10, 1782, to the firm of Watson and Cassoul in Nantes,
France, in which his friend, Brother Elkanah Watson was the chief
partner, thanking the firm for the Masonic Apron and ornaments sent him
from Nantes, France.

This apron is now in the possession of the Alexandria-Washington Lodge,
No. 22, at Alexandria, Virginia.

Elkanah Watson in his Memoirs states:[13]

     "Wishing to pay some mark of respect to our beloved Washington, I
     employed, in conjunction with my friend M. Cossoul, nuns in one of
     the convents at Nantes to prepare some elegant Masonic ornaments,
     and gave them a plan for combining the American and French Flags on
     the apron designed for this use. They were executed in a superior
     and expensive style. We transmitted them to America, accompanied by
     an appropriate address."


By the above extract is shown beyond all doubt the error in the
statement so repeatedly made, that the apron at Alexandria is the one
made by the Marquise de Lafayette, and presented to WASHINGTON by
General Lafayette, during his visit to Mount Vernon in 1784, and the one
in the Museum of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, that of Watson and
Cassoul.[14]

Following letter was sent to WASHINGTON, together with the Masonic Apron
and "Ornaments," by Messrs. Watson and Cassoul, from France under date
"east of Nantes," 23d 1st Month, 5782.[15]

     "TO HIS EXCELLENCY, GENERAL WASHINGTON, AMERICA.

     "_Most Illustrious and Respected Brother:_

     "In the moment when all Europe admire and feel the effects of your
     glorious efforts in support of American liberty, we hasten to offer
     for your acceptance a small pledge of our homage. Zealous lovers of
     liberty and its institutions, we have experienced the most refined
     joy in seeing our chief and brother stand forth in its defence, and
     in defence of a newborn nation of Republicans.

     "Your glorious career will not be confined to the protection of
     American liberty, but its ultimate effect will extend to the whole
     human family, since Providence has evidently selected you as an
     instrument in his hands, to fulfill his eternal decrees.

     "It is to you, therefore, the glorious orb of America, we presume
     to offer Masonic ornaments, as an emblem of your virtues. May the
     Grand Architect of the Universe be the Guardian of your precious
     days, for the glory of the Western Hemisphere and the entire
     universe. Such are the vows of those who have the favor to be by
     all the known numbers."

        "Your affectionate brothers,
          "WATSON & CASSOUL."

     "East of Nantes, 23d 1st Month, 5782."


=WASHINGTON'S HEADQUARTERS

NEWBURGH-ON-THE-HUDSON WHERE THE WATSON AND CASSOUL LETTER WAS WRITTEN,
AUGUST, 1782.=


Owing to the uncertain intercourse between the two countries, it was
almost seven months before Brother WASHINGTON received the Masonic
apron, ornaments and letter from France. He at that time was in camp
with the army at Newburg on the Hudson.[16]

In reply WASHINGTON sent the following autograph letter to the donors in
Nantes, viz.:

     "STATE OF NEW YORK
     "Augt 10th 1782.

     "Gentn.

     "The Masonick Ornamts
     "which accompanied your Bro-
     "therly Address of the 23d of
     "Jany last, tho' elegant in
     "themselves, were rendered
     "more valuable by the flattering
     "sentiments, and affectionate
     "manner, in which they were
     "presented.--

     "If my endeavours to
     "avert the evil, with which this
     "Country was threatned by a
     "deliberate plan of Tyranny,
     "should be crowned with the suc
     "cess that is wished--The praise
     "is due to the _Grand Architect_
     "of the Universe; who did not see
     "fit to suffer his superstructures
     "and justice, to be subjected to the
     "Ambition of the Princes of this
     "World, or to the rod of oppression,
     "in the hands of any power upon
     "Earth.--

     "For your affectionate
     "Vows, permit me to be grateful;
     "--and offer mine for true Brothers
     "in all parts of the world; and
     "to assure you of the sincerity
     "with which I am

        "Yrs
          "Go. Washington"

     "Messrs
       "Watson & Cosson[17]
         "East of Nantes"


This autograph letter from WASHINGTON to Messrs. Watson and Cassoul is
now in the possession of the Grand Lodge of New York, who purchased it
from a member of the Watson family in the year 1866 or 1867 at a cost of
approximately $1,000, and is now framed and secured between two sheets
of glass in the collection of the Committee of Antiquities of the Grand
Lodge F. & A. M. of New York.[18]

It is written upon two pages of an ordinary letter sheet, and was a copy
of one written by WASHINGTON, with which he was not entirely satisfied,
as shown by the changes made in the text before it was sent to France.
The first copy WASHINGTON retained, and is now in the Library of
Congress, and is here given for comparison, viz:

     "STATE OF NEW YORK,
     "Augt 10th 1782.

     "_Gentn._,

     "The Masonick Orna-
     "ments which accompanied your
     "Brotherly Address of the 23d.
     "of the first month, tho' elegant
     "in themselves, were rendered
     "more valuable by the flattering
     "sentiments, and affectionate
     "manner, in which they were
     "offered.--

     "If my endeavours to
     "avert the evil, with which
     "this Country was threatned, by
     "a deliberate plan of Tyranny,
     "should be crowned with the
     "success that is wished--the
     "praise is due to the _Grand
     "Architect_ of the Universe; who
             see fit to
     "who did not ^ suffer his superstruc
     "tures & justice, to be subjected
       ambition of the Princes of this world--or
     "to the ^ rod of oppression, in the
     "hands of any power upon Earth.

     "For your affectionate
     "vows, permit me to be grateful;
     "and offer mine for true Brothers
     "in all parts of the world; and
     "to assure you of the sincerity
     "with which I am,

        "Yrs.
          "Go. Washington"

     Endorsed
       to
     "Messrs. Watson &
     "Cosson--Nantes
       "10th Augt 1782."


=FAC-SIMILE OF THE ORIGINAL DRAFT OF WASHINGTON'S LETTER TO WATSON AND
CASSOUL, NEW YORK, AUGUST 10, 1782.=


A photographic fac-simile of the letter now in New York, and a photostat
of the original copy retained by WASHINGTON are in the collection of the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

The firm of Watson and Cassoul of Nantes, France, acted as confidential
agents of the American Government during the Revolutionary period, as is
shown by their correspondence with Benjamin Franklin in the Franklin
Mss. collection of the American Philosophical Society.[19] Elkanah
Watson was also a bearer of despatches to Dr. Franklin.




Footnotes:

[13] "Men and Times of the Revolution, or Memoirs of Elkanah Watson,"
New York, 1856, pp. 135, 136.

[14] Cf. "Proceedings Grand Lodge of New York," 1867, p. 28.

[15] "Memoirs of Elkanah Watson," p. 135.

[16] Cf. "Itinerary of General WASHINGTON from June 15, 1775, to
December 23, 1783," by William S. Baker, Philadelphia, 1892, p. 271.

[17] It will be noted that on both the draft and letter, WASHINGTON
spells the name Cassoul--"Cosson."

[18] Catalogue of Antiquities and Curios, Grand Lodge F. & A. M., New
York, Class J, No. 1, New York, 1905.

[19] Cf. "Calendar of the Papers of Benjamin Franklin in the Library of
the American Philosophical Society," edited by I. Minis Hays, Volume V,
p. 312.




II

CORRESPONDENCE WITH ALEXANDRIA LODGE, NO. 39, VIRGINIA, DECEMBER, 1783.


The next Masonic Letter of Brother WASHINGTON of which we have any
knowledge is the one written in answer to a letter sent him, upon his
return to civil life by the Brethren of Lodge No. 39, on the register of
the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, which met at Alexandria, Virginia.

December 23, 1783, General WASHINGTON presented himself to "The United
States in Congress Assembled," at Annapolis, Maryland, and resigned his
Commission that he had received on June 17, 1775, as Commander-in-Chief
of the Armies of the United States.

Upon Christmas Eve he returned to Mount Vernon, whereupon the Brethren
at Alexandria, who, it must be remembered, were working under a
Pennsylvania Warrant, at once sent the following Address signed by the
Officers of Lodge No. 39, to Brother WASHINGTON at Mount Vernon,[20]
viz.:

     "_Sir_: Whilst all denominations of people bless the happy occasion
     of your excellency's return to enjoy private and domestic felicity,
     permit us, sir, the members of Lodge No. 39, lately established in
     Alexandria, to assure your excellency, that we, as a mystical body,
     rejoice in having a brother so near us, whose preeminent
     benevolence has secured the happiness of millions; and that we
     shall esteem ourselves highly honored at all times your excellency
     shall be pleased to join us in the needful business."

     "We have the honor to be, in the name and behalf of No. 39, your
     excellency's

     "Devoted friends and brothers,
        "ROBERT ADAM, M.
        "E. C. DICK, S. W.
        "J. ALLISON, J. W.
        "WM. RAMSAY, _Treas._"

     "His Excellency General Washington."


Two days later Brother WASHINGTON sent following reply,[21] viz.:

     "MOUNT VERNON 28th Decr. 1783.

     "_Gentlemen_:

     "With pleasing sensibility
     "I received your favor of the 26th, and
     "beg leave to offer you my sincere thanks
     "for the favorable sentiments with
     "which it abounds.--

     "I shall always feel pleasure
     "when it may be in my power to ren-
     "der service to Lodge No 39, and in
     "every act of brotherly kindness to the
     "Members of it; being with great truth.

        "Your affecte Brother
        "and Obedt Servant
          "Go. Washington"

     "Robt Adam Esqr Master,
       "& the Wardens & Treasr
         "of Lodge No 39."


No copy of either address nor reply of this correspondence has thus far
been found among the Washington papers in the Library of Congress, by
the present writer.

Brother Robert Adam, the Master of Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, was a Son
of the Rev. John Adam, D.D., and Janet Campbell, of Kelbride, Scotland,
was born May 4, 1731; he emigrated to America in 1753, and, after a
short residence at Annapolis, Md., established himself at a pleasant
country residence in Fairfax County, Virginia, about four miles from
Alexandria. He was a gentleman of refined taste, cultivation and wealth,
and interested himself in everything that could promote the prosperity
of his adopted home.


=WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO ALEXANDRIA LODGE, NO. 39. ORIGINAL IN
ALEXANDRIA-WASHINGTON LODGE, NO. 22, ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA.=


It appears that during his residence at Annapolis, he was made a Mason
in a clandestine or irregular Lodge, and in the year 1783 applied for a
dispensation from the Grand Master of Pennsylvania, to apply to Lodge
No. 2, for initiation and membership.

Brother Dr. Elisha Cullen Dick, Senior Warden of Lodge No. 39, was a
native of Pennsylvania, born near Marcus Hook, in Delaware County, about
1753, and died at Alexandria, Va., September 22, 1825. He was a son of
Archibald Dick, a member of Lodge No. 2 at Philadelphia, and joined the
same Lodge, September 15, 1779.[22] Brother Elisha C. Dick was a
graduate of the old Pequea Academy, and of the College of Pennsylvania.
He began the study of medicine under Drs. William Shippen and Benjamin
Rush. After graduating he settled in Alexandria, Va., and at once became
active in Masonic circles in that city, and was instrumental in having
the petition presented to the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania for a warrant,
which was granted under the name and number "Alexandria Lodge No. 39."

Upon the records of the Lodge, Brother Dick appears as both predecessor
and successor of Brother WASHINGTON as Master. Brother Dick was the
first consulting physician in WASHINGTON's last illness, and also
conducted the Masonic services at WASHINGTON's funeral on December 18,
1799. A biography of Dr. Dick is in the Library of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania.

Brother John Allison, the Junior Warden of Lodge No. 39, had served as
Major in the 1st Virginia State Regiment, and later as Lieutenant
Colonel.

Brother William Ramsay, Treasurer of Lodge No. 39, was an old personal
friend of WASHINGTON.

For a history of Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, warranted by the Grand Lodge
of Pennsylvania, February 3, 1783, which was constituted on the second
floor of a large three-story frame building, known as the "Lamb Tavern,"
on the twenty-fifth of February, 1783, the Masonic student is referred
to "Old Masonic Lodges of Pennsylvania," Philadelphia, 1913, Chapter
XLVI, pp. 153-168.

This tavern was situated on the west side of Union Street, between
Prince and Duke Streets, Alexandria, the site of which is now known as
No. 55 South Union Street.[23]



Footnotes:

[20] Cf. "Old Masonic Lodges of Pennsylvania--Moderns and Ancients,"
Julius F. Sachse, Philadelphia, 1913, Vol. II, p. 157. Also _Vide_
"Washington the Man and the Mason," by Charles H. Callahan, published
under the auspices of the "Memorial Temple Committee of the George
Washington Masonic National Memorial Association," Washington, D. C.,
1913.

[21] Original among Washington relics in Alexandria-Washington Lodge,
No. 22, Alexandria, Virginia. Fac-simile in Washington collection of
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

[22] Elisha C. Dick's petition was presented in Lodge No. 2, September
14, 1779, approved and entered by virtue of a dispensation from the
Grand Master, September 15; passed and raised, September 23.
"Freemasonry in Pennsylvania," Vol. I, pp. 352, 353.

[23] Cf. "The Lodge of Washington," by F. L. Brocket, Alexandria, Va.,
1876.




III

CORRESPONDENCE WITH ALEXANDRIA LODGE, NO. 39, VIRGINIA, JUNE, 1784.


The next Washington letter of Masonic import in chronological order is
his reply to an invitation to join the brethren of Alexandria Lodge, No.
39, in the celebration of St. John the Baptist's Day, June 24, 1784, to
which WASHINGTON sent the following reply, accepting the fraternal
invitation.

     "MOUNT VERNON, June 19, 1784.[24]

     "_Dear Sir_: With pleasure, I received the invita- tion of the
     master and members of Lodge No. 39, to dine with them on the
     approaching anniversary of St. John the Baptist. If nothing
     unforeseen at present interferes, I will have the honor of doing it.
     For the polite and flattering terms in which you have expressed
     their wishes, you will please accept my thanks."

        "With esteem and respect,
          "I am, dear sir,
            "Your most Ob't serv't
              "Go. Washington"

     "Wm. Herbert, Esquire."


=PLACE OF MEETING OF ALEXANDRIA LODGE, No. 39, ON PENNSYLVANIA REGISTER,
ALEXANDRIA VIRGINIA, WHERE GENERAL WASHINGTON ACCEPTED HONORARY MEMBERSHIP,
JUNE 24, 1784.=


No copy of this invitation nor acceptance, has thus far been found among
the Washington papers.

The original of this letter is also said to be among the relics of
Alexandria-Washington Lodge, No. 22. As no fac-simile copy was
obtainable, an engrossed copy for same was substituted in the collection
of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

This banquet was held at Wise's tavern[25] and was participated in by
WASHINGTON, who upon this festive occasion was elected an honorary
Member of Lodge No. 39, upon the Pennsylvania register, and thus became
a Pennsylvania Freemason, and his name is duly recorded as such upon the
minutes of Lodge No. 39.

This fact further contradicts the Anti-Masonic arguments based upon the
Snyder letter so extensively used during the years 1826-1833, that
WASHINGTON never belonged to any Masonic Lodge, after his initiation in
the Fredericksburg Lodge in 1752.

The above note as recorded upon the Minutes of Alexandria Lodge, No. 39,
shows that WASHINGTON was in complete harmony with the Masonic
Fraternity; further, that by his acceptance of membership, WASHINGTON
became a Pennsylvania Mason.

Among the cherished relics in the Alexandria Lodge, there is none more
valuable than the Masonic portrait of Brother WASHINGTON, which forms
the frontispiece of this volume. This was painted from life in pastel,
by William Williams, at Philadelphia in 1794.

In the year 1910 a fac-simile of this portrait was made in oil by Miss
Fanny M. Burke, an artist of repute, and a great-granddaughter of Thomas
Jefferson. This replica made for the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania is the
only one ever made of this portrait and shows Brother WASHINGTON as a
man and Mason, neither heroized nor idealized.[26]


=GEORGE WASHINGTON

BY JEAN ANTOINE HOUDON, 1785.=



Footnotes:

[24] "Washington and his Masonic Compeers," by Sidney Hayden, New York,
1866, p. 104.

[25] John Wise's tavern, in which the above Masonic Banquet was held, is
a large three-story brick building still standing on high ground at the
northeast corner of Cameron and Fairfax Streets, Alexandria. At that
time it had an unobstructed view of the Potomac.

[26] _Vide_ "Abstract of Proceedings of the Proceedings Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania, During the Year 1910," pp. 110-117.




IV

CORRESPONDENCE WITH KING DAVID'S LODGE, NO. 1, RHODE ISLAND, AUGUST,
1790.


The next correspondence in chronological order is the letter, sent in
reply to the Address delivered by the Brethren of King David's Lodge,
No. 1, at Newport, Rhode Island, to President WASHINGTON, August 17,
1790, during his visit to New England.

By referring to the Minutes of this old Lodge following entry is found:

     "At a Lodge, called by request of several Breth-
     "ren on Tuesday evening, August 17, 5790, an
     "Entered Apprentice Lodge being opened in due
     "form proceeded to business, when it was proposed
     "to address the President of the United States.
     "The R. W. Master (Moses Seixas) Henry Sher-
     "burne, and the Secretary, [William Littlefield]
     "were appointed a committee for that purpose,
     "after which the Lodge closed."[27]


Following address was prepared and according to local tradition was
publicly presented, by the Committee to President WASHINGTON, in the
Venerable Sanctuary of the Jewish Congregation at Newport; the Brethren
of King David's Lodge being present:

     "TO GEORGE WASHINGTON, _President of the United
                                 States of America._

     "We the Master, Wardens, and Brethren of
     "King David's Lodge in New Port Rhode Island
     "with joyful hearts embrace this opportunity to
     "greet you as a Brother, and to hail you welcome
     "to Rhode Island. We exult in the thought that
     "as Masonry has always been patronised by the
     "wise, the good, and the great, so that it stood
     "and ever will stand, as its fixtures are on the
     "immutable pillars of faith, hope, and charity.

     "With unspeakable pleasure we gratulate
     "you as filling the presidential chair with the
     "applause of a numerous and enlightened people
     "Whilst at the same time we felicitate ourselves
     "in the honor done the brotherhood by your many
     "exemplary virtues and emanations of goodness
     "proceeding from a heart worthy of possessing
     "the ancient mysteries of our craft; being persuaded
     "that the wisdom and grace with which heaven
     "has endowed you, will square all your thoughts,
     "words, and actions by the eternal laws of honor,
     "equity, and truth, so as to promote the advancement
     "of all good works, your own happiness, and that
     "of mankind.

     "Permit us then, illustrious Brother,
     "cordially to salute you with three times three
     "and to add our fervent supplications that the
     "sovereign architect of the universe may always
     "encompass you with his holy protection.

                 "MOSES SEIXAS[28]   _Master_
     "New Port Augt 17, 1790.      _Committee_.
                 "HY SHERBURNE
     "By order
       "WM LITTLEFIELD, _Secy._"


Brother Moses Seixas was born in New York, March 28, 1744; died in New
York City, November 29, 1809. He was a merchant in Newport, Rhode
Island, and one of the founders of the Newport Bank of Rhode Island, of
which he was cashier until his death. He succeeded Brother Moses M. Hays
as Worshipful Master of King David's Lodge at Newport. He was also the
first Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Rhode Island. It was Moses
Seixas who addressed a letter of welcome in the name of the Jewish
congregation to GEORGE WASHINGTON when the latter visited Newport, and
it was to him that WASHINGTON's answer was addressed.

The Town Hall at Newport being out of repair at that time the ancient
Jewish Synagogue on the main street was used, upon that and several
other public occasions. It is an interesting fact that this sacred
edifice is still preserved in the same condition as it was during the
Colonial period.

So far as known this address was the first of Masonic import made to
WASHINGTON as President. Unfortunately, the exact date of presentation
and receipt of his answer is not known to a certainty, as there does not
appear to be any date upon either the original documents or the copies
in WASHINGTON's letter book.

The original address and WASHINGTON's reply to the Master, Wardens and
Brethren of King David's Lodge in Newport, the latter signed in
autograph by WASHINGTON, are in the Athenaeum collection at Boston,
Massachusetts.[29]

Following copy of the President's answer is taken from his letter
book.[30] Both address and answer in the letter book are in the
handwriting of Major William Jackson, secretary to the President.

A photostat of the original entry is in the Archives of the Grand
Lodge of Pennsylvania. It will be noted that there is neither place nor
date given.


=FAC-SIMILE OF REPLY TO KING DAVID'S LODGE, NO. 1, NEWPORT, R. I. LETTER
BOOK II, FOLIO 29.=


President WASHINGTON arrived at Newport, R.I., at eight o'clock on
Tuesday morning, August 17, 1790. On the next day, Wednesday, the
President and his suite left on the Packet "Hancock" at nine o'clock in
the morning for Providence.

His company consisted of Governor Clinton of New York, Thomas Jefferson,
Secretary of State, Senator Theodore Foster, Judge Blair, Mr. Smith of
South Carolina and Mr. Gorman of New Hampshire; members of Congress.[31]

WASHINGTON left Providence, Saturday, August 21, and arrived in New York
upon the following day, Sunday, August 22, 1790,[32] and sent the
following reply to the Newport Brethren:

     "TO THE MASTER, WARDENS, AND BRETHREN OF
     "KING DAVIDS LODGE IN NEWPORT RHODE ISLAND."

     "_Gentlemen_,

     "I receive the welcome which you
     "give me to Rhode Island with pleasure, and I
     "acknowledge my obligations for the flattering
     "expressions of regard, contained in your address,
     "with grateful sincerity.

     "Being persuaded that a just
     "application of the principles, on which the Masonic
     "Fraternity is founded, must be promotive of
     "private virtue and public prosperity, I shall
     "always be happy to advance the interests of
     "the Society, and to be considered by them as
     "a deserving brother.

     "My best wishes, Gentlemen,
     "are offered for your individual happiness."[33]

        "Go. Washington"


=FAC-SIMILE OF NOTICE SENT TO BROTHER WASHINGTON AT MOUNT VERNON TO
ATTEND HIS LODGE. TREASURED BY THE WIFE OF PRESIDENT MADISON UNTIL HER
DEATH. ORIGINAL IN ARCHIVES OF GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA. MSS. VOL. A,
FOLIO 81.=



Footnotes:

[27] A copy of the Extracts from the Records of King David's Lodge, No.
1, as made by Ara Hildreth, Esq., is in the Archives of the Grand Lodge
of Pennsylvania, Mss. Volume Q, R.I. 7.

Cf. also a verified copy of the Minute in "Proceedings of the
Anti-Masonic Republican Convention of Massachusetts, Boston, 1832," p.
22.

[28] _Vide_ "The Jews and Masonry in the United States," by Samuel
Oppenheim, New York, 1810, p. 22 _et seq._

[29] Cf. "Catalogue of the Washington Collection in the Boston
Athenaeum," Boston, 1897, p. 331.

[30] Letterbook II, p. 29.

[31] Cf. "Washington after the Revolution," W. S. Baker, Philadelphia,
1898, p. 192.

[32] Cf. _Pennsylvania Packet_, August 30-31 1790.

[33] Copy of Address in Letter Book II, pp. 27-28, Photostat of same in
Archives of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.




V

CORRESPONDENCE WITH ST. JOHN'S LODGE, NO. 2 AT NEWBERN, N. C., APRIL,
1791.


The next Masonic letter of President WASHINGTON was written, in answer
to an address by the brethren of St. John's Lodge, No. 2, at Newbern,
North Carolina, during his southern tour in 1791.

April 7, 1791, WASHINGTON started on a tour through the Southern States,
by way of Fredericksburg, Richmond, and Petersburg, Virginia; Halifax,
Tarborough, Newbern, and Wilmington, North Carolina; Georgetown, and
Charleston, South Carolina; and Savannah, Georgia.

When advice of this proposed presidential visit reached Newbern, the
brethren of St. John's Lodge, No. 2,[34] at the stated meeting held on
April 1, 1791, passed the following resolution. "_Resolved_, that an
address shall be presented to Brother GEORGE WASHINGTON, in behalf of
this Lodge, on his arriving in this town."[35]

Upon his arrival at Newbern, N. C., April 20, following address was
presented to the President,[36] which, together with the reply, has thus
far never been in print or noted:

     "TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
         AMERICA.

     "The Address of St Johns Lodge No. 2 of
         Newbern.

     "_Right Worshipful Sir_,

     "We the Master, Officers, and Members of St.
     "Johns Lodge No 2, of Newbern, beg leave to hail
     "you welcome with three times three.

     "We approach you not with the language of
     "adulation, but sincere fraternal affection--your
     "works having proved you to be the true and faith-
     "ful brother, the skilful and expert Craftsman, the
     "just and upright man, But the powers of elo-
     "quence are too feeble to express with sufficient
     "energy the cordial warmth with which our bosoms
     "glow toward you.

     "We therefore most ardently wish, most fervently
     "and devoutly pray, That the Providence of the
     "most high may strengthen, establish, and protect
     "you, in your walk through this life; and when you
     "shall be called off from your terrestrial labours by
     "command of our divine grand master, and your
     "operations sealed with the mark of his approbation,
     "may your soul be eternally refreshed with the
     "streams of living water which flow at the right
     "hand of God, and when the supreme architect of
     "all worlds shall collect his most precious jewels as
     "ornaments of the celestial Jerusalem, may you
     "everlastingly shine among those of the brightest
     "lustre.

     "We are in our own behalf, and that of the
     "Members of this Lodge,

        "Right worshipful Sir;
     "St Johns Lodge No. 2.
        "Your true and faithful brethren
     "April 20th 5791.
        "ISAAC GUION _Master_.
        "SAMUEL CHAPMAN _Senior Warden_.
        "WILLIAM JOHNSTON, _Junior Warden_.
     "SOLOMON HALLING, EDW. PASTEUR, JAS CARNEY,
        "F. LOWTHROP.
             "_Members of the Committee_."


=FAC-SIMILE OF ADDRESS FROM ST. JOHN'S LODGE, NO. 2, NEWBERN, N. C.
LETTER BOOK II, FOLIO 47-48.=


Brothers: Isaac Guion, Worshipful Master, Samuel Chapman, Senior Warden,
William Johnston, Junior Warden, and Solomon Halling, signers to above
petition had all seen service in the Continental Army during the
Revolutionary War. Brother Guion served as Surgeon and Paymaster;
Brother Chapman, Captain in 8th North Carolina, serving until the close
of the War; Brother Johnston, Captain in North Carolina Militia and
present at Kings Mountain.

Brother Hailing was Surgeon of the 4th Carolina Regiment and served
until the close of the War.

     WASHINGTON'S REPLY[37] TO THE BRETHREN OF ST. JOHN'S LODGE.

     "TO THE MASTER, WARDENS, AND MEMBERS OF ST
         "JOHN'S LODGE NO. 2 OF NEWBERN.

     "_Gentlemen_,

     "I receive the cordial welcome which you
     "are pleased to give me with sincere gratitude.

     "My best ambition having ever aimed at
     "the unbiassed approbation of my fellow-citizens,
     "it is peculiarly pleasing to find my conduct
     "so affectionately approved by a fraternity whose as-
     "sociation is founded in justice and benevolence.

     "In reciprocating the wishes contained
     "in your address, be persuaded that I offer a sincere
     "prayer for your present and future happiness.

        "Go. Washington"


"At the following Meeting of St. John's Lodge, No. 2, April 29, 1791,
the Master laid before the Lodge the answer of Brother George Washington
ordered that it be read, which being done, Resolved that it be entered
on Minutes of this Lodge."[38] "The Address to Brother Washington and
his answer are both on the Minutes of the Lodge. The original letter may
have been lost during the late unpleasantness, as the Lodge lost nearly
everything it possessed."[39]



Footnotes:

[34] In the latter part of the eighteenth century, St. John's Lodge, No.
2, at Newbern, was very active, at which time it built a two-story
theatre and Masonic Hall, and took part in a number of local matters.

[35] Extract from Minutes by Brother J. F. Rhem, M.D., Newbern, N. C.

[36] Letter Book 2, pp. 47-48 in Library of Congress, Washington, D. C.;
photostat in Archives of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

[37] _Ibid._, p. 49; photostat in Archives of Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania.

[38] Extract from Minutes by Brother J. F. Rhem, M.D., Newbern, N. C.

[39] Brother J. F. Rhem, Newbern, N. C., in letter to Brother A. B.
Andrews, Jr., December 14, 1914.




VI

CORRESPONDENCE WITH PRINCE GEORGE'S LODGE, NO. 16, GEORGETOWN, S. C.,
APRIL, 1791.


WASHINGTON left Newbern, North Carolina, under an escort of horse, April
22, 1791, and arrived at Georgetown, South Carolina, by way of
Wilmington, N. C., Saturday, April 30, where he was received with a
salute of cannon, and by a company of infantry, and during the afternoon
was presented with the following address, by a Committee of Prince
George's Lodge, No. 16 (Moderns), of Georgetown, South Carolina.

This Lodge was one of the original six Lodges, which had been warranted
prior to 1756 in South Carolina, under the Jurisdiction of the
Provincial Grand Lodge, and through it, the Grand Lodge of England. It
is the only instance where a Lodge of the "Moderns" addressed Brother
WASHINGTON:

     "TO OUR ILLUSTRIOUS BROTHER GEORGE WASHINGTON.

     "_President of the United States._

     "At a time when all men are emulous to approach
     "you to express the lively sensations you inspire as
     "the Father of our country. Permit us the Brethren
     "of Prince George's Lodge No. 16 to have our share
     "in the general happiness in welcoming you to
     "Georgetown, and the pleasure of reflecting that we
     "behold in you the liberator of our country. the
     "distributor of its equal laws, and a Brother of our
     "most ancient and most honorable Order.

     "At the same time indulge us in congratulating
     "you on the truly honorable and happy situation in
     "which you now stand, as the Grand Conductor of
     "the political interests of these United States.

     "Having by your manly efforts caused the beau-
     "teous light of liberty to beam on this western hemi-
     "sphere, and by the wisdom Heaven has graciously
     "endowed you with established the liberties of
     "America on the justest and firmest basis that was
     "ever yet recorded in the annuals of history, you
     "now enjoy the supremest of all earthly happiness
     "that of diffusing peace, liberty, and safety to mil-
     "lions of your fellow-citizens.

     "As a true reward for your patriotic, noble and
     "exalted services we fervently pray the Grand Archi-
     "tect of the universe long to bless you with health,
     "stability, and power to continue you the Grand
     "Pillar of the arch of liberty in this vast empire,
     "which you have been so eminently distinguished in
     "raising to this pitch of perfection at which we now
     "behold it.

     "May the residue of your life be spent in ease
     "content and happiness, and as the Great Parent of
     "these United States may you long live to see your
     "children flourish under your happy auspices and
     "may you be finally rewarded with eternal happiness.

     "We conclude our present address with a fervent
     "wish that you will continue as you have hitherto
     "been, the friend of our ancient and honorable
     "Order, and of all worthy Masons.

        "I. WHITE
        "R. GRANT      _Committee from_
        "AB. COHEN     _Prince George's Lodge._
        "JOS. BLYTH.
        "J. CARSON.

     "George Town 30th April 1791."


Of the above signers, three of the brethren had served in the War for
Independence, viz.: Brother Isaac White, Lieutenant in North Carolina
Militia at Kings Mountain; Brother Reuben Grant, Ensign in the 6th North
Carolina Infantry, and Brother Joseph Blythe, Surgeon in 1st North
Carolina Regiment, taken prisoner at Charleston, May 12th, 1780;
exchanged June 14, 1781; in 4th North Carolina in February, 1782, and
served to close of war.


=FAC-SIMILE OF ADDRESS FROM THE BRETHREN OF PRINCE GEORGE'S LODGE, FOLIO
NO. 16, GEORGETOWN, SOUTH CAROLINA, APRIL, 1791. LETTER BOOK II, 59-60.=


The following reply unfortunately bears no date. Both address and reply
were entered in Washington Letter Book, No. II, folio 60-61. It is not
known what has became of the originals. No notice or copies of either of
the above documents have thus far been published.

     WASHINGTON'S REPLY.

     "TO THE BRETHREN OF PRINCE GEORGE'S LODGE,
         NO. 16.

     "_Gentlemen_:

     "The cordial welcome which you give me
     "to George Town, and the congratulations, you are
     "pleased to offer on my election to the chief
     "magistracy receive my grateful thanks.

     "I am much obliged by your good wishes
     "and reciprocate them with sincerity, assuring the
     "fraternity of my esteem, I request them to believe
     "that I shall always be ambitious of being considered
     "a deserving Brother.

        Go. Washington


=GENERAL MORDECAI GIST.

B. BALTIMORE, MD., 1743. D. CHARLESTON, S. C., 1792.

WHO, AS GRAND MASTER OF SOUTH CAROLINA, SIGNED THE ADDRESS TO BROTHER
WASHINGTON.=




VII

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF SOUTH CAROLINA, MAY, 1791.


President WASHINGTON left Georgetown at six o'clock in the evening, May
1, 1791, reaching Charleston, South Carolina, Monday, May 2, in a
twelve-oared barge rowed by twelve American captains of ships
accompanied by a great number of boats with gentlemen and ladies in
them, and two boats with music.[40] Brother WASHINGTON remained in
Charleston until May 9.

Wednesday, May 4, 1791, General Mordecai Gist, an old companion in arms
of WASHINGTON, and formerly Master of the Military Lodge in the Maryland
line (No. 27 upon the register of Pennsylvania),[41] but now Grand
Master of the Grand Lodge of Ancient York Masons of South Carolina,
attended by the other present and past grand officers,[42] waited on
their beloved brother, the president of the United States, and presented
the following address:[43]

     "_Sir_--Induced by a respect for your public and private character,
     as well as the relation in which you stand with the brethren of
     this society, we the Grand Lodge of the State of South Carolina,
     Ancient York Masons, beg leave to offer our sincere congratulations
     on your arrival in this state.

     "We felicitate you on the establishment and exercise of a permanent
     government, whose foundation was laid under your auspices by
     military achievements, upon which have been progressively reared
     the pillars of the free republic over which you preside, supported
     by wisdom, strength, and beauty unrivalled among the nations of the
     world.

     "The fabric thus raised and committed to your superintendence, we
     earnestly wish may continue to produce order and harmony to
     succeeding ages, and be the asylum of virtue to the oppressed of
     all parts of the universe.

     "When we contemplate the distresses of war, the instances of
     humanity displayed by the Craft afford some relief to the feeling
     mind; and it gives us the most pleasing sensation to recollect,
     that amidst the difficulties attendant on your late military
     stations, you still associated with, and patronized the Ancient
     Fraternity.

     "Distinguished always by your virtues, more than the exalted
     stations in which you have moved, we exult in the opportunity you
     now give us of hailing you brother of our Order, and trust from
     your knowledge of our institution, to merit your countenance and
     support.

     "With fervent zeal for your happiness, we pray that a life so dear
     to the bosom of this society, and to society in general, may be
     long, very long preserved; and when you leave the temporal symbolic
     lodges of this world, may you be received into the celestial lodge
     of light and perfection, where the Grand Master Architect of the
     Universe presides.

     "Done in behalf of the Grand Lodge.

        "M. GIST, G. M."[44]

     "Charleston, 2d May, 1791."


To this address WASHINGTON returned the following reply.[45]

     "_Gentlemen_:--I am much obliged by the respect which you are so
     good as to declare for my public and private character. I recognize
     with pleasure my relation to the brethren of your Society, and I
     accept with gratitude your congratulations on my arrival in South
     Carolina.

     "Your sentiments, on the establishment and exercise of our equal
     government, are worthy of an association, whose principles lead to
     purity of morals, and are beneficial of action.

     "The fabric of our freedom is placed on the enduring basis of
     public virtue, and will, I fondly hope, long continue to protect
     the prosperity of the architects who raised it. I shall be happy,
     on every occasion, to evince my regard for the Fraternity. For your
     prosperity individually, I offer my best wishes."

        "Go. Washington"


This letter was probably destroyed with other Grand Lodge property when
Columbia, South Carolina, was burned by Sherman's Army during the war
between the States.[46]

Fortunately, the original draft of WASHINGTON's reply, was found among
the Washington papers now in the Library of Congress. This is written
upon two pages of a letter sheet: the first page shows a paragraph which
was suppressed and did not appear upon the clear copy sent to the Grand
Lodge of Ancient York Masons of South Carolina.

A photostat of this draft is in the collection of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania, viz.:

     "TO THE GRAND LODGE OF THE STATE OF SOUTH
       "CAROLINA ANCIENT YORK MASONS.

     "_Gentlemen_,

     "I am much obliged by the respect
     "which you are so good as to declare for my
     "public and private character. I recognise
     "with pleasure my relation to the Brethren
     "of your Society--and I accept with gratitude
     "your congratulations on my arrival in
     "South Carolina.

     "_Your felicitations It is peculiarly
                           general
     "pleasing to observe the ^ satisfaction expressed
     "on the establishment and exercise of the
     "federal government_--
     "Your sentiments on the establishment
     "and exercise of our equal government are
     "worthy of an association, whose principles
     "lead to purity of morals, and beneficence
     "of action--The fabric of our freedom
     "is placed on the enduring basis of
     "public virtue, and will long continue
     "to protect the Posterity of the architects
     "who raised it.

     "I shall be happy on every
                            regard
     "occasion to evince my respect for the
     "Fraternity, for whose happiness individually
     "I offer my best wishes.

        "Go. Washington"


=FAC-SIMILE OF DRAFT OF WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO ADDRESS FROM GRAND LODGE OF
SOUTH CAROLINA, MAY, 1791.

HANDWRITING OF MAYOR WILLIAM JACKSON.=


Upon the first page the four lines commencing with "Your felicitations"
and ending with "federal government" were crossed out, and as above
stated, were not in the reply sent to R. W. Grand Master Gist and his
officers.

In the third line from the bottom the word "regard" is substituted for
"respect."

Brother Gist was the original Warrant Master of the Regimental Lodge in
the Maryland line, No. 27, on the Roster of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania. After the war, Brother Gist settled in Charleston, South
Carolina, retaining his old Military Warrant, and, in 1786, applied to
the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, to renew this warrant, for a Lodge to
be located at Charleston under the same number. This request was
granted, and Brother Gist was again named as Warrant Master.

At the formation of the Grand Lodge of South Carolina Ancient York
Masons in 1787, Brother Gist was elected Deputy Grand Master and served
as such during the years 1787-88-89, and as Grand Master, 1790-1791.



Footnotes:

[40] Washington's Diary.

[41] Cf. "Old Masonic Lodges in Pennsylvania," Philadelphia, 1913, Vol.
2, p. 53 _et seq._

[42] Brother William Drayton, Past Grand Master; Brother Mordecai Gist,
Grand Master; Brother Thomas B. Bowen, Deputy Grand Master; Brother
George Miller, Senior Grand Warden; Brother John Mitchell, Junior Grand
Warden; Brother Thomas Gates, Grand Chaplain; Brother Robert Knox, Grand
Treasurer; Brother Alexandrer Alexander, Grand Secretary; Brother Israel
Meyers, Grand Tiler.

[43] _City Gazette_, Friday, May 6, 1791, p. 2, column 4.

[44] For full account of Lodge 27 and Brother Gist, _vide_ "Old Masonic
Lodges of Pennsylvania," before quoted, Vol. II, pp. 53-63.

[45] Cf. Hayden, "Washington and his Masonic Compeers," p. 135.

[46] William C. Mazyck, Right Worshipful Grand Secretary, G. L. of South
Carolina.




VIII

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF GEORGIA, MAY, 1791.


On the way from Charleston, South Carolina, to Savannah, Georgia,
WASHINGTON called on Mrs. Greene, the widow of late Brother General
Nathaniel Greene, at her plantation called Mulberry Grove, reaching
Savannah, Georgia, on the evening of Thursday, May 12, 1791.

Saturday, May 14, WASHINGTON was waited on by Brethren of the Grand
Lodge of Georgia and presented with the following address:[47]

     "TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

     "_Sir, and Brother_,

     "The Grand Master, Officers and Members of the
     "Grand Lodge of Georgia, beg leave to congratulate
     "you on your arrival in this city. Whilst your ex-
     "alted character claims the respect and deference of
     "all men, they from the benevolence of masonic prin-
     "ciples approach you with the familiar declaration
     "of fraternal affection.

     "Happy indeed that Society, renowned for its
     "antiquity, and pervading influence over the en-
     "lightened world, which having ranked a Frederick
     "at its head, can now boast of a Washington as a
     "Brother. A Brother who it justly hailed the Re-
     "deemer of his country, raised it to glory, and by his
     "conduct in public and private life has evinced to
     "Monarchs that true majesty consists not in splendid
     "royalty, but in intrinsic worth.

     "With these sentiments they rejoice at your pres-
     "ence in this State, and in common with their fellow-
     "citizens, greet you, thrice welcome, flattering them-
     "selves that your stay will be made agreeable.

     "May the great Architect of the Universe pre-
     "serve you whilst engaged in the work allotted you
     "on earth, and long continue you the brightest pil-
     "lar of our Temple, and when the supreme fiat shall
     "summon you hence, they pray the might I AM
     "may take you into his holy keeping,

        "Grand Lodge in Savannah
          "May 14th 5791.
            "GEO: HOUSTON,
              "_Grand Master_."


=BRO. WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO ADDRESS FROM THE GRAND LODGE OF GEORGIA, MAY,
1791. LETTER BOOK II, FOLIO 78.=


Upon the next day, Sunday, May 15, after attending the morning church
service, WASHINGTON left Savannah and set out for Augusta, Georgia,
halting for dinner at Mulberry Grove, the seat of Mrs. Nathaniel Greene.
The following reply to the Masonic address was sent to the Grand Lodge
of Georgia,[48] both address and reply now first published:

     "TO THE GRAND MASTER, OFFICERS AND MEMBERS
       "OF THE GRAND LODGE OF GEORGIA.

     "_Gentlemen_,

     "I am much obliged by your congratulations
     "on my arrival in this city, and I am highly indebted
     "to your favorable opinions.

     "Every circumstance contributes to
     "render my stay in Savannah agreeable, and it
     "is cause of regret to me that it must be so
     "short.

     "My best wishes are offered for the welfare
     "of the fraternity, and for your particular happiness.

        "Go. Washington"


=PRESIDENT WASHINGTON'S RESIDENCE IN PHILADELPHIA, A. D. 1790 A. D. 1797.

WHERE THE MASONIC ADDRESSES OF THE GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA WERE
DELIVERED.

FROM A CONTEMPORARY WATER COLOR PAINTING BELONGING TO THE LIBRARY
COMPANY OF PHILADELPHIA.

THE FIGURES ARE THOSE OF WASHINGTON AND ROBERT MORRIS.=



Footnotes:

[47] Washington Letter Book, II, folio 77. Photostat in Archives of the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

[48] Address and Reply, Letter Book II, folio 77-78.




IX

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA, JANUARY 3, 1792.


During the Presidential term of Brother WASHINGTON, the President, when
in Philadelphia, lived in a large double three-story brick mansion, on
the south side of Market Street, sixty feet east of Sixth Street, the
site of which is now occupied by three stores, viz.: Nos. 526, 528, 530.

The Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania then held its meetings in the upper
floor of the Meeting house of the Free Quakers, still standing, at the
southwest corner of Arch and Fifth Streets; this was but a short
distance from the presidential mansion. Brother WASHINGTON was
undoubtedly personally acquainted with many of its members, especially
such as had been officers during the Revolution, and were fellow members
of the Cincinnati.

On St. John's Day, December 27, 1791, a Grand Lodge was opened in ample
form,[49] and the Minutes of the last Grand Communication were read, as
far as concerns the election of Grand Officers.

The Grand Officers upon this occasion were:

Brother Jonathan Bayard Smith, _R. W. Grand Master_.

Brother Joseph Few, _Deputy Grand Master_.

Brother Thomas Procter, _Senior Grand Warden_.

Brother Gavin Hamilton, _Junior Grand Warden_.

Brother Peter Le Barbier Duplessis, _Grand Secretary_.

Brother Benjamin Mason, _Grand Treasurer_.

The Rev. Brother Dr. William Smith then addressed the Brethren in an
oration suitable to the Grand Day, and the thanks of the Lodge were
given to said Brother William Smith for the same.

After which, on motion and seconded, the Rev. Brother Dr. Smith and the
Right Worshipful Grand Officers were appointed a Committee to prepare an
address to our Illustrious Brother GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the
United States; and this Lodge was adjourned to the second day of January
next to receive the report of said Committee.

     "PHILADELPHIA, January 2d, 1792.

     "_Grand Lodge, By Adjournment_,[50]

     "A Grand Lodge was opened in ample form, and the Minutes of St.
     John's Day being read as far as relates to the appointment of a
     Committee to prepare an Address to our illustrious Brother George
     Washington, The Revd. Bro. Dr. Wm. Smith, one of the said
     Committee, presented the Draft of one which was read, Whereupon, on
     Motion and Seconded, the same was unanimously approved of, and
     Resolved, That the Rt. Wt. Grand Master, Depy. G. Master, and
     Grand Officers, with the Revd Bro. Smith, be a Committee to
     present the said Address in behalf of this Rt. Wt. Grand Lodge,
     signed by the Right Worshipful Grand Master, and Countersigned by
     the Grand Secretary.

     "Lodge closed at half past 9 o'clock in Harmony."


Following is the address presented to Brother WASHINGTON. Both the
original draft in the handwriting of Brother William Smith, showing
minor alterations, as well as a fair copy, are in the archives of the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.[51]

     "TO HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

     "_Sir and Brother_:

     "The Ancient _York Masons_ of the Jurisdiction of Pennsylvania, for
     the first time assembled in General _Communication_ to celebrate
     the Feast of St. John the Evangelist, since your Election to the
     _Chair_ of Government in the United States, beg leave to approach
     you with Congratulations from the East, and in the pride of
     Fraternal affection to hail you as the _Great Master Builder_
     (under the Supreme Architect) by whose labours the _Temple of
     Liberty_ hath been reared in the West, exhibiting to the Nations of
     the Earth a _Model_ of _Beauty_, _Order_ and _Harmony_ worthy of
     their Imitation and Praise.

     "Your Knowledge of the Origin and Objects of our Institution; its
     Tendency to promote the Social Affections and harmonize the Heart,
     give us a sure pledge that this tribute of our Veneration, this
     Effusion of our Love will not be ungrateful to you; nor will Heaven
     reject our _Prayer_ that you may be long continued to adorn the
     bright list of Master workmen which our Fraternity in the
     _terrestrial Lodge_; and that you may be late removed to that
     _Celestial Lodge_ where love and Harmony reign transcendent and
     Divine; where the great Architect more immediately presides, and
     where _Cherubim_ and _Seraphim_, wafting our Congratulations from
     _Earth to Heaven_, shall hail you _Brother_.

        (Seal)     "By order and in behalf of the Grand
                   "Lodge of Pennsylvania in general Com-
                   "munication assembled in ample form.


                   "J B Smith

        (Signed)                G.M.

                  [Illegible Signature]

       "Attest:                 Gd. Secry."


=FAC-SIMILE OF THE ORIGINAL ADDRESS READ BEFORE PRESIDENT WASHINGTON
BY REV. BRO. WILLIAM SMITH, D.D., JANUARY 3, 1792.

ORIGINAL IN ARCHIVES OF GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA. MSS.--VOLUME
A.--FOLIO.--21.=


On January 3, 1792, Jonathan Bayard Smith, the Right Worshipful Grand
Master, together with the Grand Officers and Rev. Brother William Smith
called on the President and delivered the above address.

The deputation was received in the dining room of the presidential
mansion. This was a room about thirty feet long, and where WASHINGTON
was accustomed to receive delegations.

At the Quarterly Communication held March 5, 1792, the Right Worshipful
Grand Master Jonathan B. Smith informed the Brethren that, in conformity
to the resolve of this Grand Lodge, he had, in company with the Grand
Officers and the Rev. Brother Dr. Smith, presented the address to our
illustrious Brother GEORGE WASHINGTON and had received an answer, which
was read.

     "TO THE ANCIENT YORK MASONS OF THE
       "JURISDICTION OF PENNSYLVANIA.

     "_Gentlemen and Brothers_,

     "I receive your kind Congratulations
     "with the purest sensations of fraternal affection:--and
     "from a heart deeply impressed with your generous
     "wishes for my present and future happiness, I beg
     "you to accept my thanks.

     "At the same time I request you will
     "be assured of my best wishes and earnest prayers
     "for your happiness while you remain in this terres-
     "tial Mansion, and that we may thereafter meet
     "as brethren in the Eternal Temple of the
     "Supreme Architect.

        "Go. Washington"


=FAC-SIMILE OF WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA,
JANUARY, 1792. ORIGINAL IN ARCHIVES OF THE GRAND LODGE.=


=WASHINGTON'S MASONIC APRON.

EMBROIDERED BY MADAM LAFAYETTE; PRESENTED AUGUST, 1784, BY BRO. GEN.
LAFAYETTE TO BRO. GEN. WASHINGTON; PRESENTED OCTOBER 26, 1816, BY THE
LEGATEES OF BRO. WASHINGTON TO THE WASHINGTON BENEVOLENT SOCIETY OF
PENNSYLVANIA; PRESENTED JULY 3, 1829, BY THE WASHINGTON BENEVOLENT
SOCIETY TO THE R. W. GRAND LODGE, F. &. A. M. OF PENNSYLVANIA.

ORIGINAL APRON IN MUSEUM OF THE GRAND LODGE.=


Whereupon, on motion and seconded, Resolved, unanimously, that the said
address and the answer thereto, shall be entered on the minutes.

This answer, in possession of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, is in the
handwriting of Tobias Lear, who was the private secretary of the
President, and for years attended to the details of WASHINGTON's
domestic affairs, and was liberally remembered by him in his will.

The letter was signed by WASHINGTON, who had both the address and answer
copied verbatim in one of his letter books[52] by Bartholomew Dandridge,
secretary to the President. A photostat copy of above, together with the
original answer by WASHINGTON is in the Archives of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania.

This address was read by Rev. Brother William Smith, one of the most
noted Episcopal preachers in Philadelphia, and the first Provost of the
College of Philadelphia, now the University of Pennsylvania. Brother
William Smith, D.D., had been an active member of the Masonic
Fraternity in Pennsylvania for forty years; he was the Chaplain of the
Grand Lodge of Moderns for almost a quarter of a century. In winter of
1778 he joined the Grand Lodge of Ancient York Masons, and for some time
served as Grand Secretary.[53]

Jonathan Bayard Smith, the Grand Master of Pennsylvania, was one of
Philadelphia's prominent citizens. During the Revolutionary period he
was an ardent patriot; he was among the earliest of those who espoused
the cause of independence. In 1775 he was chosen secretary of the
Committee of Safety, and in February, 1777, he was elected by the
assembly a delegate to the Continental Congress. He was a second time
chosen to this post, serving in the congresses of 1777-8. From April 4,
1777, till Nov. 13, 1778, he was prothonotary of the court of Common
Pleas.

On December 1, 1777, he presided at the public meeting, in Philadelphia,
of "Real Whigs," by whom it was resolved "That it be recommended to the
council of safety that in this great emergency ... every person between
the age of sixteen and fifty years be ordered out under arms." During
this year he was commissioned lieutenant-colonel of a battalion of
"Associators."


=J B SMITH

B. FEB. 21, 1742; D. JUNE 16, 1812.

GRAND MASTER OF MASONS IN PENNSYLVANIA, 1789-1794.=


In 1778 he was appointed a justice of the court of Common Pleas, Quarter
Sessions, and Orphans' Court, which post he held for many years. He
was appointed in 1781, one of the auditors of the accounts of
Pennsylvania troops in the service of the United States. In 1792, and
subsequently, he was chosen an alderman of the city, which was an office
of great dignity in his day, and in 1794 he was elected auditor-general
of Pennsylvania.

Brother Jonathan B. Smith was an active member of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania. He was the Senior Grand Warden in 1786, at the time when
the Provincial Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania: "_Resolved_, that the Grand
Lodge is, and ought to be perfectly independent and free of any such
foreign jurisdiction."[54]

In the two following years he was appointed Deputy Grand Master by Right
Worshipful Grand Master William Adcock; he was elected Right Worshipful
Grand Master in 1789 and served in that capacity for six years
(1789-1794). In the year 1798 he was again elected to that honorable
office, serving five more consecutive years (1798 to 1802), when he
declined reelection. The following action was taken by the Grand
Lodge:[55]

     "On Motion made and Seconded the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania
     impressed with a grateful sense of the long assiduous and highly
     useful labours of their late R. W. Grand Master, Bror Jonathan
     Bayard Smith, Esqr, previous to and during his service in the
     high Station which he has left, Resolved Unanimously, That the most
     respectful Thanks of the said G. Lodge be presented to their said
     Brother Jonathan Bayard Smith for the eminent services he has
     rendered to the Craft generally and more especially for the able,
     diligent and impartial manner in which he has discharged the Duties
     of the Chair and while they deplore the necessity of his now
     retiring from the Official Station amongst them which he has so
     Honourably filled, they hope for a continuance of his Brotherly
     Love, Aid and information and finally that he be requested to
     receive the best wishes of the Grand Lodge for a prolongation of
     his useful life, a commensurate enjoyment of his Health and his
     final Happiness in the Mansion of Everlasting Rest."


Brother Joseph Few, Deputy Grand Master, was also a Revolutionary
Soldier, having served as Regimental Quarter Master with the 4th
Continental Artillery.

Brother Thomas Procter, Senior Grand Warden, formerly Colonel of the
Pennsylvania Artillery, and Warrant Master of the Military Lodge, No.
19, upon the Roster of Pennsylvania was prominent in both civil and
political affairs during WASHINGTON's administration. A full account of
Brother Thomas Procter and this Military Lodge will be found in the
History of the Old Masonic Lodges of Pennsylvania, published by the
Grand Lodge in 1913.[56]

For a sketch of Brother Peter Le Barbier Duplessis, the reader is
referred to the same volume.[57]


=WASHINGTON'S PAST MASTER'S JEWEL.

Replica in the Museum of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.=



Footnotes:

[49] Reprint of Minutes of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, Vol. I, p. 178.

[50] _Ibid._, p. 180.

[51] MSS. Volume A, folio 17, 19, 21.

[52] Letter Book II, pp. 104-105.

[53] Cf. "Old Masonic Lodges of Pennsylvania," Vol. I, p. 201.

[54] Cf. Reprint of Minutes of Grand Lodge, Vol. I, p. 96 _et seq._

[55] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 68.

[56] Volume II, Chapter XXVI, pp. 1-36. Cf. also "Freemasonry in
Pennsylvania," Vol. I and II, for various references to Col. Procter.

[57] Cf. "Old Lodges," Vol. II, pp. 256 _et seq._




X

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS, DECEMBER, 1792.


     "At Grand Lodge held at Concert Hall, Boston, 10th of December, 5792,
     being a Quarterly Communication it was

     "_Resolved_, That the Grand Master, with the Grand Wardens, present
     to our Most Beloved Brother

                         GEORGE WASHINGTON,

     the new Book of Constitutions, with a suitable address."


At the next Quarterly Communication we find that,

     "Agreeably to a resolve at the last Quarterly Communication, the
     Grand Master, with his Wardens, reported:

     "That they had written to our beloved President and Brother, George
     Washington, and presented him with a Book of Constitutions, to
     which letter he had been pleased to make answer. The letter and
     answer were read, and Voted to be inserted in the records of the
     Grand Lodge."


This address was evidently sent to President WASHINGTON at Philadelphia,
and was answered from the presidential office in that city. No date nor
place appears upon either the original so far as known, nor the copy in
the letter book, both address and reply therein being in the handwriting
of Bartholomew Dandridge, Secretary to the President.

The following copy of both address and reply are taken from Letter Book
II, folio 106-108.

     "An Address of the Grand Lodge of Free &
     "Accepted Masons for the Commonwealth
     "of Massachusetts, To their honored and
     "Illustrious Brother.

                GEORGE WASHINGTON.

     "Whilst the Historian is describing the
     "career of your glory, and the inhabitants
     "of an extensive Empire are made happy
     "in your unexampled exertions:--whilst some
     "celebrate the Hero so distinguished in li-
     "berating United America; and others the Patriot
     "who presides over her Councils, a Band of bro-
     "thers, having always joined the acclamations
     "of their countrymen, now testify their res-
     "pect for those milder virtues which have
     "ever graced the man.

     "Taught by the precepts of our Society;
     "that all its members _stand upon a level_, we
     "venture to assume this station & to approach
     "you with that freedom which diminishes
     "our diffidence without lessening our respect.

     "Desirous to enlarge the boundaries of
     "social happiness, and to vindicate the cere-
     "monies of their institution, this Grand Lodge
     "have published a "Book of Constitutions," (and
     "a copy for your acceptance accompanies
     "this) which by discovering the principles that
     "actuate will speak the Eulogy of the Society;
     "though they fervently wish the conduct of its;
     "Members may prove its higher commendation.

     "Convinced of his attachment to its
     "cause, and readiness to encourage its bene-
     "volent designs; they have taken the liberty to
     "dedicate this work to one, the qualities of
     "whose heart and the actions of whose life
     "have contributed to improve personal virtue,
     "and extend throughout the world, the most endear-
     "ing cordialities; and they humbly hope he will
     "pardon this freedom, and accept the tribute of
     "their esteem & homage.

     "May the supreme architect of the uni-
     "verse protect & bless you, give you length of
     "days & increase of Felicity in this world, and then
     "receive you to the harmonious & exalted So-
     "ciety in Heaven.--

        "JOHN CUTLER,        _Grand Master_
        "JOSIAH BARTLETT  }
        "MUNGO MACHEY     }   _Grd Wardens_.

     "Boston
     "Decem. 27, A.D. 1792."


The following reply was sent by President WASHINGTON from Philadelphia
to the Brethren of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. It will be noticed
that there was no date or place mentioned upon the copy in the Letter
Book, nor on the original letter, which at present is believed to be in
the Library of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts.

     WASHINGTON'S REPLY

     "TO THE GRAND LODGE OF FREE & ACCEPTED MA-
       "SONS, FOR THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHU-
       "SETTS.

     "Flattering as it may be to the human
     "mind, & truly honorable as it is to receive
     "from our fellow citizens testimonies of appro-
     "bation for exertions to promote the public wel-
     "fare, it is not less pleasing to know, that the
     "milder virtues of the heart are highly respected
     "by a Society whose liberal principles must be
     "founded in  the immutable laws of truth and
     "justice.--

     "To enlarge the sphere of social happi-
     "ness is worthy the benevolent design of a ma-
     "sonic institution; and it is most fervently to
     "be wished, that the conduct of every member
     "of the fraternity, as well as those publications
     "that discover the principles which actuate them;
     "may tend to convince mankind that the grand
     "object of Masonry is to promote the happiness
     "of the human race.

     "While I beg your acceptance of
     "my thanks for the "Book of Constitutions" which
     "you have sent me, & the honor you have done
     "me in the dedication, permit me to assure you
     "that I feel all those emotions of gratitude
     "which your affectionate address & cordial
     "wishes are calculated to inspire; and I
     "sincerely pray that the Great Architect
     "of the Universe may bless you here, and
     "receive you hereafter into his immortal Temple.

        "Go. Washington"


No fac-simile copy of the original letter was obtainable for the
Collection of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.


=WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO THE GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS. LETTER BOOK II,
FOLIO 108.=




XI

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA, DECEMBER, 1796.


September 18, 1796, President WASHINGTON issued his farewell address.
His second term was drawing to a close; the term had been a more or less
exciting one: The passing of the Neutrality Act; Genet's appeal from the
executive to the people; the Fugitive Slave Act; the whiskey
insurrection in western Pennsylvania; the adoption of the Eleventh
amendment; the purchase of peace from Algiers, Tripoli and Tunis; the
troubles with Great Britain about the non-delivery of the military posts
and later the Jay Treaty, all came within President WASHINGTON's second
and last term.[58]

During these troublous times WASHINGTON had no stauncher supporters than
his Masonic Brethren of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. Further, that
WASHINGTON kept more or less in touch with his Masonic Brethren of the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania is shown by the fact that he attended the
services at St. Paul's Episcopal Church, on Third Street below Walnut,
on St. John's Day, December 27, 1793, where a charity sermon was
preached by Rev. Brother Samuel Magaw, D.D., Vice-Provost of the
University of Pennsylvania, before the Grand and Subordinate Lodges for
the purpose of increasing the relief fund, for the widows and orphans of
the yellow fever epidemic which ravaged the capital city during the past
summer.[59]

When the Brethren found that WASHINGTON positively declined reelection
in 1796, and that John Adams was elected to succeed him on the fourth of
March following, the Brethren of the Grand Lodge at their Quarterly
Communication, December 5, 1796, determined that it would be right and
proper to present him with an address before his retirement from office,
whereupon, it was resolved: "On Motion and seconded, that a Committee be
appointed to frame an Address to be presented on the ensuing Feast of
St John, Decemr 27th, to the Great Master Workman, our Illustrious Br.
Washington, on the occasion of his intended retirement from Public
Labor, to be also laid before the said Grand Lodge on St John's Day, and
the Rt W. Grand Master, Deputy G. M. Brs Sadler, Milnor and Williams,
were accordingly appointed."

At a Grand Lodge held on St. John's Day, Philadelphia, December 27,
5796, "The Committee appointed to prepare an Address to our Brother
George Washington, President of the United States, presented an Address
by them drawn up, which was ordered to be read, and was in the words
following, to wit:

     "To GEORGE WASHINGTON PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

     "The Address of the Grand Lodge of Pennsyl-
     "vania.

     "_Most Respected Sir and Brother_,

     "Having announced your intention to retire from
     "_Public Labour_ to that _Refreshment_ to which your
     "preeminent Services for near Half a Century have
     "so justly entitled you. Permit the Grand Lodge
     "of Pennsylvania at this last Feast of our Evangelic
     "Master St. John, on which we can hope for an im-
     "mediate Communication with you to join the grate-
     "ful Voice of our Country in Acknowledging that
     "you have carried forth the Principles of the Lodge
     "into every Walk of your Life, by your constant
     "Labours for the Prosperity of that Country, by
     "your unremitting Endeavours to promote Order,
     "Union and Brotherly Affection amongst us, and
     "lastly by the Vows of your Farewell Address to
     "your Brethren and Fellow Citizens. An Address
     "which we trust Our Children and Our Childrens
     "Children will ever look upon as a most invaluable
     "Legacy from a _Friend_ a _Benefactor_ and a _Father_.

     "To these our grateful Acknowledgments (leav-
     "ing to the impartial Pen of History to record the
     "important Events in which you have borne so illus-
     "trious a part) permit us to add our most fervent
     "prayers, that after enjoying to the utmost of
     "Human Life, every Felicity which the Terrestial
     "Lodge can afford, you may be received by the
     "great Master Builder of this World and of Worlds
     "unnumbered, into the Ample Felicity of that _Celes-
     "tial Lodge_ in which alone distinguished Virtues and
     "distinguished Labours can be eternally rewarded.

     "By unanimous order of the Grand Lodge of
     "Pennsylvania at their communication held the 27th
     "Day of December Anno Domini 5796.

        "Wm Moore Smith"


=REV. BRO. WILLIAM SMITH, D. D.

B. ABERDEEN, SCOTLAND, 1727. D. PHILADELPHIA, MAY 14, 1803.

GRAND CHAPLAIN "MODERNS," 1755. GRAND SECRETARY "ANCIENTS," 1779-1784.

WHO PRESENTED THE PENNSYLVANIA ADDRESSES TO BRO. WASHINGTON, 1792-1796.=


It was then moved and seconded that the same be adopted. Upon the
question being taken it appeared that it was approved of. On motion and
seconded, it was agreed that a committee be appointed to wait on Brother
WASHINGTON to acquaint him that it is the intention of this Grand Lodge
to present an address to him, and to know what time he shall be pleased
to appoint to receive it. The committee appointed to perform this duty
were Brothers William Smith, Peter Le Barbier Duplessis and Thomas
Procter, who, after having waited on him, reported that he had appointed
to-morrow, December 28, 1796, at twelve o'clock to receive it. Said
committee, to wit, Brothers W. Smith, Duplessis and Procter, together
with Right Worshipful Grand Master, Deputy Grand Master, and Junior
Wardens, Grand Secretary and the Masters of the different Lodges in the
City, were then appointed a Deputation to present the said Address.

This deputation consisted of Right Worshipful Grand Master William Moore
Smith, Gavin Hamilton, Deputy Grand Master, Thomas Town, Senior Grand
Warden, Thomas Armstrong, Esqr., Junior Grand Warden, George A.
Baker, Grand Secretary, John McElwee, Grand Treasurer, and the following
Masters of the Philadelphia Lodges, viz.: David Irwin, No. 2, Israel
Israel, No. 3, Andrew Nilson No. 9, Eleaser Oswald, No. 19, Cadawalder
Griffith, No. 52, Richard E. Cusack, No. 59, Thomas Bradley, No. 67,
William Nelson, No. 71; together with the appointed Committee, Brothers
William Smith D.D., Le Barbier Duplessis and Thomas Procter.

President WASHINGTON received the august deputation of the Brethren at
the appointed time; the address was read before him by the Rev. Brother
William Smith, D.D., whereupon he returned them a reply. This
document, still in the Library of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, is
entirely in the handwriting of WASHINGTON and signed by him, viz.:

     "FELLOW-CITIZENS AND BROTHERS,
       "OF THE GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA.

     "I have received your address
     "with all the feelings of brotherly affection,
     "mingled with those sentiments, for the
     "Society, which it was calculated to excite.

     "To have been, in any degree, an
     "instrument in the hands of Providence,
     "to promote order and union, and erect upon
     "a solid foundation the true principles of
     "government, is only to have shared with
     "many others in a labour, the result of
     "which let us hope, will prove through
     "all ages, a sanctuary for brothers and
     "a lodge for the virtues,--

     "Permit me to reciprocate your
     "prayers for my temporal happiness,
     "and to supplicate that we may all
     "meet thereafter in that eternal temple,
     "whose builder is the great architect
     "of the Universe.

        "Go. Washington"


=FAC-SIMILE OF WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA, DECEMBER,
1796. ORIGINAL IN ARCHIVES OF THE GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA.=


Brother William Moore Smith, Right Worshipful Grand Master of
Pennsylvania, whose first official act as Grand Master was to head the
committee to call on the President, was a son of the Rev. William Smith,
D.D., born in Philadelphia, June 1, 1759. He was a lawyer by profession
and served as Deputy Grand Master for the year 1795 under the Venerable
William Ball, and as Right Worshipful Grand Master for the years
1796-1797. He was appointed by the President as agent for the settlement
of claims that were provided for in the Sixth Article of John Jay's
Treaty, and visited England in 1803 to close the commission. He died at
the Smith Homestead at Falls of Schuylkill, March 12, 1821.

Both the address and reply were copied in WASHINGTON's Letter Book III,
pp. 244-245, in the handwriting of one of his secretaries, G. W. Craik,
a son of Dr. James Craik, WASHINGTON's "compatriot in arms, and old and
intimate friend," who attended him during his last illness.

Photostat copies of above are in the Library of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania, also the original draft of the address, presented to the
President (Mss. Volume A, folio 23).

This autograph Masonic letter from WASHINGTON to the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania has been reproduced in fac-simile, published and circulated
(in most cases without the knowledge or consent of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania) more widely than any other known letter of WASHINGTON.
Some of these copies are treasured by their owners under the impression
that they have the original letter. Several cases of this kind have of
late come under the notice of the writer. In one case where one of these
reproductions was offered for sale, hundreds of dollars were asked for
the reproduction, and it was with great difficulty that the owner could
be convinced of its character.

Another use made of this letter by unprincipled persons was to make a
photo-lithographic copy of the letter, and substitute the name of
another state for that of Pennsylvania, and then palm it off upon the
authorities of that state as an original letter to their Grand Lodge.
The latest case of this kind known to the writer is that of the Grand
Lodge of Georgia, who were thus imposed upon.

Then again the letter has been extensively used for advertising purposes
by publishing houses of Masonic literature.

The letter has also been printed in most all books bearing upon Masonic
history during the revolutionary period.

It was also frequently quoted and criticised during the Anti-Masonic
craze which swept over the country some eighty-odd years ago, it being
the chief Masonic letter of the five known to the leaders of those
misguided persons. The main point of their argument was that it bore no
date and therefore was not authentic.


=MOUNT VERNON

DURING WASHINGTON'S OCCUPANCY, 1788-1799.=



Footnotes:

[58] Cf. The Religious and Social Conditions of Philadelphia, under the
Federal Constitution, 1790-1800. Julius F. Sachse, Philadelphia, 1900.

[59] Cf. "Freemasonry in Pennsylvania," before quoted, Vol. II, pp.
190-197; original copy in archives of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.




XII

CORRESPONDENCE WITH ALEXANDRIA LODGE, NO. 22, VIRGINIA.


Upon pages 244 and 245 of WASHINGTON's folio Letter Book No. III in the
Library of Congress are recorded a letter and address to WASHINGTON from
the Master of Alexandria Lodge, No. 22, of Virginia, together with
WASHINGTON's reply.

WASHINGTON and his family had left Philadelphia, Thursday, March 9,
1797, for Mount Vernon, and arrived at Baltimore, Sunday, March 12, and
at Mount Vernon, March 15, where he again settled down to the life of a
private gentleman, free from the cares and concerns of public life.

March 28, 1797, he was waited on at Mount Vernon by Brothers Dennis
Ramsay and Phillip G. Marsteller, and presented with the following
letter and address from James Gillies, the Master of Alexandria Lodge,
No. 22, of Virginia, viz.:

     "ALEXA March 28th, 5797.

     "_Most respected Brother_,

     "Brother Ramsay & Marsteller wait upon you
     "with a copy of an address which has been prepared
     "by the unanimous desire of the Ancient York Ma-
     "sons of Lodge No. 22. It is their earnest request
     "that you will partake of a Dinner with them and
     "that you will please appoint the time most conve-
     "nient for you to attend.--

        "I am most beloved Brother,
          "Your Mo. Obt Hble Servt
            "JAMES GILLIES, _M._

     "Genl Geo Washington."


The letter was an invitation to dine with the Lodge. This WASHINGTON
accepted.

     "_Most respected Brother_,

     "The ancient York Masons of Lodge No. 22 offer you
     "their warmest congratulations on your retire-
     "ment from your useful labors. Under the su-
     "preme architect of the Universe you have been the
     "Master Workman in erecting the Temple of Lib-
     "erty in the west, on the broad basis of equal rights.
     "In your wise administration of the government of
     "the United States for the space of eight years, you
     "have kept within the compass of our happy Consti-
     "tution and acted on the square with foreign Na-
     "tions and thereby preserved your country in peace
     "and promoted the prosperity and happiness of your
     "fellow Citizens, and now that you have retired from
     "the labours of public life to the refreshment of
     "domestic tranquility, they ardently pray that you
     "may long enjoy all the happiness which the Terres-
     "tial Lodge can afford and finally be removed to that
     "celestial Lodge where Love, Peace and Harmony
     "for ever reign and where cherubims and seraphims
     "shall hail you Brother.--

        "By the unanimous desire of Lodge
          "No. 22
            "JAMES GILLIES, _Master_."

     "Gen Geo Washington.


WASHINGTON attended the meeting of his Lodge at Alexandria, on Saturday,
April 1, 1797, when his reply to Brother Gillies' address was read in
open Lodge, viz.:

     "BROTHERS OF THE ANCIENT YORK MASONS OF
       "LODGE NO. 22.

     "While my heart acknowledges with Brotherly
     "Love, your affectionate congratulations on my re-
     "tirement from the arduous toils of past years, my
     "gratitude is no less excited by your kind wishes for
     "my future happiness.--

     "If it has pleased the supreme architect of the
     "universe to make me an humble instrument to pro-
     "mote the welfare and happiness of my fellow men,
     "my exertions have been abundantly recompensed
     "by the kind partiality with which they have been
     "received; and the assurance you give me of your
     "belief that I have acted upon the square in my
     "public capacity, will be among my principles en-
     "joyments in this Terrestial Lodge.

        "Go. Washington"


=FAC-SIMILE OF LETTER FROM W. M. OF ALEXANDRIA LODGE TO BRO. WASHINGTON,
MARCH, 1797. LETTER BOOK II, FOLIO 294.=

=FAC-SIMILE OF ADDRESS FROM ALEXANDRIA LODGE, NO. 22, TO WASHINGTON, MARCH,
1797. LETTER BOOK II, FOLIO 294-295.=

=FAC-SIMILE OF WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO ALEXANDRIA LODGE, NO. 22, VIRGINIA,
MARCH, 1797.=


After which the Brethren went in procession from their room to Abert's
Tavern,[60] where they partook of an "elegant" dinner, following which a
number of toasts were offered. The tenth toast was by Brother
WASHINGTON, "The Lodge at Alexandria, and all Masons throughout the
World," after which he returned to Mount Vernon under an escort of
mounted troops of the town.[61]

The copies of the letter, address and reply in WASHINGTON's Letter Book
are in the handwriting of his secretary, Tobias Lear. Photostats of all
are in the collection of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. No direct
photograph of the original in possession of Alexandria-Washington Lodge,
No. 22, was obtainable.




Footnotes:

[60] Abert's Tavern, formerly "John Wise's." _Vide_ p. 35 _supra_.

[61] Cf. "Washington after the Revolution," W. S. Baker, p. 347.




XIII

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS, MARCH, 1797.


At a Grand Lodge in Quarterly Communication, held at Concert Hall,
Boston, on the evening of March 18, A.L. 5797.

     "On motion it was Voted, That a committee be appointed to draft an
     Address, to be presented to our Illustrious Brother, George
     Washington, Esq'r, when the M.W. Paul Revere, Grand Master, R.W.
     John Warren, Rev. Bro. Thaddeus M. Harris, R.W. Josiah Bartlett,
     Bro. Thomas Edwards, were appointed a committee for that purpose."


In response to above resolution the following address was sent to
Brother WASHINGTON at Mount Vernon dated Boston, March 21, 5797, viz.:

     "_The East, the West and the South, of the Grand Lodge of Free and
     Accepted Masons of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts._

     _To Their Most Worthy George Washington._"

     "Wishing ever to be foremost in testimonials of respect and
     admiration for those virtues and services with which you have so
     long adorned and benefited our common country; and not the last nor
     least, to regret the cessation of them, in the public councils of
     the Union; your Brethren of the Grand Lodge embrace the earliest
     opportunity of greeting you in the calm retirement you have
     contemplated to yourself. Though as citizens they lose you in the
     active labors of political life, they hope, as Masons, to find you
     in the pleasing sphere of Fraternal engagement.

     "From the cares of state and the fatigues of public business our
     institution opens a recess affording all the relief of tranquility,
     the harmony of peace and the refreshment of pleasure. Of these may
     you partake in all their purity and satisfaction; and we will
     assure ourselves that your attachment to this social plan will
     increase; and that under the auspices of your encouragement,
     assistance and patronage, the Craft will attain its highest
     ornament, perfection and praise. And it is our ardent prayer, that
     when your light shall be no more visible in this earthly temple,
     you may be raised to the All Perfect Lodge above; be seated on the
     right of the Supreme Architect of the Universe, and there receive
     the refreshment your labors merited.

     "In behalf of the Grand Lodge, we subscribe ourselves with the
     highest esteem,

        "Your affectionate Brethren,
          "PAUL REVERE, _Grand Master_.
          "ISAIAH THOMAS, _S. Grand Warden._
          "JOSEPH LAUGHTON, _J. Grand Warden_.
     "Daniel Oliver, Grand Secretary,
       "Boston, 21st March, 5797."


For some unaccountable reason the delivery of the address was delayed
and not received at Mount Vernon until late in April. The original draft
of WASHINGTON's reply to the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts in his own
handwriting and signature as well as an autograph note of apology for
the seeming delay to Grand Master Paul Revere and his officers dated
Mount Vernon, April 24, 1797, are in the Manuscript Department in the
Library of Congress, viz.:

     "TO PAUL REVERE GRAND MASTER, ISAIAH
       "THOMAS SENIOR GRAND WARDEN AND
       "JOSEPH LAUGHTON JUNR GRAND WARDEN.

     "_Brothers_,

     "I am sorry that the en-
     "closed answer to the affectionate address
     "of the Grand Lodge of Ancient, Free and
     "Accepted Masons, of the Commonwealth
     "of Massachusetts transmitted under your
     "signatures, should appear so much out
                   from
     "of season; but ^ the lapse of time between
     "the date & reception of the address (from
     "what cause I know not) it was not to be
     "avoided, and is offered as an apology, for
     "the delay. With brotherly affection

        "I am always yours,
          "Go. Washington"

     "Mount Vernon,
     "24th April 1797."


=PAUL REVERE

1735-1818.

GRAND MASTER OF MASONS IN MASSACHUSETTS, 1797.=


=FAC-SIMILE OF AUTOGRAPH LETTER FROM WASHINGTON TO PAUL REVERE AND THE
OFFICERS OF THE GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS, APRIL 24, 1797.=

=FAC-SIMILE OF ORIGINAL DRAFT OF WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO THE ADDRESS FROM
THE GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS IN LIBRARY OF CONGRESS.=


Following is a copy of WASHINGTON's original draft of his reply to the
Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. It is written upon two pages of a letter
sheet entirely in his handwriting and signed by him.

     "TO THE GRAND LODGE OF ANCIENT, FREE &
       "ACCEPTED MASONS, OF THE COMMONWEALTH
       "OF MASSACHUSETTS.

     "_Brothers_,

     "It was not until within
     "these few days that I have been favoured by
     "the receipt of your affectionate Address
     "dated in Boston the 21st of March

     "For the favourable sentiments
     "you have been pleased to express on the
     "occasion of my past services, and for the
     "regrets with which they are accompani-
     "ed for the cessation of my public functions,
     "I pray you to accept my best acknowledg-
     "ments and gratitude.--

     "No pleasure, except that wch
     "results from a consciousness of having, to
     "the utmost of my abilities, discharged,
     "the trusts which have been reposed in
     "me by my Country, can equal the satis
     "faction I feel from the unequivocal proofs
     "I continually receive of its approbation
     "of my public conduct, and I beg you to be
     "assured that the evidence thereof which
     "is exhibited by the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts
     "is not among the least pleasing, or grate
     "ful to my feelings.--

     "In that retirement which decli-
     "ning years induced me to seek, and which
     "repose, to a mind long employed in pub-
     "lic concerns, rendered necessary, my wish
     "es that bounteous Providence will conti-
     "nue to bless & preserve our country in
     "Peace & in the prosperity it has enjoyed, will
     "be warm & sincere; and my attachment
     "to the Society of which we are members
     "will dispose me always, to contribute my best
     "endeavours to promote the honor &
     "interest of the _Craft_.--

     "For the prayer you offer in
     "my behalf I entreat you to accept the
     "thanks of a grateful heart; with the as-
     "surance of fraternal regard and best
     "wishes for the honor, happiness & prospe-
     "rity of all the members of the Grand Lodge
     "of Massachusetts.

        "Go. Washington"


The original letter is said to be in possession of the Grand Lodge of
Massachusetts. No photographic fac-simile of the document, however,
could be obtained.


=ANCIENT JEWEL OF THE GRAND LODGE OF MARYLAND.=




XIV

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF MARYLAND, NOVEMBER, 1798.


In the year 1798, the danger of a war with France had become so
imminent, on account of the aggressions of that government towards the
United States, that Congress ordered a provisional army to be raised,
the command of which was tendered to WASHINGTON, with the rank of
Lieutenant-General, an honor which was reluctantly accepted by
WASHINGTON. During the summer a scourge of yellow fever had again
visited Philadelphia, which caused Congress to adjourn, July 16, and the
public offices to be removed for the time being to Trenton, N. J. All
danger of the fever being over, WASHINGTON, on November 5, started for
Trenton. He arrived at Baltimore, November 7, and was waited on at his
quarters by William Belton, Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Maryland,
his Deputy and other Brethren and presented with a copy of the New
Ahiman Rezon and the following address,[62] viz.:

     "TO GEORGE WASHINGTON, ESQ.,
     Lieutenant General and Commander-in-chief of the Armies of the
     United States.

     "_Sir and Brother:_

     "The Right Worshipful Grand Lodge of Free Masons for the State of
     Maryland, wishing to testify the respect in which the whole
     fraternity in this State hold the man who is at once the ornament
     of the Society and of his country, vote a copy of the Constitution
     of Masonry, lately printed under its authority, to be presented to
     you.

     "Accept, Sir and Brother, from our hands this small token of the
     veneration of men who consider it as the greatest boast of their
     Society, that a WASHINGTON openly avows himself a member of it, and
     thinks it worthy of his approbation. With it accept also our
     warmest congratulations in the name of the body which we represent,
     on your reappointment to that elevated station in which you
     formerly wrought the salvation of your country; and on your
     restoration to the inestimable blessing of health which, that the
     Almighty disposer of events may continue to accord to you
     uninterruptedly, is the most earnest prayer of your most
     respectfully affectionate Brethren and most humble servants.

             "Signed, WM. BELTON, R.. W..G..M..
         "Peter Little, Grand Secretary,
     "Baltimore, November 5th, 1798."


=FAC-SIMILE (REDUCED) OF THE ORIGINAL DRAFT OF WASHINGTON'S LETTER TO THE
GRAND LODGE OF MARYLAND.--ELKTON, MD., NOV. 8, 1798.=


To this address WASHINGTON sent a reply, the original draft of which is
in the Library of Congress, written upon two pages of a letter sheet,
and differs somewhat from the final copy sent to the Grand Lodge from
Elkton, where WASHINGTON spent the next day. It will be recalled that
but two weeks had elapsed since he wrote his last letter to Dominie
Snyder of Fredericktown, and this fact was evidently in his mind when he
wrote this letter to the Maryland Brethren.

Upon second thought he eliminated the lines bearing upon the
insinuations in Snyder's letter. Following is a copy of the letter as
originally written, viz.:

     "TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL GRAND LODGE OF FREE
       "MASONS FOR THE STATE OF MARYLAND.

     "_Gentlemen & Brothers_,

     "Your obliging & affectionate
     "letter, together with a copy of the Constitutions of
     "Masonry has been put into my hands by
     "your Grand Master; for which I pray you to
     "accept my best thanks.--

     "So far as I am
     "acquainted with the principles & Doctrines of
     "Free Masonry, I conceive it to be founded
     "in benevolence and to be exercised only
     "for the good of mankind. _If it has been a
     "Cloak to promote improper or nefarious
     "objects, it is a melancholly proof that
     "in unworthy hands, the best institutions
     "may be made use of to promote the worst
     "designs._--

     "While I offer my grateful
     "acknowledgements for your congratulations on my
     "late appointments, and for the favorable sentiments
     "you are pleased to express of my conduct, permit
     "me to observe, that at this important &
     "critical moment, when repeated and
     "high indignities have been offered to this
     "government your country and the rights & property
     "of our Citizens plundered without a prospect of
     "redress, I conceive it to be the _indispensable_
     "duty of every American, let his situation & cir
     "cumstances in life be what they may, to come
     "forward in support of the government of his country
     "and to give all the aid in his power toward
     "maintaining that independence which we have
     "so dearly purchased; and under this impression,
     "I did not hesitate to lay aside all personal
     "considerations and accept my appointment.

     "I pray you to be assured that I ap-
     "preciate, with sincerity your kind wishes for
     "my health & happiness.

        "I am Gentln & brothers
          "very respectfully
            "Yr most obt servt.

              "Go. Washington"


Before this letter was sent, the five words on the tenth line and the
whole of next five lines were eliminated; there was also a slight change
made in the last paragraph on the second page.

Following is a copy of the letter as received by the Grand Lodge of
Maryland. The original letter was in the possession of the Grand Lodge
of Maryland, as late as 1833, but it has since disappeared.[63]

     "TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL GRAND LODGE OF FREE MASONS FOR THE STATE OF
     MARYLAND.

     "_Gentlemen and Brothers:_

     "Your obliging and affectionate letter, together with a copy of the
     Constitution of Masonry, has been put into my hands by your Grand
     Master, for which I pray you to accept my best thanks. So far as I
     am acquainted with the principles and doctrines of Freemasonry, I
     conceive them to be founded on benevolence, and to be exercised for
     the good of mankind; I cannot, therefore, upon this ground
     withdraw my approbation from it.

     "While I offer my grateful acknowledgements for your
     congratulations on my late appointment, and for the favorable
     sentiments you are pleased to express of my conduct, permit me to
     observe, that, at this important and critical moment, when high and
     repeated indignities have been offered to the Government of our
     country, and when the property of our citizens is plundered without
     a prospect of redress, I conceive it to be the indispensable duty
     of every American, let his station and circumstances in life be
     what they may, to come forward in support of the Government of his
     choice and to give all the aid in his power towards maintaining
     that independence which we have so dearly purchased; and under this
     impression, I did not hesitate to lay aside all personal
     considerations and accept my appointment. I pray you to be assured
     that I receive with gratitude your kind wishes for my health and
     happiness and reciprocate them with sincerity.

        "I am, Gentlemen and Brothers,
          "Very Respectfully,
            "Your most Ob't Servant,

              "Go. Washington"

     "Elkton, November 8th, 1798."


=GEORGE WASHINGTON

BY CHARLES BALTHAZAR FEVERET DE SAINT MEMIN.

THE LAST PORTRAIT OF WASHINGTON FROM LIFE, TAKEN IN PHILADELPHIA,
NOVEMBER, 1798.=



Footnotes:

[62] Cf. "Freemasonry in Maryland," by Edw. J. Schultz, Baltimore, 1884,
Vol. I, pp. 265-266.

[63] _Ibid._, p. 266.




XV

CORRESPONDENCE WITH G. W. SNYDER, 1798.


As to the correspondence with one G. W. Snyder (Schneider), who
represented himself as a preacher of the Reformed Church of
Fredericktown, Maryland, our late Brother James M. Lamberton, in his
address before the Right Worshipful Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, at the
celebration of the "Sesqui-centennial Aniversary of the initiation of
Brother GEORGE WASHINGTON into the Fraternity of Freemasons," held in
the Masonic Temple, in the City of Philadelphia on Wednesday, November
the fifth, A. D. 1902, states:[64]

     "It is well known that during the French Revolution religion was
     dethroned, and reason installed in the place of Deity. The
     spreading of such doctrines was by many ascribed to the
     'Illuminati,' who were supposed to be Masons. During this period
     clubs like the Jacobin Clubs in France were formed in this
     country, and the spread of these doctrines was greatly feared,
     especially by the clergy, and in 1798 one of them, one G. W.
     Snyder, of Fredericktown, Maryland, wrote to Washington sending at
     the same time a book entitled 'Proofs of a Conspiracy,' etc., by
     John Robison,[65] the conspiracy being 'to overturn all government
     and all religion'."[66]


This letter, sent to WASHINGTON at Mount Vernon covered no less than six
pages; following is a verbatim copy of the original now in the Library
of Congress.

     "TO HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON.

     "_Sir_,--You will, I hope, not think it a Pre | sumption in a
     Stranger, whose Name, | perhaps never reached your Ears, to ad | dress
     himself to you, the Commanding | General of a great Nation. I am a |
     German, born and liberally educated | in the city of Heydelberg, in
     the Pa | latinate of the Rhine. I came to this | Country in 1776, and
     felt soon after my | arrival, a close Attachment to the | Liberty for
     which these confederated | States then struggled. The same
     attachment | still remains not glowing, but burning in | my Breast.
     At the same Time that I am | exulting in the Measures adopted by
     our | Government, I feel myself elevated in | the Idea of my adopted
     Country, I am | attached, both from the Bent of Educa | tion and
     mature Enquiry and Search | to the simple Doctrines of Christianity, |
     which I have the Honor to teach in | Public; and I do heartily
     Despise all the | Cavils of Infidelity. Our present Time | pregnant
     with the most shocking Events | and Calamities, threatens Ruin to |
     our Liberty and Government. | The most secret Plans are in
     Agitation; | Plans calculated to ensnare the Unwary, | to attract the
     Gay irreligious, and to | entice even the Well-Disposed to combine
     in | the general Machine for overturning all | Government and all
     Religion.

     "It was some Time since that a Book | fell into my hands, entitled
     'Proofs | of a Conspiracy, &c. by John Robison,' which | gives a full
     Account of a Society of Free | Masons, that distinguishes itself by
     the | name of 'Illuminati,' whose Plan is to over | throw all
     Government and all Religion, even | natural; and who endeavor to
     eradicate | every Idea of a Supreme Being, and distin | guish Man from
     Beast by his shape only. | A Thought suggested itself to me, that
     some | of the Lodges in the United States might | have caught the
     Infection, and might co-oper | ate with the Illuminati or the Jacobin
     Club | in France. Fauchet is mentioned by Robinson | as a zealous
     Member; and who can doubt | Genet and Adet? Have not these their
     con | fidants in this country? They use the same | Expressions, and
     are generally Men of no | Religion. Upon serious Reflection I was
     led | to think that it might be within your | Power to prevent the
     horrid Plan from | corrupting the Brethren of the English Lodges |
     over which you preside.

     "I send you the 'Proof of a Conspiracy,' &c. | which I doubt not,
     will give you Satis | faction, and afford you matter for a | Train of
     ideas, that may operate to our | national Felicity. If, however, you
     have | already perused the Book, it will not, | I trust, be
     disagreeable to you that I | have presumed to address you with this |
     Letter and the Book accompanying it. | It proceeded from the
     Sincerity of my | Heart, and my ardent Wishes for the | common Good.

     "May the Supreme Ruler of all | Things continue You long with us in |
     these perilous Times: may he endow you | with Strength and Wisdom to
     save our | Country in the threating Storms and | gathering Clouds of
     Factions and Com | motions! and after you have completed his | Work,
     on this terrene Spot, may He | bring you to the full Possession of
     the | glorious Liberty of the Children of God, | is the hearty and
     most sincere Wish of

        "Your Excellency's | very humble and |
                             "devoted Servant,
                                    "G. W. SNYDER.

     "Fredericktown, (Maryland) Aug. 22, 1798.
     "His Excellency General George Washington."


=FAC-SIMILE OF FIRST PAGE OF LETTER FROM G. W. SNYDER TO WASHINGTON,
AUGUST 22, 1798.=

=FAC-SIMILE OF FOURTH PAGE OF LETTER FROM G. W. SNYDER TO WASHINGTON,
AUGUST 22, 1798.=

=FAC-SIMILE OF PRESS COPY OF WASHINGTON'S ANSWER TO REV. G. W.
SNYDER.--SEPTEMBER 25, 1798.=


This man Snyder (Schneider) was an agitator and thoroughly irresponsible
person, having no ecclesiastical connection with any organized Church
Body.

In the year 1787, Schneider came from Albany, New York, to Frederick,
ostensibly to collect money to build a Church. He was kindly received
and permitted to preach in the Reformed Congregation, where he soon
fomented discord and trouble.

Schneider was soon driven out of Frederick Town, but returned again in
1794, when he renewed the trouble in the Church, which ended in a
schism. The matter finally got into the Civil Court, and on February 15,
1800 the case was decided against him, which ended his activity in
Frederick Town; soon after which he left for parts unknown.[67]

Snyder, who was not a native of this country, evidently labored under
the impression that WASHINGTON was a Grand Master General, who presided
over all of the English (or Symbolic) Masonic Lodges in the United
States. Snyder evidently used the term "English" Lodges, to distinguish
them from the Masonic bodies working in the so-called higher (Scotch)
degrees, as are now known as the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.

How important WASHINGTON considered this correspondence is shown by his
precaution in taking a press copy of both of his letters to Snyder, who
he was led to believe was the regular pastor of the German Reformed
Congregation at Fredericktown. These are now in the Library of Congress.
It will be noted that in all of his other Masonic correspondence, copies
were made in his regular letter books by his clerks, of both address and
reply. Brother WASHINGTON evidently surmised that this letter from
Snyder was nothing more or less than a scheme to entrap him. It was not
until a month had elapsed, and then only after due consideration, that
the following reply was sent to Fredericktown, viz.:

     "MOUNT VERNON, 25th Sept. 1798.

     "_Sir_,

     "Many apologies are
     "due to you, for my not acknowledging
     "the receipt of your obliging favour of
                      for
     "the 22d ult, and ^ not thanking you, at
     "an earlier period for the Book you
     "had the goodness to send me.

     "I have heard much of the ne-
     "farious & dangerous plan, & doctrines
     "of the Illuminati, but never saw the
     "Book until you were pleased to send
     "it to me. The same causes which
     "have prevented my acknowledging the
     "receipt of your letter, have prevented
     "my reading the Book, hitherto, name-
     "ly, the multiplicity of matters which
                  me
     "pressed upon before, & the debilitated
     "state in which I was left after a se
     "vere fever had been removed, and
     "which allows me to add little more now,
     "than thanks for your kind wishes and
     "favourable sentiments, except to cor-
     "rect an error you have run into, of my
     "presiding over the English Lodges in
     "this Country. The fact is, I preside over
     "none, nor have I been in one, more than
                                  thirty
     "once or twice, within the last years.

     "I believe notwithstanding, that
     "none of the Lodges in this Country are
     "contaminated with the principles as-
     "cribed to the society of the Illuminati."

        "With respect
          "I am, Sir,
            "Your Obedt Hble Servt

              "Go. Washington"

       "The Revd Mr Snyder.
     Endorsed
     to
     "The Revd Mr. Snyder.
     "25th Sep. 1798."


=FAC-SIMILE OF PRESS COPY OF WASHINGTON'S SECOND LETTER TO REV. G. W.
SNYDER.--OCTOBER 24, 1798.=


In this letter WASHINGTON was correct in stating that he had not
presided over the "English Lodges in this Country," undoubtedly meaning
as Grand Master General.

Where WASHINGTON says "_The fact is I preside over none_," he meant that
he did not then preside over any individual lodge, as he at that time
was a Past Master of Alexandria Lodge, No. 22, of Virginia.[68]

Where he says "_Nor have I been in one_, [meaning an individual lodge]
_more than once or twice within the last thirty years_," he obviously
had in view his occasional visits to the various lodges during that
period, and that he could not, on account of his official duties and
other conditions, attend any lodge regularly.

As a matter of record, WASHINGTON was a member of Alexandria Lodge, No.
39, of Pennsylvania,[69] and attended some of its meetings at Alexandria
in 1783 and 1784, as is shown by the Minutes of the Lodge, and the
records here presented.[70] Further, that when the Brethren of
Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, changed their allegiance from Pennsylvania to
Virginia, General WASHINGTON was especially named in the warrant, after
his consent having been first obtained,[71] and thereby became the
Warrant Master of Lodge No. 22, under the Virginia jurisdiction, April
28, 1788, serving as such until December 20 following, when, as the
minutes of that date show,[72] he was unanimously elected to succeed
himself for the full term, serving in all about twenty months.

The records further show that, in 1778, WASHINGTON occupied the chief
position in the procession at the celebration of St. John the Evangelist
by the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania at Philadelphia in 1778, in which
more than three hundred Brethren joined.[73]

He also occupied the same position when he laid the corner stone of the
present capitol at Washington, September 18, 1793, clothed with the
Masonic Apron presented by Lafayette, which is now in the Museum of the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. Upon both of these occasions, WASHINGTON
made a public profession of his membership in the Masonic Fraternity.

Records show that WASHINGTON was present at the meeting of American
Union Lodge (a Military Lodge), at Morristown, N. J., December 27,
1779;[74] at American Union Lodge at Nelson's point on the Hudson June
24, 1782;[75] at King Solomon's Lodge of Poughkeepsie, December 27,
1782, and occasionally at Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, in 1783-1784, and
the Virginia Lodge, No. 22, between the years 1788 and 1797.[76]

WASHINGTON in the next paragraph of his letter to Snyder makes his
meaning absolutely clear, that while he had not attended any Lodge
regularly during the past thirty years he plainly states: "I believe
notwithstanding, that none of the Lodges in this Country are
contaminated with the principles ascribed to the society of the
Illuminati."

This belief is further accentuated by the letter to the Grand Lodge of
Maryland a few weeks after the above letter was written to Snyder.

In addition to above records, there are numerous traditions of
WASHINGTON's occasional visits to Masonic Lodges and functions:[77] all
of which fall within the thirty years mentioned in the Snyder
Letter.[78]

Further, WASHINGTON's great interest in Freemasonry is shown by the
many addresses received from different Grand and Subordinate Lodges
throughout the Union, all of which he acknowledged in fraternal terms,
also by the various Masonic constitutions and sermons dedicated to him,
which he received with thanks and were preserved in his library.

It will be noted that in the fifth line from the bottom, "_Within the
last thirty years_," which in all Anti-Masonic publications is printed
in italics, the word "_thirty_" was not in the body of the letter as
originally written, but was an afterthought and interlined before the
press copy was taken.

In the press copy of this letter, it will be noted that the word written
over the words "_last years_," is almost indecipherable; in the
photostat it is completely so. This has led some investigators to
question whether the interlined word is really "_thirty_."

The surmise that the blur in the press copy of WASHINGTON's letter to
Snyder, was "thirty" was first promulgated by Jared Sparks, when he
furnished the text of the letter to the Anti-Masonic agitators, during
the political excitement which swept over the New England States in the
second decade of the nineteenth century.

Snyder, upon receipt of this letter, undoubtedly after consultation with
persons who were politically opposed to WASHINGTON or antagonistic to
the Masonic Fraternity, wrote a second letter and sent it to Mount
Vernon under date of October 17, 1798; no copy of this letter has thus
far been found among the WASHINGTON papers in the Library of Congress.

WASHINGTON immediately sent the following sharp reply to Snyder, in
which he plainly sets forth his belief that the Masonic Lodges in the
United States were not interested in the propagation of the tenets of
what was then known as Jacobism or the Illuminati. The words as
underscored in the original letter by WASHINGTON were to emphasize his
meaning upon this subject.

Photostats of both of the above letter press copies are in the Archives
of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

     "MOUNT VERNON 24th Oct. 1798.

     "_Rev. Sir_,

     "I have you favor of the
                                         tive
     "17th instant before me and my only mo:
     "to trouble you with the receipt of this let
     "ter, is to explain, and correct a mistake
     "which I perceive the hurry in which I
     "am obliged, often to write letters, have
     "led you into.--

     "It was not my intention to doubt
     "that, the doctrines of the Illuminati, and
     "principles of Jacobism had not spread
     "in the United States. On the contrary, no
     "one is more, fully satisfied of this fact
     "that I am.

     "The idea I meant to convey, was,
     "that I did not believe that the _Lodges_
     "of Free Masons in _this_ Country had, as
     "_Societies_, endeavoured to propagate the
     "diabolical tenets of the first, or the per-
     "nicious principles of the latter, (if they
     "are susceptible of separation) That
     "individuals of them may have done it, or
     "that the _founder_, or _instrument_ employ
     "ed to found the Democratic Societies
     "in the United States, may have had these
     "objects, and actually had a separation
     "of the _people_ from their _Government_
     "in view, is too evident to be questioned.

     "My occupations are such, that
     "but little leisure is allowed me to read News
     "Papers, or Books of any kind. The reading
     "of letters and preparing answers, absorb
     "much of my time.--

        "With respect,--I remain,
          "Revd Sir,
            "Your Most Obedt Hble Servt

              "Go. Washington"

     "The Revd.
       "Mr Snyder."
     Endorsed
     to
     "The Revd Mr Snyder,
     "24th Oct. 1798."


It is a historical fact that WASHINGTON had always retained the highest
respect for the people of Maryland, and especially the citizens of
Frederick County. No man ever stood higher in the estimation of the
people of Maryland than WASHINGTON, and his death awakened genuine
sorrow. On February 22d, 1800, memorial services were observed in the
Reformed Church at Fredericktown.[79] It was a solemn day and the whole
County was in mourning; at which time Ex-Governor Thomas Johnson
pronounced the funeral oration. Snyder took no part in these services.

The two letters to Snyder were chiefly relied upon by the Anti-Masons to
support their political claims.

     "That Washington was never in a Lodge but twice, in his life; that
     he paid no attention to Masonry during the war; that in 1781 he
     declined being addressed by Masons as a brother Mason, and in 1798
     was very particular to insist upon the fact that he had not been in
     a Lodge, but once or twice in 30 years, and knew nothing of their
     principles and practices."[80]


How false these statements so frequently made, is shown by the many
proofs here presented in fac-simile of the originals, which also
absolutely controvert the statement in Governor Ritner's Vindication?
viz:--

     "That all the letters said to be written by Washington to Lodges
     are spurious. This is rendered nearly certain: First, by the
     non-production of the originals: Second, by the absence of copies
     among the records of his letters: Third, by their want of dates:
     Fourth, by the fact that his intimate friend and biographer, Chief
     Justice Marshall,[81] (himself a Mason in his youth,) says that he
     never heard Washington utter a syllable on the subject, a matter
     nearly impossible, if Washington had for years been engaged in
     writing laudatory letters to the Grand Lodges of South Carolina,
     Pennsylvania, and Massachusetts."[82]


The movement to elect General WASHINGTON a Grand Master over all the
Brethren in the United States originated at a meeting of American Union
Lodge, held at the encampment of the American Army at Morristown, New
Jersey, December 15, 1779. This Lodge was a Regimental Lodge of the
Connecticut Line, originally warranted by the Provincial Grand Master of
Massachusetts.

This movement continued to find favor amongst the craft, especially in
Pennsylvania, and culminated in a motion to that effect at a General
Grand Communication of the Grand Lodge, December 20, 1779.

This resulted in a Grand Lodge of Emergency being convened January 13,
1780, when the following action was taken:[83]

     "This Lodge being called by Order of the Grand Master, upon the
     request of Sundry Brethren, and also in pursuance of a Motion made
     at the last General Communication, to consider the Propriety as
     well as the necessity of appointing a Grand Master over all the
     Grand Lodges formed or to be formed in these United States, as the
     Correspondence which the Rules of Masonry require cannot now be
     carried on with the Grand Lodge of London, under whose Jurisdiction
     the Grand Lodges in these States were originally constituted; The
     Ballot was put upon the Question: Whether it be for the Benefit of
     Masonry that 'a Grand Master of Masons thro'out the United States'
     shall be now nominated on the part of this Grand Lodge; and it was
     unanimously determined in the affirmative.

     "Sundry respectable Brethren being then put in nomination, it was
     moved that the Ballot be put for them separately, and His
     Excellency George Washington, Esquire, General and
     Commander-in-chief of the Armies of the United States being first
     in nomination, he was ballotted for accordingly as Grand Master,
     and Elected by the unanimous vote of the whole Lodge.

     "Ordered, That the minutes of this Election and appointment be
     transmitted to the different Grand Lodges in the United States, and
     their Concurrence therein be requested, in Order that application
     be made to his Excellency in due form, praying that he will do the
     Brethren and Craft the honor of accepting their appointment. A
     Committee was appointed to expedite the Business."


The movement was further advanced at a Convention of representatives of
the Army Lodges, held at Morristown, N. J., on February 7, 1780, when,
fortified by the pronounced action of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, a
committee was chosen of which Brother Mordecai Gist of Maryland was
chairman and Brother Otho Williams of Delaware, secretary.[84]


=FAC-SIMILE OF FINAL LETTER FROM BOSTON, ENDING THE ATTEMPT TO MAKE
GEN. WASHINGTON GENERAL GRAND MASTER.=


This Committee issued the celebrated address:

     "To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, The Grand Masters of the several Lodges
     in the Respective United States of America.

         "UNION----FORCE----LOVE."


This address was signed by representatives of no less than seven states,
viz.: Maryland, Connecticut, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts
Bay, New York and Delaware; in addition to those of the American Union
Lodge, Artillery, St. John's Regimental Lodge and the Staff of the
American Army.

It was further ordered that the foregoing address with an exact copy of
these proceedings signed by the President and Secretary, be sent to the
respective Provincial Grand Masters in the United States.[85]

It was not until the middle of October that a reply was received from
the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts to the circular letter sent out by the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, and then only in response to a letter
written by our Grand Secretary, Rev. Brother Dr. William Smith.

This matter led to more or less correspondence between the Grand Lodges
of Pennsylvania and Massachusetts and was in abeyance, until January,
1781, when the following letter was received from Joseph Webb, Grand
Master of Massachusetts.[86]


     "BOSTON, Jany 17, 1781.

     "_Revd Sir and
     "Respected Brother_

     "Last Friday Evening the Grand Lodge met, agreeable to adjournment
     and after a long debate on the subject, whether it was expedient at
     present to elect a Grand Master General for the United States, it
     passed in the negative.

     "Inclosed I transmit you the vote from the G. Sec'y.

        "Yr Affecte Brother
          "& Hble Servt
            "Jos: WEBB.

     "Rev Dr Smith
       "Philadelphia."


The belief that WASHINGTON was the Grand Master of the United States was
widespread, and, as our late Bro. James M. Lamberton said in his address
before mentioned,[87] notwithstanding the fact that the project to
elevate General WASHINGTON fell through, "that the action of the Army
Lodges and of our Grand Lodge got abroad, is shown by translations of
two letters from a Lodge at Cape Francois,[88] on the island of San
Domingo, directed to General WASHINGTON as Grand Master of all America,
soliciting a charter, which were presented to our Grand Lodge, February
3, 1786. The same thing is shown by a medal struck in 1797, the obverse
showing the bust of WASHINGTON, with the legend, "G. Washington
President. 1797," the reverse showing many Masonic emblems,[89] with the
legend "Amor. Honor. Et Justica G.W.G.G.M." (_i. e.,_ George Washington,
General Grand Master).

The writer of the letters to WASHINGTON, Snyder, quoted at the beginning
of this chapter, being of foreign birth, and not a member of the Masonic
Fraternity, nor even living where a Masonic Lodge existed, evidently
labored under the same delusion as the Brethren at Cape Francois.

The Masonic Correspondence of WASHINGTON as represented upon these
pages, should settle for all time to come the question, as to the esteem
in which WASHINGTON held the Masonic Fraternity, of which he was an
honored Member.

It is stated that there are still a large number of Washington papers in
the Library of Congress, that are not accessible, as they have thus far
not been classified or indexed. Thus it is in the possibilities that
there may be still further documentary evidence found of Masonic import,
in addition to such as are set forth upon these pages.



=_The Arms of ye most Ancient & Honorable Fraternity of Free and Accepted
Masons._=



Footnotes:

[64] "Memorial Volume, Washington Sesqui-centennial Anniversary,"
Philadelphia, 1902, p. 165.

[65] "PROOFS | of a| CONSPIRACY | against all the | RELIGIONS and
GOVERNMENTS | of | EUROPE | carried on | in the secret meetings | of | FREE
MASONS, ILLUMINATI, | and | READING SOCIETIES, | " collected from Good
Authorities | by | JOHN ROBISON, A. M. |--EDINBURGH, | 1797. |

[66] The original letter of August 22, 1798, is among the Washington
papers in the Library of Congress; a photostat of same is in the
Archives of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

[67] Cf. Historical sketch of the Evangelical Reformed Church of
Frederick, Maryland, 1904, pp. 22-25.

[68] Cf. "Washington, The Man and Mason," p. 288.

[69] _Vide_ "Sesqui-Centennial Anniversary of the Initiation of Brother
George Washington before quoted," p. 149.

[70] Cf. Chapters II and III _supra_.

[71] Cf. "Washington, The Man and Mason," p. 286.

[72] _Ibid_., December 20, 1789. His excellency, General WASHINGTON,
unanimously elected Master; Robert McCrea, Senior Warden; William
Hunter, Jr., Junior Warden; William Hodgson, Treasurer; Joseph Greenway,
Secretary; Dr. Frederick Spambergen, Senior Deacon; George Richards,
Junior Deacon. Extract from Minutes, p. 288.

[73] _Vide_ "Freemasonry in Pennsylvania, 1727-1907," Vol. I, Chapter X,
pp. 295 _et seq_.

[74] _Ibid._, Vol. I, Chapter XII, pp. 399 _et seq_.

_Vide_ "Washington and his Masonic Compeers," Chapter VIII, pp. 149 _et
seq_.

[75] _Ibid._, pp. 86-87. Also records of King Solomon's Lodge, No. 1,
Poughkeepsie, New York.

[76] _Ibid._, pp. 150 _et seq_.

[77] _Ibid._, pp. 139 _et seq_.

[78] WASHINGTON, so far as known, attended the following public Masonic
functions:

1. Procession in Philadelphia, Festival of St. John the Evangelist,
December 28, 1778.

2. Festival of St. John the Baptist, June 24, 1779, with the American
Union Lodge, at the Robinson House on the Hudson, New York.

3. Festival of St. John the Evangelist, December 27, 1779, with American
Union Lodge, at the Morris Hotel, Morristown, New Jersey.

4. Festival of St. John the Evangelist, December 27, 1782, with King
Solomon's Lodge, at Poughkeepsie, New York.

5. Festival of St. John the Baptist, June 24, 1784, with Lodge No. 39,
at Alexandria, Virginia.

6. The Masonic funeral of Brother William Ramsay, February 12, 1785, at
Alexandria.

7. Laying of the cornerstone of the capitol at the Federal City
(Washington, D. C.), September 18, 1793, upon which occasion WASHINGTON
walked in the procession.

[79] Cf. Historical sketch before quoted, p. 24.

[80] Anti-Masonic Republican Convention before quoted, p. 26.

[81] Grand Master of Virginia, 1793-1795.

[82] Vindication of General Washington before quoted, p. 15.

[83] Cf. "Reprint of Minutes of Grand Lodge," Vol. I, p. 19.

[84] "Freemasonry in Pennsylvania, 1727-1781," Vol. I, p. 39.

[85] Address in full, _ibid._, pp. 399-402.

[86] All of the original correspondence is in the Archives of the Grand
Lodge of Pennsylvania, Mss., Vol. A.

[87] "Washington Sesqui-Centennial Celebration, Nov. 5, 1902, Memorial
Volume," pp. 135-6.

[88] Cf. "Old Masonic Lodges of Pennsylvania," Vol. II, Chapter LIII,
pp. 242-250.

[89] Specimen in Museum of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.




INDEX.


  Aberts Tavern, 101

  Adam, Rev. John, 30

  Adam, Robert, 29, 30

  Adcock, William, 77

  Alexander, Alexander, 58

  Alexandria Lodge, No. 22, Address and Reply, 18;
    Letter and Address to Washington, 96;
    Washington's Reply, 97

  Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, 17;
    Correspondence with, 28;
    Address to Washington, 29;
    Meets at Lamb Tavern, 33;
    Invites Washington to dine with them, 34

  Allison, John, 29, 33

  Anti-Masonic Craze, mention of, 8;
    Attack Washington's memory, 10;
    Certify to Records, 16

  Armstrong, Thomas, 90


  Baker, George A., 90

  Ball, William, 93

  Bartlett, Josiah, 83, 102

  Belton, William, 111, 113

  Blair, Judge, 42

  Blyth, Joseph, 53

  Bowen, Thomas B., 58

  Bradley, Thomas, 90

  Burk, Miss Fanny M., Copies, Portrait for Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, 36


  Carson, J., 53

  Chapman, Samuel, 48, 49

  Clark, Peleg, 15

  Clinton, Governor, 42

  Cohen, Abraham, 53

  Corney, James, 48

  Craik, George W., 2, 93

  Craik, Dr. James, 93

  Cutler, John, 83

  Cusack, Richard E., 90


  Dandridge, Bartholomew, 2, 75, 81

  Dick, Archibald, 32

  Dick, Elisha C., 29, 32;
    Conducts Masonic Services at Washington's Funeral, 33

  Drayton, William, 58

  Duplessis, Peter le Barbier, 70;
    Autograph, 72, 79, 80


  Edwards, Thomas, 102

  Elliot, Robert, 15


  Few, Joseph, 70;
    mention of, 78

  Foster, Theo., 42

  Franklin, Benjamin, mention of, 27

  Fredericktown, Maryland, 117

  Freemasonry in Pennsylvania (Barratt and Sachse), Referred to, 16

  Free Quaker Meeting House, 69


  Gates, Thomas, 58

  Georgia Grand Lodge, Address and Reply, 7, 17;
    Fraudulent letter to, 94

  Gillies, James, 95, 96, 97

  Gist, Mordecai, 57, 58, 59;
    Sketch of, 64, 134

  Gorman, Mr., of New Hampshire, 42

  Grant, Reuben, 53

  Greene, Mrs. Nathaniel, 66

  Griffith, Cadawalder, 90

  Guion, Isaac, 48, 49


  Halling, Solomon, 48, 49

  Hamilton, Gavin, 70, 90

  Handy, John, 15

  Harris, Thaddeus M., 102

  Hayes, Moses Michael, mention of, 15

  Hildreth, Ara, 38

  Houston, George, 66

  Hunt, Galliard, mention of, 6


  Illuminati, 117

  Irwin, David, 90

  Israel, Israel, 90


  Jackson, Major William, 2;
    Copies Address and Answer, 40

  Jefferson, Thomas, 36, 42

  Johnson, William, 48, 49


  King David's Lodge, No. 1, Newport, R. I., Proposed Masonic Address to
   General Washington, 14;
    Extracts from Records, 15, 17;
    Correspondence with, 37;
    Sends Address to Washington, 38;
    Fac-simile of Washington's Reply, 41

  Knox, Robert, 58


  Lamb Tavern, Alexandria meeting place of Lodge, No. 39, 33

  Lamberton, J. M., Address Washington as a Freemason, 11;
    quoted, 117

  Laughton, Joseph, 104

  Lear, Tobias, 2, 75, 101

  Letter Books in Library of Congress, 6

  Littlefield, William, 37

  Lodge No. 27, on Pennsylvania Roster, 57, 59

  Lowthorp, F., 48


  Machey, Mungo, 83

  Marshall, John, Chief Justice, 132

  Marsteller, Phillip G., 95, 96

  Maryland Grand Lodge, Draft of Letter to 7, 18;
    Address to Washington, 112;
    Washington Reply, 113;
    Original Draft of Reply, _ib._

  Mason, Benjamin, 70

  Masonic Aprons, 20

  Masonic Portrait of Washington in Alexandria Lodge, 36

  Massachusetts Grand Lodge, Draft of Letter to, 7;
    Letter to, 8;
    Objects to Washington as Grand Master General, 16;
    Address and Reply, 18;
    Address to Washington, 83;
    Reply, 85;
    Letter to Paul Revere, 104;
    Reply to Grand Lodge, 106;
    Refuses to nominate Washington as Grand Master General, 136

  Mazyck, William C., 60

  McElwee, John, 90

  Meyers, Israel, 58

  Miller, George, 58

  Mitchell, John, 58


  Nelson, William, 90

  Newburgh, Washington in Camp at, 21

  Nilson, Andrew, 90


  Oliver, Daniel, 104

  Oswald, Eleaser, 90


  Pasteur, Edward, 48

  Pennsylvania Grand Lodge, Draft of Letter to, 7;
    Address and Reply, 18;
    Resolutions, 69;
    Address to Washington, 71;
    Washington's Reply, 73;
    Address to Washington, 1796, 88;
    Address, 1797, 103;
    Nominated Washington as Grand Master General, 133

  Prince George's Lodge, No. 16, Georgetown, S. C.,
   Address and Reply, 8, 17;
    Correspondence with, 51;
    Sketch of, _ib._;
    Address to Washington, 52;
    Fac-simile, 54, 55;
    Washington's Reply, 56

  Procter, Thomas, 70;
    Sketch of, 78, 90

  Providence, R. I., Washington Arrives at, 42

  Putnam, Herbert, mention of, 4


  Ramsay, Dennis, 95, 96

  Ramsay, William, 29, 33

  Rehm, Dr. J. F., 50

  Revere, Paul, 2;
    Letter from Washington, 8;
    Letter to, 18, 102, 104

  Ritner, Governor, Vindication, 132

  Robison, John, "Proofs of Conspiracy," 118

  Rush, Dr. Benjamin, 32


  Seixas, Moses, 15, 37;
    Sketch of, 39

  Sherburne, Henry, 37

  Shippen, Dr. William, 32

  Smith, Jonathan Bayard, 70;
    Autograph, 72, 73;
    Sketch of, 76

  Smith, Mr. of South Carolina, 42

  Smith, Rev. William, D.D., Sermon by, 12;
    Masonic Sermons by, 13;
    Addresses the Brethren, 70;
    Drafts Address, 71, 73;
    Masonic Record, 76, 90;
    Writes to Grand Lodge, Massachusetts, 135

  Smith, William Moore, Autograph, 89, 90;
    Sketch of, 93;
    Snyder (Schneider), G. W., 3;
    Letter to Washington, 18, 113;
    Fac-simile of Letter, 119, 121;
    Sketch of, 123

  South Carolina Grand Lodge, Draft of Letter to, 7, 17;
    Correspondence with, 57;
    Address to Washington, 59;
    Washington's Reply, 59;
    Original Draft of Reply, 61;
    Fac-simile, 62, 63

  Sparks, Jared, 9;
    Letter from, 10, 129

  St. John's Lodge, No. 2, Newbern, N. C., Address and Reply, 8, 17;
    Correspondence with, 44;
    Resolution, 44;
    Address to Washington, 45;
    Fac-Simile, 46, 47


  Thomas, Isaiah, 104

  Town, Thomas, 90


  Warren, John, 102

  Washington, George, Master of Lodge while President, 2;
    Masonic Bodies named after, 3;
    Full length Portrait in London, 4;
    Copies of all Masonic Letters, 5;
    Letter to Paul Revere, 7;
    Memory attacked by Anti-Masons, 10;
    At Newport, R. I., 1781, 14;
    At Providence, R. I., _ib._;
    Report on, 15;
    As Grand Master, 16;
    Replies to Snyder, 18;
    Receives Masonic Ornaments from Watson & Cassoul, 20;
    Masonic Apron from Lafayette, 20;
    Reply to Watson & Cassoul, 21;
    In camp at Newburg, 21;
    Resigns his commission at Annapolis, 28;
    Returns to Mount Vernon, _ib._;
    Address from Lodge No. 39, 29;
    Reply to Lodge No. 39, 30;
    Fac-simile, 31;
    Invites Washington to dine with the Lodge, 34;
    Acceptance, 35;
    Accepts Honorary Membership, _ib._;
    Portrait of in Alexandria Lodge, 36;
    Address from King David's Lodge, 38;
    Arrives at Newport, R. I., 42;
    Providence, _ib._;
    Reply to King David's Lodge, ib;
    Starts on Southern Tour, 44;
    Reply to St. John's Lodge, 49;
    Arrives at Georgetown, S. C., 51;
    Washington's Reply to Prince George's Lodge, 56;
    Arrives at Charleston, S. C., 57;
    Receives Address from Grand Lodge of South Carolina, 58;
    Washington's Reply, 59;
    Calls on Mrs. Nathaniel Greene, 65;
    Receives Address from Grand Lodge, Georgia, 66;
    Leaves Savannah, 68;
    Replies to Grand Lodge of Georgia, _ib._;
    Residence in Philadelphia, 69;
    Received Address from Grand Lodge, Pennsylvania, 71;
    Reply 73;
    Master's Jewel, 79;
    Address from Grand Lodge, Massachusetts, 81;
    Washington's Reply, 84;
    Farewell Address, 86;
    At Philadelphia, 87;
    Address from Grand Lodge, Pennsylvania, 88;
    Washington Receives Deputation, 90;
    Reply, 91;
    Letters counterfeited, 94;
    Arrives at Mount Vernon, 95;
    Letter & Address from Alexandria Lodge, No. 22, 96;
    Reply, 97;
    Dines with Lodge No. 22, 101;
    Letter to Paul Revere, 104;
    Draft of Reply to Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, 106;
    Lieutenant General, 111;
    At Baltimore, _ib._;
    Draft of Reply to Grand Lodge of Maryland, 113;
    Reply, 115;
    Sesqui-Centennial Anniversary, 117;
    Letter and Book from G. W. Snyder, 118;
    Reply to Snyder's Letter of September 15, 1798, 123;
    Explanation of, 125;
    Member of Alexandria Lodge, 126;
    Lays Corner-Stone of Capitol, 127;
    Masonic Record of, _ib._;
    Traditions of, 128;
    Second Letter from Snyder, 129;
    Washington's Reply, 130;
    Refutation of the Anti-Masonic Slanders, 131;
    Grand Master General, 132;
    Address by Army Lodges, 134;
    Massachusetts refuses to concur, 136;
    Universal belief that Washington was Grand Master General, 137;
    Medal struck as such, 138

  Washington, Lodges in United States, 3

  Watson and Cassoul, Draft and Letter to, 7, 17;
    Send Masonic Apron to Washington, 19;
    Reply to, 22;
    Fac-simile of original Draft to, 24, 25;
    mention of, 27

  Watson, Elkanah, 19;
    Letter to Washington, 20, 27

  Webb, Joseph, 135

  White, Isaac, 53

  White, Rev. William, Prayer by, 12

  Williams, J. Henry, Authorization, iii;
    mention of, 4

  Williams, Otho, 134

  Williams, William, Paints Washington's Masonic Portrait, 36

  Wise's Tavern, Alexandria, 35




Transcriber's Notes:

  Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

  Image captions are indicated by =caption=.

  Illustrations without captions are not identified in this text version.

  Superscripted letters are not identified in this text version.

  Additional spacing after some of the quotes is intentional to indicate
  both the end of a quotation and the beginning of a new paragraph as
  presented in the original text.

  The following misprints have been corrected:
    "contiuue" corrected to "continue" (page 66)
    "Illumaniti" corrected to "Illuminati" (page 130)
    "Fredricksburg" corrected to "Fredericksburg" (footnote 7)
    "Dick, Elisah" corrected to "Dick, Elisha" (index)

  All other spelling and punctuation is presented as in the original.

  The index has been correctly alphabetized.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Washington's Masonic Correspondence, by
Julius F. Sachse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WASHINTON'S MASONIC CORRESPONDENCE ***

***** This file should be named 29949.txt or 29949.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/9/4/29949/

Produced by Curtis Weyant, Stephanie Eason, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
