The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Forerunner (vol. 1) by C. P. Gilman
#5 in our series by Charlotte Perkins Gilman

Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the laws for your country before redistributing these files!!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.

Please do not remove this.

This should be the first thing seen when anyone opens the book.
Do not change or edit it without written permission.  The words
are carefully chosen to provide users with the information they
need about what they can legally do with the texts.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.

Presently, contributions are only being solicited from people in:
Texas, Nevada, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, South Dakota,
Iowa, Indiana, and Vermont. As the requirements for other states
are met, additions to this list will be made and fund raising will
begin in the additional states. These donations should be made to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655


Title:  The Forerunner, Volume 1 (1909-1910)

Author:  Charlotte Perkins Gilman

Release Date:  January, 2002  [Etext #3017]
[Yes, we are about one year ahead of schedule]

Edition:  10

Language: English


The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Forerunner (vol. 1) by C. P. Gilman
******This file should be named 3017.txt or 3017.zip******

This etext was prepared by Christopher Hapka, New York, NY.

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our books one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to send us error messages even years after
the official publication date.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our sites at:
http://gutenberg.net
http://promo.net/pg


Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
can surf to them as follows, and just download by date; this is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://metalab.unc.edu/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext01
or
ftp://metalab.unc.edu/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext01

Or /etext00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release fifty new Etext
files per month, or 500 more Etexts in 2000 for a total of 3000+
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
should reach over 300 billion Etexts given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding.

Something is needed to create a future for Project Gutenberg for
the next 100 years.

We need your donations more than ever!

Presently, contributions are only being solicited from people in:
Texas, Nevada, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, South Dakota,
Iowa, Indiana, and Vermont. As the requirements for other states
are met, additions to this list will be made and fund raising will
begin in the additional states.

All donations should be made to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and will be tax deductible to the extent
permitted by law.

Mail to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Avenue
Oxford, MS 38655  [USA]

We are working with the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation to build more stable support and ensure the
future of Project Gutenberg.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

You can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.


Example command-line FTP session:

ftp metalab.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99 or etext00 through etext01, etc.
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain etexts, and royalty free copyright licenses.
If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.07.00*END*





THE FORERUNNER, A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

by

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN



VOLUME ONE, November 1909-December 1910 (14 issues)




CONTENTS





 Volume 1 No. 1
 November 1909


Then This (poem)
A Small God And a Large Goddess (essay)
Arrears (poem)
Three Thanksgivings (story)
How Doth The Hat (poem)
Introducing the World, the Flesh And the Devil (sketch)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
Where the Heart Is (sketch)
Thanksgiving (poem)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
Comment And Review
Personal Problems
Thanksong (poem)
Advertisements: Lowney's, Fels-Naptha Soap, Holeproof Hoisery, Moore's
Fountain Pen, The Forerunner, A Toilet Preparation, Calendula



 Volume 1 No. 2
 December 1909


Love (poem)
According To Solomon (story)
An Obvious Blessing (essay)
Steps (poem)
Why We Honestly Fear Socialism (essay)
Child Labor (poem)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
The Poor Relation (sketch)
His Crutches (poem)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
Comment And Review
Personal Problems
Get Your Work Done (poem)
Advertisements: Lowney's, Soapine, Woman's Era, The Forerunner, Calendula



 Volume 1 No. 3
 January 1910


A Central Sun, a song (poem)
Reasonable Resolutions (essay)
Her Housekeeper (story)
Locked Inside (poem)
Private Morality And Pulic Immorality (essay)
"With God Above" (poem)
The Humanness Of Women (essay)
Here Is The Earth (poem)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
The "Anti" And The Fly (poem)
The Barrel (sketch)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
Play-Time: The Melancholy Rabbit (poem)
Advertisements: The Forerunner, Confidential Remarks About Our
Advertising, Things we wish to Advertise, Calendula



 Volume 1 No. 4
 February 1910


Two Prayers (poem)
An Offender (story)
Before Warm February Winds (poem)
Kitchen-Mindedness (esssay)
Two Storks (sketch)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
Little Leafy Brothers (poem)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
Play-Time: A Walk Walk Walk (poem)
Ode To a Fool (poem)



 Volume 1 No. 5
 March 1910


The Sands (poem)
A Middle-Sized Artist (story)
The Minor Birds (poem)
Parlor-Mindedness (essay)
Naughty (sketch)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
Erratum
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
Water-Lure (poem)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
Play-Time: Aunt Eliza (poem)
The Cripple (poem)



 Volume 1 No. 6
 April 1910


When Thou Gainest Happiness (poem)
Martha's Mother (story)
For Fear (poem)
Nursery-Mindedness (essay)
A Village Of Fools (sketch)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
"I gave myself to God" (poem)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
His Agony (poem)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
Advertisements: The Forerunner, A Summer Cottage



 Volume 1 No. 7
 May 1910


Brain Service (poem)
When I Was A Witch (story)
Quotation: Eugene Wood
Believing And Knowing (essay)
The Kingdom (poem)
Heaven Forbid! (poem)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
The House of Apples (sketch)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
Suffrage (editorial)
Advertisements: The Forerunner, A Summer Cottage



 Volume 1 No. 8
 June 1910


The Puritan (poem)
Making a Living (story)
Ten Suggestions (essay)
The Malingerer (poem)
Genius, Domestic and Maternal, part I (essay)
Prisoners (sketch)
May Leaves (poem)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
The Room At The Top (poem)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
Advertisement: The Forerunner



 Volume 1 No. 9
 July 1910


The Bawling World (poem)
A Coincidence (story)
Shares (poem)
Genius, Domestic and Maternal, part II (essay)
Improved Methods of Habit Culture (essay)
O Faithful Clay! (poem)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
We Eat At Home (poem)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
Only an Hour (sketch)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
Advertisements: Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman, The Forerunner



 Volume 1 No. 10
 August 1910


The Earth's Entail (poem)
The Cottagette (story)
Wholesale Hypnotism (essay)
"Sit up and think!" (poem)
The Kitchen Fly (essay)
Alas! (poem)
Her Pets (sketch)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
"The Outer Reef!" (poem)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
The Editor's Problem (editorial)
Advertisements: Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman, The Forerunner



 Volume 1 No. 11
 September 1910


To-morrow Night (poem)
Mr. Robert Grey Sr. (story)
What Virtues Are Made Of (essay)
Animals In Cities (essay)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
The Waiting-Room (poem)
While the King Slept (sketch)
The Housewife (poem)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
The Beauty Women Have Lost (essay)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
The Editor's Problem (editorial)
From Letters Of Subscribers
Advertisements: Some Of Our Exchanges, Books by Charlotte Perkins
Gilman, The Forerunner


 Volume 1 No. 12
 October 1910


Only Mine (poem)
The Boys and the Butter (story)
A Question (poem)
Is It Wrong To Take Life? (essay)
The World and the Three Artists (sketch)
In How Little Time (poem)
Woman and the State (essay)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
The Socialist and the Suffragist (poem)
Comment and Review
Personal Problems
Our Bound Volume As A Christmas Present (editorial)
To Those Specially Interested... (editorial)
If You Renew (editorial)
If You Discontinue (editorial)
Advertisements: The Woman's Journal, Some Of Our Exchanges, Books
by Charlotte Perkins Gilman, The Crux


 Volume 1 No. 13
 November 1910


Worship (poem)
My Astonishing Dodo (story)
Why Texts? (essay)
The Little White Animals (poem)
Women Teachers, Married and Unmarried (essay)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
The Good Man (sketch)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
A Frequent Question (sketch)
Boys Will Be Boys (poem)
Many Windows (poem)
Comment and Review
From Letters Of Subscribers
A Friendly Response (editorial)
Our Bound Volume As A Christmas Present (editorial)
To Those Specially Interested... (editorial)
If You Renew (editorial)
If You Discontinue (editorial)
Advertisements: The Woman's Journal, Some Of Our Exchanges, Books by
Charlotte Perkins Gilman, The Crux


 Volume 1 No. 14
 December 1910


In As Much (poem)
A Word In Season (story)
Christmas Love (essay)
What Diantha Did (serial fiction)
Our Overworked Instincts (essay)
Love's Highest (poem)
The Permanent Child (sketch)
The New Motherhood (essay)
How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money (essay)
Our Androcentric Culture; or, The Man-Made World (serial non-fiction)
The Nun In The Kitchen (essay)
Letters From Subscribers (editorial)
Comment and Review
Advertisements: Success Magazine, The Co-Operative Press, Woman
and Socialism, The Woman's Journal, Some Of Our Exchanges
From Letters of Forerunner Subscribers
Advertisements: Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman, The Crux




INDEX



 SERIALS AND COLUMNS

Our Androcentric Culture, or The Man-Made World, non-fiction (1:1 - 1:14)
What Diantha Did, novel (1:1 - 1:14)
Comment and Review (1:1 - 1:14)
Personal Problems (1:1 - 1:12)
Play-Time (1:3 - 1:5)


 STORIES

According To Solomon (1:2)
The Boys and the Butter (1:12)
A Coincidence (1:9)
The Cottagette (1:10)
Her Housekeeper (1:3)
Making a Living (1:8)
Martha's Mother (1:6)
A Middle-Sized Artist (1:5)
Mr. Robert Grey Sr. (1:11)
My Astonishing Dodo (1:13)
An Offender (1:4)
Three Thanksgivings (1:1)
When I Was A Witch (1:7)
A Word In Season (1:14)


 ESSAYS AND SKETCHES

Animals In Cities (1:11)
The Barrel (1:3)
The Beauty Women Have Lost (1:11)
Believing And Knowing (1:7)
Christmas Love (1:14)
A Frequent Question (1:13)
Genius, Domestic and Maternal (1:8, 1:9)
The Good Man (1:13)
Her Pets (1:10)
The House of Apples (1:7)
How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money (1:14)
The Humanness Of Women (1:3)
Improved Methods of Habit Culture (1:9)
Introducing the World, the Flesh And the Devil (1:1)
Is It Wrong To Take Life? (1:12)
The Kitchen Fly (1:10)
Kitchen-Mindedness (1:4)
Naughty (1:5)
The New Motherhood (1:14)
The Nun In The Kitchen (1:14)
Nursery-Mindedness (1:6)
An Obvious Blessing (1:2)
Only an Hour (1:9)
Our Overworked Instincts (1:14)
Parlor-Mindedness (1:5)
The Permanent Child (1:14)
The Poor Relation (1:2)
Prisoners (1:8)
Private Morality And Pulic Immorality (1:3)
Reasonable Resolutions (1:3)
A Small God And a Large Goddess (1:1)
Ten Suggestions (1:8)
A Village Of Fools (1:6)
What Virtues Are Made Of (1:11)
Where the Heart Is (1:1)
Wholesale Hypnotism (1:10)
While the King Slept (1:11)
Why Texts? (1:13)
Why We Honestly Fear Socialism (1:2)
Woman and the State (1:12)
Women Teachers, Married and Unmarried (1:13)
The World and the Three Artists (1:12)

 POEMS

Alas! (1:10)
The "Anti" And The Fly (1:3)
Arrears (1:1)
Aunt Eliza (1:5)
The Bawling World, a sestina (1:9)
Before Warm February Winds (1:4)
Boys Will Be Boys (1:13)
Brain Service (1:7)
A Central Sun, a song (1:3)
Child Labor (1:2)
The Cripple (1:5)
The Earth's Entail (1:10)
For Fear (1:6)
Get Your Work Done (1:2)
Heaven Forbid! (1:7)
His Agony (1:6)
His Crutches (1:2)
Here Is The Earth (1:3)
The Housewife (1:11)
How Doth The Hat (1:1)
"I gave myself to God" (1:6)
In As Much (1:14)
In How Little Time (1:12)
The Kingdom (1:7)
Little Leafy Brothers (1:4)
The Little White Animals (1:13)
Locked Inside (1:3)
Love (1:2)
Love's Highest (1:14)
The Malingerer (1:8)
Many Windows (1:13)
May Leaves (1:8)
The Melancholy Rabbit (1:3)
The Minor Birds (1:5)
O Faithful Clay! (1:9)
Ode To a Fool (1:4)
Only Mine (1:12)
"The Outer Reef!" (1:10)
Play-Time: Aunt Eliza (1:5)
Play-Time: The Melancholy Rabbit (1:3)
Play-Time: A Walk Walk Walk (1:4)
The Puritan (1:8)
A Question (1:12)
The Room At The Top (1:8)
The Sands (1:5)
Shares (1:9)
"Sit up and think!" (1:10)
The Socialist and the Suffragist (1:12)
Steps (1:2)
Thanksgiving (1:1)
Thanksong (1:1)
Then This (1:1)
To-morrow Night (1:11)
Two Prayers (1:4)
The Waiting-Room (1:11)
A Walk Walk Walk (1:5)
Water-Lure (1:5)
We Eat At Home (1:9)
When Thou Gainest Happiness (1:6)
"With God Above" (1:3)
Worship (1:13)

 ADVERTISEMENTS AND MISC.

Editorial: The Editor's Problem (1:10, 1:11)
Editorial: A Friendly Response (1:13)
Editorial: If You Discontinue (1:12, 1:13)
Editorial: If You Renew (1:12, 1:13)
Editorial: Letters From Subscribers (1:14)
Editorial: Our Bound Volume As A Christmas Present (1:12, 1:13)
Editorial: Suffrage (1:7)
Editorial: To Those Specially Interested... (1:12, 1:13)
Erratum (1:5)
From Letters Of Subscribers (1:11, 1:13, 1:14)
Masthead tags (1:1, 1:3 - 1:7)
Quotation: Eugene Wood (1:7)
Advertisement: Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1:9 - 1:14)
Advertisement: Calendula (1:1 - 1:3)
Advertisement: Confidential Remarks About Our Advertising (1:3)
Advertisement: The Co-Operative Press (1:14)
Advertisement: The Crux (1:12 - 1:14)
Advertisement: Fels-Naptha Soap (1:1)
Advertisement: The Forerunner (1:1 - 1:3, 1:6 - 1:11)
Advertisement: Holeproof Hoisery (1:1)
Advertisement: Lowney's (1:1: 1:2)
Advertisement: Moore's Fountain Pen (1:1)
Advertisement: Soapine (1:2)
Advertisement: Some Of Our Exchanges (1:11 - 1:14)
Advertisement: Success Magazine (1:14)
Advertisement: A Summer Cottage (1:6, 1:7)
Advertisement: Things we wish to Advertise (1:3)
Advertisement: A Toilet Preparation (1:1)
Advertisement: Woman's Era (1:2)
Advertisement: Woman and Socialism (1:14)
Advertisement: The Woman's Journal (1:12 - 1:14)

 WORKS REVIEWED

"The American Magazine", illustrations (1:1)
Jessie H. Childs, "The Sea of Matrimony" (1:3)
Stanton Coit, "Woman in Church and State" (1:9)
"The Common Cause," magazine (1:11)
Lavinia L. Dock, "Hygiene and Morality" (1:13)
"The Englishwoman," magazine (1:10)
"The Ethical World", magazine (1:9)
Cicely Hamilton, "Marriage as a Trade" (1:13)
Alexander Irvine, "From The Bottom Up" (1:11)
Mary Jonston, "The Wise Housekeeper" (1:13)
Ellen Key, "The Century of the Child" (1:14)
Ingraham Lovell, "Margharita's Soul" (1:2)
"Philemon's Verses" (author unknown) (1:5)
Sarah Harvey Porter, "The Life and Times of Anne Royall" (1:2)
"The Progressive Woman," magazine (1:11)
Gerald Stanley Lee, "Inspired Millionaires" (1:7)
Prince Morrow, "Social Diseases and Marriage" (1:6)
Meredith Nicholson, "The Lords of High Decision" (1:5)
William Robinson, "Never Told Tales" (1:6)
Thomas W. Salmon, "Two Preventable Causes of Insanity" (1:10)
Nancy Musselman Schoonmaker, "The Eternal Fires" (1:9)
Molly Elliot Sewell, "The Ladies' Battle" (1:14)
Ida Tarbell, "The American Woman" (1:8)
"To-day's Problems," various authors (1:13)
"The Union Labor Advocate," magazine (1:11)
"Votes for Women," magazine (1:11)
Lester F. Ward, "Pure Sociology" (1:12)
H. G. Wells, "Ann Veronica" (1:3)
Harvey White, "A Ship Of Souls" (1:12)
"The Woman's Journal" (1:3, 1:10)






THE FORERUNNER, VOLUME ONE





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
OWNER AND PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 1
NOVEMBER, 1909
The Charlton Company, 67 Wall Street, New York
Copyright for 1909, C. P. Gilman

Said the New Minister: "I shall not give you a text this morning.  If
you listen closely, you will discover what the sermon is about by what I
say."




THEN THIS


The news-stands bloom with magazines,
 They flame, they blaze indeed;
So bright the cover-colors glow,
So clear the startling stories show,
So vivid their pictorial scenes,
 That he who runs may read.

Then This: It strives in prose and verse,
 Thought, fancy, fact and fun,
To tell the things we ought to know,
To point the way we ought to go,
So audibly to bless and curse,
 That he who reads may run.



A SMALL GOD AND A LARGE GODDESS


The ancient iconoclast pursued his idol-smashing with an ax.  He did not
regard the feelings of the worshippers, and they, with similar
indifference to his, promptly destroyed him.

The modern iconoclast, wiser from long experience, practices the
kindergarten art of substitution; enters without noise, and dexterously
replaces the old image with a new one.

Often the worshippers do not notice the change. They never spend their
time in discriminating study of their idol, being exclusively occupied
in worshipping it.

The task herein undertaken is not so easy.  We can hardly expect to
remove the particular pet deity of millions of people for thousands of
years--an especially conspicuous little image at that, differing from
other gods and goddesses; and substitute another figure, three times his
size, of the opposite sex, and thirty years older--without somebody's
noticing it.

Yet this is precisely what is required of us, by the new knowledge of
to-day.  We are called upon to dislodge what is easily the most popular
god in the calendar, albeit the littlest; that fat fluttering small boy,
congenitally blind, with his haphazard archery playthings; that
undignified conception, type of folly change and irresponsible mischief,
which so amazingly usurps the name and place of love.  Never was there a
more absurd misrepresentation.

Suppose we worshipped Fire, the great sun for our over-lord, all lesser
lights in varying majesty, each hearth-fire as the genius and guardian
of the home.  So worshipping, suppose we chose, as ever present image of
the great idea, to be pictured and sculptured far and wide, to fill all
literature, to be accepted even by science as type and symbol of the
Fire Divine--a match-box!

So slight, so transient, so comparatively negligible in importance, is
the flickering chance-sown spark typified in this pretty chimera of
flying immaturity, compared with the majestic quenchless flame of life
and love we ought to worship.

We have taken the assistant for the principal, a tributary for the main
stream; we have exalted Eros, the god of man's desire, and paid no heed
to that great goddess of mother love to whom young Eros is but a running
footman.

We are right to worship love, in all its wide, diverging branches; the
love that is gratitude, love that is sympathy. love that is admiration,
love that is gift and service; even the love that is but hunger--mere
desire.

But when we talk of the Life Force, the strong stream of physical
immortality, which has replaced form with form and kept the stream
unbroken through the ages, we ought to understand whereof we speak.

That force is predominant. Under its ceaseless, upward pressure have all
creatures risen from the first beginning.  Resistlessly it pushes
through the ages; stronger than pain or fear or anger, stronger than
selfishness or pride, stronger than death.  It rises like a mighty tree,
branching and spreading through the changing seasons.

Death gnaws at it in vain.  Death destroys the individual, not the race;
death plucks the leaves, the tree lives on.  That tree is motherhood.

The life process replaces one generation with another, each equal to,
yes, if possible, superior to, the last.  This mighty process has
enlarged and improved throughout the ages, until it has grown from a
mere division of the cell--its first step still--to the whole range of
education by which the generations are replenished socially as well as
physically. From that vague impulse which sets afloat a myriad oyster
germs, to the long patience of a brooding bird; from the sun-warmed eggs
of a reptile to the nursed and guarded young of the higher mammals; so
runs the process and the power through lengthening years of love and
service, lives by service, grows with service.  The longer the period of
infancy, the greater the improvement of species.

The fish or insect, rapidly matured, reaches an early limit. He must be
competent to Iive as soon as he begins, and is no more competent at his
early ending.  The higher life form, less perfect at beginning, spending
more time dependent on its mother, receives from her more power.  First
from her body's shelter, the full, long upbuilding; safety while she is
safe; the circling guard of wise, mature, strong life, of conscious
care, besides the unconscious bulwark of self-interest.  Contrast this
with the floating chances of the spawn!

Then the rich, sure food of mother-milk, the absolute adaptation, the
whole great living creature an alembic to gather from without, and
distil to sweet perfection, what the child needs.  Contrast this with
the chances of new-born fish or fly, or even those of the bird baby,
whose mother must search wide for the food she brings.  The mammal has
it with her.

Then comes the highest stage of all, where the psychic gain of the race
is transmitted to the child as well as the physical.  This last and
noblest step in the life process we call education.  education is
differentiated motherhood. It is social motherhood.  It is the
application to the replenishment and development of the race of the same
great force of ever-growing life which made the mother's milk.

Here are the three governing laws of life: To Be; To Re-Be; To Be
Better.  The life force demands Existence.  And we strain every nerve to
keep ourselves alive.  The life force demands Reproduction.  And our
physical machinery is shifted and rearranged repeatedly, with arrayed
impulses to suit--to keep the race alive.  Then, most imperative of all,
the life force demands Improvement.  And all creation groaneth and
travaileth in this one vast endeavor.  Not merely this
thing--permanently; not merely more of this thing--continuously; but
better things, ever better and better types, has been the demand of life
upon us, and we have fulfilled it.

Under this last and highest law, as the main factor in securing to the
race its due improvement, comes that supreme officer of the life
process, the Mother.  Her functions are complex, subtle, powerful, of
measureless value.

Her first duty is to grow nobly for her mighty purpose.  Her next is to
select, with inexorable high standard, the fit assistant for her work.
The third--to fitly bear, bring forth, and nurse the child.  Following
these, last and highest of all, comes our great race-process of social
parentage, which transmits to each new generation the gathered
knowledge, the accumulated advantages of the past.

When mother and father labor and save for years to give their children
the "advantages" of civilization; when a whole state taxes itself to
teach its children; that is the Life Force even more than the direct
impulse of personal passion.  The pressure of progress, the resistless
demand of better conditions for our children, is life's largest
imperative, the fullest expression of motherhood.

But even if we confine ourselves for the time being to the plane of mere
replenishment, to that general law under which animals continue in
existence upon earth, even here the brief period of pre-paternal
excitement is but a passing hour compared to the weeks and months, yes,
years, in the higher species, of maternal service, love and care.  The
human father, too, toils for his family; but the love, the power, the
pride of fatherhood are not symbolized by the mischievous butterfly baby
we have elected to worship.

Cupid has nothing to do with either motherhood or fatherhood in the
large human sense.  His range is far short of the mark, he suggests
nothing of the great work to which he is but the pleasing preliminary.
Even for marriage we must bring in another god little heard of--Master
Hymen.  This personage has made but small impression upon literature and
art; we have concentrated our interest on the God of First Sensation,
leaving none for ultimate results.

It is as if we were impressed by the intricate and indispensible process
of nutrition (upon which, as anyone can see, all life continuously
depends) and then had fixed our attention upon the palate, as chief
functionary.  The palate is useful, even necessary.  Without that eager
guide and servant we might be indifferent to the duty of eating, or
might eat what was useless or injurious, or at best eat mechanically and
without pleasure.

In the admirable economy of nature we are led to perform necessary acts
by the pleasure which accompanies them; so the "pleasures of the palate"
 rightly precede the uses of the stomach; but we should not mistake them
for the chief end.  In point of fact, this is precisely what we have
done.  It not an analogy, it is a real truth.  In nutrition as in
reproduction we have been quite taken up with accompaniments and
assistants, and have ignored the real business in hand.  That is why the
whole world is so unwisely fed.  It considers only the taste of things,
the pleasure of eating them, and ignores the real necessities of the
process.

And why, if this standard of doorstep satisfaction does not really
measure values in food, should we continue to set the same standard for
the mighty work of love?  Love is mighty, but little Master Cupid is not
Love.  The love that warms and lights and builds the world is
Motherlove.  It is aided and paralleled by Fatherlove (that new
development distinctive of our race, that ennobling of the father by his
taking up so large a share of what was once all motherwork).

But why, so recognizing and reverencing this august Power, why should we
any longer be content to accept as its symbol this godlet of transient
sensation?  No man who has ever loved a woman fully, as only human
beings can love, through years of mutual care and labor, through
sickness, age, and death, can honestly accept, as type of that long,
strong, enduring Love, this small blind fly-by-night.

There is, unquestionably, a stage of feeling which he fitly represents.
There is an inflammable emotionality in youth and its dreary continuance
into middle life, when as the farcial old governor in the play exclaims,
"Every day is ladies' day to me."  Such a state of mind--or body,
rather--is common enough, harmless enough, perhaps, for a few light,
ineffectual years; but it is a poor compliment to call it Love, to let
this state of shuffling indecision, this weather-cock period, this
blindfold chance-shot game of hit or miss, hold such high place in our
hearts.

The explanation of it all is plain.  In those slow, ignorant ages when
the spark of life was supposed to be transmitted by the male, he
naturally was taken to typify the life force.  As this force was most
imperious in youth, so youth was taken to represent it.  And as, even in
the eyes of the supposed chief actor, his feelings were changeable and
fleeting and his behavior erratic and foolish in the extreme--therefore
Cupid!

Therefore, seeing the continuous unreason of the love-driven male, we
say, "Love is blind"; seeing his light-mindedness, we say, "Love has
wings"; seeing his evident lack of intelligence and purpose, we make him
a mere child; seeing the evil results of his wide license, we
euphemistically indicate some pain by that bunch of baby arrows.

It is easy to see the origin of this deification of the doorstep.  It is
not so easy to justify its persistence now that long years of knowledge
show us the great Door.

The Door of Life is Motherhood. She is the gate of entrance.  Her work
is the great work as moulder and builder.  She carries in her the Life
Power which this absurd infant is supposed to typify; and her love is
greater than his, even as a wise, strong mother is greater than a little
child.

Consider the imperative law that demands motherhood, that gives
motherhood, that holds motherhood to its great continuing task; where
short pleasure is followed by long discomfort crowned with pain; where
even the rich achievement of new-made life is but the beginning of years
of labor and care.  Here is the life force.  Here is power and passion.
Not the irritable, transient impulse, however mighty, but the staying
power, the passion that endures, the spirit which masters weakness,
slays selfishness, holds its ministrant to a lifelong task.

This is not appetite, hunger, desire.  Desire may lead to it, and
usefully.  Desire is the torchbearer, Motherhood is the Way.

Give Baby Love his due.  He is not evil; he is good.  He is a joy
forever.  He is vitally necessary in the scheme of things.  Happy are
they who in the real great work of life can carry with them this angel
visitant, fluttering free along their path, now close and sweet, now
smiling mischievously at a distance, yet returning ever.

But with all that can be said of him he is out of place as chief deity
in this high temple.  Let a little shrine be made at the gate outside
the door.  Let him smile there and take his tribute of red roses.  But
when we put the shoes from off our feet and enter, we should see before
us, tall and grave, glorious in strong beauty, majestic in her amplitude
of power, the Goddess Motherhood.

Such love should shine from her deep eyes that children would crowd to
that temple and feel at home; learning to understand a little of what
had brought them there. Such beauty in this body of great womanhood that
men would worship as for long they have worshipped her of Melos.  Such
high pride that girls, gazing, would feel strong to meet and bear their
splendid task.  And such power--such living, overmastering power that
man, woman and child alike should bow in honor and rise in strength.

Then will Love be truly worshipped.



ARREARS


Our gratitude goes up in smoke,
 In incense smoke of prayer;
We thank the Underlying Love,
 The Overarching Care--
We do not thank the living men
 Who make our lives so fair.

For long insolvent centuries
 We have been clothed and fed,
By the spared captive, spared for once,
 By inches slain instead;
He gave his service and is gone;
 Unthanked, unpaid, and dead.

His labor built the world we love;
 Our highest flights to-day
Rest on the service of the past,
 Which we can never pay;
A long repudiated debt
 Blackens our upward way.

Our fingers owed his fathers dead--
 Disgrace beyond repair!
No late remorse, no new-found shame
 Can save our honor there:
But we can now begin to pay
 The starved and stunted heir!

We thank the Power above for all--
 Gladly we do, and should.
But might we not save out a part
 Of our large gratitude,
And give it to the power on earth--
 Where it will do some good?



THREE THANKSGIVINGS


Andrew's letter and Jean's letter were in Mrs. Morrison's lap.  She had
read them both, and sat looking at them with a varying sort of smile,
now motherly and now unmotherly.

"You belong with me," Andrew wrote.  "It is not right that Jean's
husband should support my mother.  I can do it easily now.  You shall
have a good room and every comfort.  The old house will let for enough
to give you quite a little income of your own, or it can be sold and I
will invest the money where you'll get a deal more out of it.  It is not
right that you should live alone there.  Sally is old and liable to
accident.  I am anxious about you.  Come on for Thanksgiving--and come
to stay.  Here is the money to come with.  You know I want you.  Annie
joins me in sending love.  ANDREW."

Mrs. Morrison read it all through again, and laid it down with her
quiet, twinkling smile.  Then she read Jean's.

"Now, mother, you've got to come to us for Thanksgiving this year.  Just
think!  You haven't seen baby since he was three months old!  And have
never seen the twins.  You won't know him--he's such a splendid big boy
now.  Joe says for you to come, of course.  And, mother, why won't you
come and live with us?  Joe wants you, too. There's the little room
upstairs; it's not very big, but we can put in a Franklin stove for you
and make you pretty comfortable.  Joe says he should think you ought to
sell that white elephant of a place.  He says he could put the money
into his store and pay you good interest.  I wish you would, mother.
We'd just love to have you here.  You'd be such a comfort to me, and
such a help with the babies.  And Joe just loves you.  Do come now, and
stay with us.  Here is the money for the trip.--Your affectionate
daughter, JEANNIE."

Mrs. Morrison laid this beside the other, folded both, and placed them
in their respective envelopes, then in their several well-filled
pigeon-holes in her big, old-fashioned desk.  She turned and paced
slowly up and down the long parlor, a tall woman, commanding of aspect,
yet of a winningly attractive manner, erect and light-footed, still
imposingly handsome.

It was now November, the last lingering boarder was long since gone, and
a quiet winter lay before her.  She was alone, but for Sally; and she
smiled at Andrew's cautious expression, "liable to accident."  He could
not say "feeble" or "ailing," Sally being a colored lady of changeless
aspect and incessant activity.

Mrs. Morrison was alone, and while living in the Welcome House she was
never unhappy.  Her father had built it, she was born there, she grew up
playing on the broad green lawns in front, and in the acre of garden
behind.  It was the finest house in the village, and she then thought it
the finest in the world.

Even after living with her father at Washington and abroad, after
visiting hall, castle and palace, she still found the Welcome House
beautiful and impressive.

If she kept on taking boarders she could live the year through, and pay
interest, but not principal, on her little mortgage. This had been the
one possible and necessary thing while the children were there, though
it was a business she hated.

But her youthful experience in diplomatic circles, and the years of
practical management in church affairs, enabled her to bear it with
patience and success.  The boarders often confided to one another, as
they chatted and tatted on the long piazza, that Mrs. Morrison was
"certainly very refined."

Now Sally whisked in cheerfully, announcing supper, and Mrs. Morrison
went out to her great silver tea-tray at the lit end of the long, dark
mahogany table, with as much dignity as if twenty titled guests were
before her.

Afterward Mr. Butts called.  He came early in the evening, with his
usual air of determination and a somewhat unusual spruceness.  Mr. Peter
Butts was a florid, blonde person, a little stout, a little pompous,
sturdy and immovable in the attitude of a self-made man.  He had been a
poor boy when she was a rich girl; and it gratified him much to
realize--and to call upon her to realize--that their positions had
changed.  He meant no unkindness, his pride was honest and unveiled.
Tact he had none.

She had refused Mr. Butts, almost with laughter, when he proposed to her
in her gay girlhood.  She had refused him, more gently, when he proposed
to her in her early widowhood.  He had always been her friend, and her
husband's friend, a solid member of the church, and had taken the small
mortgage of the house.  She refused to allow him at first, but he was
convincingly frank about it.

"This has nothing to do with my wanting you, Delia Morrison," he said.
"I've always wanted you--and I've always wanted this house, too.  You
won't sell, but you've got to mortgage.  By and by you can't pay up, and
I'll get it--see?  Then maybe you'll take me--to keep the house.  Don't
be a fool, Delia. It's a perfectly good investment."

She had taken the loan.  She had paid the interest.  She would pay the
interest if she had to take boarders all her life.  And she would not,
at any price, marry Peter Butts.

He broached the subject again that evening, cheerful and undismayed.
"You might as well come to it, Delia," he said.  "Then we could live
right here just the same. You aren't so young as you were, to be sure;
I'm not, either.  But you are as good a housekeeper as
ever--better--you've had more experience."

"You are extremely kind, Mr. Butts," said the lady, "but I do not wish
to marry you."

"I know you don't," he said.  "You've made that clear.  You don't, but I
do.  You've had your way and married the minister.  He was a good man,
but he's dead.  Now you might as well marry me."

"I do not wish to marry again, Mr. Butts; neither you nor anyone."

"Very proper, very proper, Delia," he replied.  "It wouldn't look well
if you did--at any rate, if you showed it.  But why shouldn't you?  The
children are gone now--you can't hold them up against me any more."

"Yes, the children are both settled now, and doing nicely," she
admitted.

"You don't want to go and live with them--either one of them--do you?"
he asked.

"I should prefer to stay here," she answered.

"Exactly!  And you can't!  You'd rather live here and be a grandee--but
you can't do it.  Keepin' house for boarders isn't any better than
keepin' house for me, as I see.  You'd much better marry me."

"I should prefer to keep the house without you, Mr. Butts."

"I know you would.  But you can't, I tell you. I'd like to know what a
woman of your age can do with a house like this--and no money?  You
can't live eternally on hens' eggs and garden truck. That won't pay the
mortgage."

Mrs. Morrison looked at him with her cordial smile, calm and
non-committal.  "Perhaps I can manage it," she said.

"That mortgage falls due two years from Thanksgiving, you know."

"Yes--I have not forgotten."

"Well, then, you might just as well marry me now, and save two years of
interest.  It'll be my house, either way--but you'll be keepin' it just
the same."

"It is very kind of you, Mr. Butts.  I must decline the offer none the
less. I can pay the interest, I am sure.  And perhaps--in two years'
time--I can pay the principal.  It's not a large sum."

"That depends on how you look at it," said he. "Two thousand dollars is
considerable money for a single woman to raise in two years--_and_
interest."

He went away, as cheerful and determined as ever; and Mrs. Morrison saw
him go with a keen, light in her fine eyes, a more definite line to that
steady, pleasant smile.

Then she went to spend Thanksgiving with Andrew.  He was glad to see
her.  Annie was glad to see her.  They proudly installed her in "her
room," and said she must call it "home" now.

This affectionately offered home was twelve by fifteen, and eight feet
high.  It had two windows, one looking at some pale gray clapboards
within reach of a broom, the other giving a view of several small fenced
yards occupied by cats, clothes and children. There was an ailanthus
tree under the window, a lady ailanthus tree.  Annie told her how
profusely it bloomed.  Mrs. Morrison particularly disliked the smell of
ailanthus flowers.  "It doesn't bloom in November," said she to herself.
 "I can be thankful for that!"

Andrew's church was very like the church of his father, and Mrs. Andrew
was doing her best to fill the position of minister's wife--doing it
well, too--there was no vacancy for a minister's mother.

Besides, the work she had done so cheerfully to help her husband was not
what she most cared for, after all.  She liked the people, she liked to
manage, but she was not strong on doctrine.  Even her husband had never
known how far her views differed from his.  Mrs. Morrison had never
mentioned what they were.

Andrew's people were very polite to her.  She was invited out with them,
waited upon and watched over and set down among the old ladies and
gentlemen--she had never realized so keenly that she was no longer
young.  Here nothing recalled her youth, every careful provision
anticipated age.  Annie brought her a hot-water bag at night, tucking it
in at the foot of the bed with affectionate care.  Mrs. Morrison thanked
her, and subsequently took it out--airing the bed a little before she
got into it.  The house seemed very hot to her, after the big, windy
halls at home.

The little dining-room, the little round table with the little round
fern-dish in the middle, the little turkey and the little
carving-set--game-set she would have called it--all made her feel as if
she was looking through the wrong end of an opera-glass.

In Annie's precise efficiency she saw no room for her assistance; no
room in the church, no room in the small, busy town, prosperous and
progressive, and no room in the house.  "Not enough to turn round in!"
she said to herself.  Annie, who had grown up in a city flat, thought
their little parsonage palatial.  Mrs. Morrison grew up in the Welcome
House.

She stayed a week, pleasant and polite, conversational, interested in
all that went on.

"I think your mother is just lovely," said Annie to Andrew.

"Charming woman, your mother," said the leading church member.

"What a delightful old lady your mother is!" said the pretty soprano.

And Andrew was deeply hurt and disappointed when she announced her
determination to stay on for the present in her old home.  "Dear boy,"
she said, "you mustn't take it to heart.  I love to be with you, of
course, but I love my home, and want to keep it is long as I can.  It is
a great pleasure to see you and Annie so well settled, and so happy
together.  I am most truly thankful for you."

"My home is open to you whenever you wish to come, mother," said Andrew.
 But he was a little angry.

Mrs. Morrison came home as eager as a girl, and opened her own door with
her own key, in spite of Sally's haste.

Two years were before her in which she must find some way to keep
herself and Sally, and to pay two thousand dollars and the interest to
Peter Butts.  She considered her assets.  There was the house--the white
elephant.  It _was_ big--very big.  It was profusely furnished.  Her
father had entertained lavishly like the Southern-born, hospitable
gentleman he was; and the bedrooms ran in suites--somewhat deteriorated
by the use of boarders, but still numerous and habitable.  Boarders--she
abhorred them.  They were people from afar, strangers and interlopers.
She went over the place from garret to cellar, from front gate to
backyard fence.

The garden had great possibilities.  She was fond of gardening. and
understood it well.  She measured and estimated.

"This garden," she finally decided, "with the hens, will feed us two
women and sell enough to pay Sally.  If we make plenty of jelly, it may
cover the coal bill, too.  As to clothes--I don't need any.  They last
admirably.  I can manage.  I can _live_--but two thousand dollars--_and_
interest!"

In the great attic was more furniture, discarded sets put there when her
extravagant young mother had ordered new ones.  And chairs--uncounted
chairs.  Senator Welcome used to invite numbers to meet his political
friends--and they had delivered glowing orations in the wide, double
parlors, the impassioned speakers standing on a temporary dais, now in
the cellar; and the enthusiastic listeners disposed more or less
comfortably on these serried rows of "folding chairs," which folded
sometimes, and let down the visitor in scarlet confusion to the floor.

She sighed as she remembered those vivid days and glittering nights.
She used to steal downstairs in her little pink wrapper and listen to
the eloquence.  It delighted her young soul to see her father rising on
his toes, coming down sharply on his heels, hammering one hand upon the
other; and then to hear the fusilade of applause.

Here were the chairs, often borrowed for weddings, funerals, and church
affairs, somewhat worn and depleted, but still numerous.  She mused upon
them.  Chairs--hundreds of chairs.  They would sell for very little.

She went through her linen room.  A splendid stock in the old days;
always carefully washed by Sally; surviving even the boarders.  Plenty
of bedding, plenty of towels, plenty of napkins and tablecloths.  "It
would make a good hotel--but I _can't_ have it so--I _can't!_  Besides,
there's no need of another hotel here.  The poor little Haskins House is
never full."

The stock in the china closet was more damaged than some other things,
naturally; but she inventoried it with care.  The countless cups of
crowded church receptions were especially prominent.  Later additions
these, not very costly cups, but numerous, appallingly.

When she had her long list of assets all in order, she sat and studied
it with a clear and daring mind.  Hotel--boarding-house--she could think
of nothing else.  School!  A girls' school!  A boarding school!  There
was money to be made at that, and fine work done.  It was a brilliant
thought at first, and she gave several hours, and much paper and ink, to
its full consideration.  But she would need some capital for
advertising; she must engage teachers--adding to her definite
obligation; and to establish it, well, it would require time.

Mr. Butts, obstinate, pertinacious, oppressively affectionate, would
give her no time.  He meant to force her to marry him for her own
good--and his.  She shrugged her fine shoulders with a little shiver.
Marry Peter Butts!  Never!  Mrs. Morrison still loved her husband.  Some
day she meant to see him again--God willing--and she did not wish to
have to tell him that at fifty she had been driven into marrying Peter
Butts.

Better live with Andrew.  Yet when she thought of living with Andrew,
she shivered again.  Pushing back her sheets of figures and lists of
personal property, she rose to her full graceful height and began to
walk the floor.  There was plenty of floor to walk.  She considered,
with a set deep thoughtfulness, the town and the townspeople, the
surrounding country, the hundreds upon hundreds of women whom she
knew--and liked, and who liked her.

It used to be said of Senator Welcome that he had no enemies; and some
people, strangers, maliciously disposed, thought it no credit to his
character.  His daughter had no enemies, but no one had ever blamed her
for her unlimited friendliness.  In her father's wholesale
entertainments the whole town knew and admired his daughter; in her
husband's popular church she had come to know the women of the
countryside about them.  Her mind strayed off to these women, farmers'
wives, comfortably off in a plain way, but starving for companionship,
for occasional stimulus and pleasure.  It was one of her joys in her
husband's time to bring together these women--to teach and entertain
them.

Suddenly she stopped short in the middle of the great high-ceiled room,
and drew her head up proudly like a victorious queen.  One wide,
triumphant, sweeping glance she cast at the well-loved walls--and went
back to her desk, working swiftly, excitedly, well into the hours of the
night.

*

Presently the little town began to buzz, and the murmur ran far out into
the surrounding country. Sunbonnets wagged over fences; butcher carts
and pedlar's wagon carried the news farther; and ladies visiting found
one topic in a thousand houses.

Mrs. Morrison was going to entertain.  Mrs. Morrison had invited the
whole feminine population, it would appear, to meet Mrs. Isabelle Carter
Blake, of Chicago.  Even Haddleton had heard of Mrs. Isabelle Carter
Blake.  And even Haddleton had nothing but admiration for her.

She was known the world over for her splendid work for children--for the
school children and the working children of the country.  Yet she was
known also to have lovingly and wisely reared six children of her
own--and made her husband happy in his home.  On top of that she had
lately written a novel, a popular novel, of which everyone was talking;
and on top of that she was an intimate friend of a certain conspicuous
Countess--an Italian.

It was even rumored, by some who knew Mrs. Morrison better than
others--or thought they did--that the Countess was coming, too!  No one
had known before that Delia Welcome was a school-mate of Isabel Carter,
and a lifelong friend; and that was ground for talk in itself.

The day arrived, and the guests arrived.  They came in hundreds upon
hundreds, and found ample room in the great white house.

The highest dream of the guests was realized--the Countess had come,
too.  With excited joy they met her, receiving impressions that would
last them for all their lives, for those large widening waves of
reminiscence which delight us the more as years pass.  It was an
incredible glory--Mrs. Isabelle Carter Blake, _and_ a Countess!

Some were moved to note that Mrs. Morrison looked the easy peer of these
eminent ladies, and treated the foreign nobility precisely as she did
her other friends.

She spoke, her clear quiet voice reaching across the murmuring din, and
silencing it.

"Shall we go into the east room?  If you will all take chairs in the
east room, Mrs. Blake is going to be so kind as to address us.  Also
perhaps her friend--"

They crowded in, sitting somewhat timorously on the unfolded chairs.

Then the great Mrs. Blake made them an address of memorable power and
beauty, which received vivid sanction from that imposing presence in
Parisian garments on the platform by her side.  Mrs. Blake spoke to them
of the work she was interested in, and how it was aided everywhere by
the women's clubs.  She gave them the number of these clubs, and
described with contagious enthusiasm the inspiration of their great
meetings.  She spoke of the women's club houses, going up in city after
city, where many associations meet and help one another.  She was
winning and convincing and most entertaining--an extremely attractive
speaker.

Had they a women's club there?  They had not.

Not _yet,_ she suggested, adding that it took no time at all to make
one.

They were delighted and impressed with Mrs. Blake's speech, but its
effect was greatly intensified by the address of the Countess.

"I, too, am American," she told them; "born here, reared in England,
married in Italy."  And she stirred their hearts with a vivid account of
the women's clubs and associations all over Europe, and what they were
accomplishing.  She was going back soon, she said, the wiser and happier
for this visit to her native land, and she should remember particularly
this beautiful, quiet town, trusting that if she came to it again it
would have joined the great sisterhood of women, "whose hands were
touching around the world for the common good."

It was a great occasion.

The Countess left next day, but Mrs. Blake remained, and spoke in some
of the church meetings, to an ever widening circle of admirers.  Her
suggestions were practical.

"What you need here is a 'Rest and Improvement Club,'" she said.  "Here
are all you women coming in from the country to do your shopping--and no
place to go to.  No place to lie down if you're tired, to meet a friend,
to eat your lunch in peace, to do your hair.  All you have to do is
organize, pay some small regular due, and provide yourselves with what
you want."

There was a volume of questions and suggestions, a little opposition,
much random activity.

Who was to do it?  Where was there a suitable place?  They would have to
hire someone to take charge of it.  It would only be used once a week.
It would cost too much.

Mrs. Blake, still practical, made another suggestion.  Why not combine
business with pleasure, and make use of the best place in town, if you
can get it?  I _think_ Mrs. Morrison could be persuaded to let you use
part of her house; it's quite too big for one woman."

Then Mrs. Morrison, simple and cordial as ever, greeted with warm
enthusiasm by her wide circle of friends.

"I have been thinking this over," she said.  "Mrs. Blake has been
discussing it with me.  My house is certainly big enough for all of you,
and there am I, with nothing to do but entertain you.  Suppose you
formed such a club as you speak of--for Rest and Improvement.  My
parlors are big enough for all manner of meetings; there are bedrooms in
plenty for resting.  If you form such a club I shall be glad to help
with my great, cumbersome house, shall be delighted to see so many
friends there so often; and I think I could furnish accommodations more
cheaply than you could manage in any other way.

Then Mrs. Blake gave them facts and figures, showing how much clubhouses
cost--and how little this arrangement would cost.  "Most women have very
little money, I know," she said, "and they hate to spend it on
themselves when they have; but even a little money from each goes a long
way when it is put together.  I fancy there are none of us so poor we
could not squeeze out, say ten cents a week.  For a hundred women that
would be ten dollars.  Could you feed a hundred tired women for ten
dollars, Mrs. Morrison?"

Mrs. Morrison smiled cordially.  "Not on chicken pie," she said, "But I
could give them tea and coffee, crackers and cheese for that, I think.
And a quiet place to rest, and a reading room, and a place to hold
meetings."

Then Mrs. Blake quite swept them off their feet by her wit and
eloquence.  She gave them to understand that if a share in the palatial
accommodation of the Welcome House, and as good tea and coffee as old
Sally made, with a place to meet, a place to rest, a place to talk, a
place to lie down, could be had for ten cents a week each, she advised
them to clinch the arrangement at once before Mrs. Morrison's natural
good sense had overcome her enthusiasm.

Before Mrs. Isabelle Carter Blake had left, Haddleton had a large and
eager women's club, whose entire expenses, outside of stationary and
postage, consisted of ten cents a week _per capita,_ paid to Mrs.
Morrison.  Everybody belonged.  It was open at once for charter members,
and all pressed forward to claim that privileged place.

They joined by hundreds, and from each member came this tiny sum to Mrs.
Morrison each week. It was very little money, taken separately.  But it
added up with silent speed.  Tea and coffee, purchased in bulk, crackers
by the barrel, and whole cheeses--these are not expensive luxuries.  The
town was full of Mrs. Morrison's ex-Sunday-school boys, who furnished
her with the best they had--at cost.  There was a good deal of work, a
good deal of care, and room for the whole supply of Mrs. Morrison's
diplomatic talent and experience.  Saturdays found the Welcome House as
full as it could hold, and Sundays found Mrs. Morrison in bed.  But she
liked it.

A busy, hopeful year flew by, and then she went to Jean's for
Thanksgiving.

The room Jean gave her was about the same size as her haven in Andrew's
home, but one flight higher up, and with a sloping ceiling.  Mrs.
Morrison whitened her dark hair upon it, and rubbed her head confusedly.
 Then she shook it with renewed determination.

The house was full of babies.  There was little Joe, able to get about,
and into everything.  There were the twins, and there was the new baby.
There was one servant, over-worked and cross.  There was a small, cheap,
totally inadequate nursemaid.  There was Jean, happy but tired, full of
joy, anxiety and affection, proud of her children, proud of her husband,
and delighted to unfold her heart to her mother.

By the hour she babbled of their cares and hopes, while Mrs. Morrison,
tall and elegant in her well-kept old black silk, sat holding the baby
or trying to hold the twins.  The old silk was pretty well finished by
the week's end.  Joseph talked to her also, telling her how well he was
getting on, and how much he needed capital, urging her to come and stay
with them; it was such a help to Jeannie; asking questions about the
house.

There was no going visiting here.  Jeannie could not leave the babies.
And few visitors; all the little suburb being full of similarly
overburdened mothers.  Such as called found Mrs. Morrison charming.
What she found them, she did not say.  She bade her daughter an
affectionate good-bye when the week was up, smiling at their mutual
contentment.

"Good-bye, my dear children," she said.  "I am so glad for all your
happiness.  I am thankful for both of you."

But she was more thankful to get home.

Mr. Butts did not have to call for his interest this time, but he called
none the less.

"How on earth'd you get it, Delia?" he demanded.  "Screwed it out o'
these club-women?"

"Your interest is so moderate, Mr. Butts, that it is easier to meet than
you imagine," was her answer.  "Do you know the average interest they
charge in Colorado?  The women vote there, you know."

He went away with no more personal information than that; and no nearer
approach to the twin goals of his desire than the passing of the year.

"One more year, Delia," he said; "then you'll have to give in."

"One more year!" she said to herself, and took up her chosen task with
renewed energy.

The financial basis of the undertaking was very simple, but it would
never have worked so well under less skilful management.  Five dollars a
year these country women could not have faced, but ten cents a week was
possible to the poorest.  There was no difficulty in collecting, for
they brought it themselves; no unpleasantness in receiving, for old
Sally stood at the receipt of custom and presented the covered cash box
when they came for their tea.

On the crowded Saturdays the great urns were set going, the mighty array
of cups arranged in easy reach, the ladies filed by, each taking her
refection and leaving her dime.  Where the effort came was in enlarging
the membership and keeping up the attendance, and this effort was
precisely in the line of Mrs. Morrison's splendid talents.

Serene, cheerful, inconspicuously active, planning like the born
statesman she was, executing like a practical politician, Mrs. Morrison
gave her mind to the work, and thrived upon it.  Circle within circle,
and group within group, she set small classes and departments at work,
having a boys' club by and by in the big room over the woodshed, girls'
clubs, reading clubs, study clubs, little meetings of every sort that
were not held in churches, and some that were--previously.

For each and all there was, if wanted, tea and coffee, crackers and
cheese; simple fare, of unvarying excellence, and from each and all,
into the little cashbox, ten cents for these refreshments.  From the
club members this came weekly; and the club members, kept up by a
constant variety of interests, came every week.  As to numbers, before
the first six months was over The Haddleton Rest and Improvement Club
numbered five hundred women.

Now, five hundred times ten cents a week is twenty-six hundred dollars a
year.  Twenty-six hundred dollars a year would not be very much to build
or rent a large house, to furnish five hundred people with chairs,
lounges, books, and magazines, dishes and service; and with food and
drink even of the simplest.  But if you are miraculously supplied with a
club-house, furnished, with a manager and servant on the spot, then that
amount of money goes a long way.

On Saturdays Mrs. Morrison hired two helpers for half a day, for half a
dollar each.  She stocked the library with many magazines for fifty
dollars a year.  She covered fuel, light, and small miscellanies with
another hundred.  And she fed her multitude with the plain viands agreed
upon, at about four cents apiece.

For her collateral entertainments, her many visits, the various new
expenses entailed, she paid as well; and yet at the end of the first
year she had not only her interest, but a solid thousand dollars of
clear profit.  With a calm smile she surveyed it, heaped in neat stacks
of bills in the small safe in the wall behind her bed.  Even Sally did
not know it was there.

The second season was better than the first.  There were difficulties,
excitements, even some opposition, but she rounded out the year
triumphantly.  "After that," she said to herself, "they may have the
deluge if they like."

She made all expenses, made her interest, made a little extra cash,
clearly her own, all over and above the second thousand dollars.

Then did she write to son and daughter, inviting them and their families
to come home to Thanksgiving, and closing each letter with joyous pride:
"Here is the money to come with."

They all came, with all the children and two nurses.  There was plenty
of room in the Welcome House, and plenty of food on the long mahogany
table.  Sally was as brisk as a bee, brilliant in scarlet and purple;
Mrs. Morrison carved her big turkey with queenly grace.

"I don't see that you're over-run with club women, mother," said
Jeannie.

"It's Thanksgiving, you know; they're all at home.  I hope they are all
as happy, as thankful for their homes as I am for mine," said Mrs.
Morrison.

Afterward Mr. Butts called.  With dignity and calm unruffled, Mrs.
Morrison handed him his interest--and principal.

Mr. Butts was almost loath to receive it, though his hand automatically
grasped the crisp blue check.

"I didn't know you had a bank account," he protested, somewhat
dubiously.

"Oh, yes; you'll find the check will be honored, Mr. Butts."

"I'd like to know how you got this money.  You _can't_ 'a' skinned it
out o' that club of yours."

"I appreciate your friendly interest, Mr. Butts; you have been most
kind."

"I believe some of these great friends of yours have lent it to you.
You won't be any better off, I can tell you."

"Come, come, Mr. Butts!  Don't quarrel with good money.  Let us part
friends."

And they parted.



HOW DOTH THE HAT


How doth the hat loom large upon her head!
Furred like a busby; plumed as hearses are;
Armed with eye-spearing quills; bewebbed and hung
With lacy, silky, downy draperies;
With spread, wide-waggling feathers fronded high
In bosky thickets of Cimmerian gloom.

How doth the hat with colors dare the eye!
Arrest--attract--allure--affront--appall!
Vivid and varied as are paroquets;
Dove-dull; one mass of white; all solid red;
Black with the blackness of a mourning world--
Compounded type of "Chaos and Old Night"!

How doth the hat expand: wax wide, and swell!
Such is its size that none can predicate
Or hair, or head, or shoulders of the frame
Below thIs bulk, this beauty-burying bulk;
Trespassing rude on all who walk beside,
Brutally blinding all who sit behind.

How doth the hat's mere mass more monstrous grow
Into a riot of repugnant shapes!
Shapes ignominious, extreme, bizarre,
Bulbous, distorted, unsymmetrical--
Of no relation to the human head--
To beauty, comfort, dignity or grace.

Shape of a dishpan!  Of a pail!  A tub!
Of an inverted wastebasket wherein
The head finds lodgment most appropriate!
Shape of a wide-spread wilted griddlecake!
Shape of the body of an octopus
Set sideways on a fireman's misplaced brim!

How doth the hat show callous cruelty
In decoration costing countless deaths;
Carrying corpses for its ornaments;
Wreath of dead humming-birds, dismembered gulls,
The mother heron's breastknot, stiffened wings;
Torn fragments of a world of wasted life.

How doth the hat effect the minds of men?
Patient bill-payers, chivalrously dumb!
What does it indicate of woman's growth;
Her sense of beauty, her intelligence,
Her thought for others measured with herself,
Her place and grade in human life to-day?



INTRODUCING THE WORLD, THE FLESH, AND THE DEVIL


"O, no--Please don't--I'd rather not meet them!"

I'm sorry but you have to meet them, constantly.

"But I don't have to know them, surely!"

You will find it safer and easier if you do.

"But they are not proper persons to meet--I've heard awful things about
them."

Those stories come from people who never really knew them.  They have
been much maligned I assure you.  Let me tell you a little about them
before they come up.

The World yonder is really an excellent fellow, but sulky and erratic
because he's not well used.  Think of a beautiful, fruitful, home garden
used for nothing but to play ball and fight in--and then blamed for its
condition.  That's the way he feels.

Then there's the Flesh.  Never was a good fellow more abused!  He's been
brought up wrong, from babyhood--but he's all right inside.

As to the Devil--we really ought to be ashamed of treating him so.  He'd
have died centuries ago, but we will keep him going--and then blame him
because his behavior's out of date!

Here they come.  Allow me to present:

The World--Just Us; We and our Workshop.

The Flesh--Just Us; Our Natural Vehicle and Servant.

The Devil--Just Us; but an Anachronism--an artificially preserved
Extinct Ancestor!



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER I.

HANDICAPPED


One may use the Old Man of the Sea,
 For a partner or patron,
But helpless and hapless is he
Who is ridden, inextricably,
 By a fond old mer-matron.


The Warden house was more impressive in appearance than its neighbors.
It had "grounds," instead of a yard or garden; it had wide pillared
porches and "galleries," showing southern antecedents; moreover, it had
a cupola, giving date to the building, and proof of the continuing
ambitions of the builders.

The stately mansion was covered with heavy flowering vines, also with
heavy mortgages.  Mrs. Roscoe Warden and her four daughters reposed
peacefully under the vines, while Roscoe Warden, Jr., struggled
desperately under the mortgages.

A slender, languid lady was Mrs. Warden, wearing her thin but still
brown hair in "water-waves" over a pale high forehead. She was sitting
on a couch on the broad, rose-shaded porch, surrounded by billowing
masses of vari-colored worsted.  It was her delight to purchase skein on
skein of soft, bright-hued wool, cut it all up into short lengths, tie
them together again in contrasting colors, and then crochet this hashed
rainbow into afghans of startling aspect.  California does not call for
afghans to any great extent, but "they make such acceptable presents,"
Mrs. Warden declared, to those who questioned the purpose of her work;
and she continued to send them off, on Christmases, birthdays, and minor
weddings, in a stream of pillowy bundles.  As they were accepted, they
must have been acceptable, and the stream flowed on.

Around her, among the gay blossoms and gayer wools, sat her four
daughters, variously intent.  The mother, a poetic soul, had named them
musically and with dulcet rhymes: Madeline and Adeline were the two
eldest, Coraline and Doraline the two youngest.  It had not occurred to
her until too late that those melodious terminations made it impossible
to call one daughter without calling two, and that "Lina" called them
all.

"Mis' Immerjin," said a soft voice in the doorway, "dere pos'tively
ain't no butter in de house fer supper."

"No butter?" said Mrs. Warden, incredulously.  "Why, Sukey, I'm sure we
had a tub sent up last--last Tuesday!"

"A week ago Tuesday, more likely, mother," suggested Dora.

"Nonsense, Dora!  It was this week, wasn't it, girls?"  The mother
appealed to them quite earnestly, as if the date of that tub's delivery
would furnish forth the supper-table; but none of the young ladies save
Dora had even a contradiction to offer.

"You know I never notice things," said the artistic Cora; and "the
de-lines," as their younger sisters called them, said nothing.

"I might borrow some o' Mis' Bell?" suggested Sukey; "dat's nearer 'n'
de sto'."

"Yes, do, Sukey," her mistress agreed.  "It is so hot.  But what have
you done with that tubful?"

"Why, some I tuk back to Mis' Bell for what I borrered befo'--I'm always
most careful to make return for what I borrers--and yo' know, Mis'
Warden, dat waffles and sweet potaters and cohn bread dey do take
butter; to say nothin' o' them little cakes you all likes so well--_an'_
de fried chicken, _an'_--"

"Never mind, Sukey; you go and present my compliments to Mrs. Bell, and
ask her for some; and be sure you return it promptly.  Now, girls, don't
let me forget to tell Ross to send up another tub."

"We can't seem to remember any better than you can, mother," said
Adeline, dreamily.  "Those details are so utterly uninteresting."

"I should think it was Sukey's business to tell him," said Madeline with
decision; while the "a-lines" kept silence this time.

"There!  Sukey's gone!" Mrs. Warden suddenly remarked, watching the
stout figure moving heavily away under the pepper trees.  "And I meant
to have asked her to make me a glass of shrub!  Dora, dear, you run and
get it for mother."

Dora laid down her work, not too regretfully, and started off.

"That child is the most practical of any of you," said her mother; which
statement was tacitly accepted.  It was not extravagant praise.

Dora poked about in the refrigerator for a bit of ice.  She ho no idea
of the high cost of ice in that region--it came from "the store," like
all their provisions.  It did not occur to her that fish and milk and
melons made a poor combination in flavor; or that the clammy,
sub-offensive smell was not the natural and necessary odor of
refrigerators.  Neither did she think that a sunny corner of the back
porch near the chimney, though convenient, was an ill-selected spot for
a refrigerator.  She couldn't find the ice-pick, so put a big piece of
ice in a towel and broke it on the edge of the sink; replaced the
largest fragment, used what she wanted, and left the rest to filter
slowly down through a mass of grease and tea-leaves; found the raspberry
vinegar, and made a very satisfactory beverage which her mother received
with grateful affection.

"Thank you, my darling," she said. "I wish you'd made a pitcherful."

"Why didn't you, Do?" her sisters demanded.

"You're too late," said Dora, hunting for her needle and then for her
thimble, and then for her twist; "but there's more in the kitchen."

"I'd rather go without than go into the kitchen," said Adeline; "I do
despise a kitchen."  And this seemed to be the general sentiment; for no
one moved.

"My mother always liked raspberry shrub," said Mrs. Warden; "and your
Aunt Leicester, and your Raymond cousins."

Mrs. Warden had a wide family circle, many beloved relatives,
"connections" of whom she was duly proud and "kin" in such widening
ramifications that even her carefully reared daughters lost track of
them.

"You young people don't seem to care about your cousins at all!" pursued
their mother, somewhat severely, setting her glass on the railing, from
whence it was presently knocked off and broken.

"That's the fifth!" remarked Dora, under breath.

"Why should we, Ma?" inquired Cora.  "We've never seen one of
them--except Madam Weatherstone!"

"We'll never forget _her!"_ said Madeline, with delicate decision,
laying down the silk necktie she was knitting for Roscoe.  "What
_beautiful_ manners she had!"

"How rich is she, mother?  Do you know?" asked Dora.

"Rich enough to do something for Roscoe, I'm sure, if she had a proper
family spirit," replied Mrs. Warden.  "Her mother was own cousin to my
grandmother--one of the Virginia Paddingtons.  Or she might do something
for you girls."

"I wish she would!" Adeline murmured, softly, her large eyes turned to
the horizon, her hands in her lap over the handkerchief she was marking
for Roscoe.

"Don't be ungrateful, Adeline," said her mother, firmly.  "You have a
good home and a good brother; no girl ever had a better."

"But there is never anything going on," broke in Coraline, in a tone of
complaint; "no parties, no going away for vacations, no anything."

"Now, Cora, don't be discontented!  You must not add a straw to dear
Roscoe's burdens," said her mother.

"Of course not, mother; I wouldn't for the world.  I never saw her but
that once; and she wasn't very cordial.  But, as you say, she might do
_something._  She might invite us to visit her."

"If she ever comes back again, I'm going to recite for her," said, Dora,
firmly.

Her mother gazed fondly on her youngest.  "I wish you could, dear," she
agreed.  "I'm sure you have talent; and Madam Weatherstone would
recognize it.  And Adeline's music too.  And Cora's art.  I am very
proud of my girls."

Cora sat where the light fell well upon her work.  She was illuminating
a volume of poems, painting flowers on the margins, in appropriate
places--for Roscoe.

"I wonder if he'll care for it?" she said, laying down her brush and
holding the book at arm's length to get the effect.

"Of course he will!" answered her mother, warmly.  "It is not only the
beauty of it, but the affection!  How are you getting on, Dora?"

Dora was laboring at a task almost beyond her fourteen years, consisting
of a negligee shirt of outing flannel, upon the breast of which she was
embroidering a large, intricate design--for Roscoe.  She was an
ambitious child, but apt to tire in the execution of her large projects.

"I guess it'll be done," she said, a little wearily. "What are you going
to give him, mother?"

"Another bath-robe; his old one is so worn.  And nothing is too good for
my boy."

"He's coming," said Adeline, who was still looking down the road; and
they all concealed their birthday work in haste.

A tall, straight young fellow, with an air of suddenly-faced maturity
upon him, opened the gate under the pepper trees and came toward them.

He had the finely molded features we see in portraits of handsome
ancestors, seeming to call for curling hair a little longish, and a rich
profusion of ruffled shirt.  But his hair was sternly short, his shirt
severely plain, his proudly carried head spoke of effort rather than of
ease in its attitude.

Dora skipped to meet him, Cora descended a decorous step or two.
Madeline and Adeline, arm in arm, met him at the piazza edge, his mother
lifted her face.

"Well, mother, dear!"  Affectionately he stooped and kissed her, and she
held his hand and stroked it lovingly. The sisters gathered about with
teasing affection, Dora poking in his coat-pocket for the stick candy
her father always used to bring her, and her brother still remembered.

"Aren't you home early, dear?" asked Mrs. Warden.

"Yes; I had a little headache"--he passed his hand over his
forehead--"and Joe can run the store till after supper, anyhow."  They
flew to get him camphor, cologne, a menthol-pencil.  Dora dragged forth
the wicker lounge.  He was laid out carefully and fanned and fussed over
till his mother drove them all away.

"Now, just rest," she said. "It's an hour to supper time yet!"  And she
covered him with her latest completed afghan, gathering up and carrying
away the incomplete one and its tumultuous constituents.

He was glad of the quiet, the fresh, sweet air, the smell of flowers
instead of the smell of molasses and cheese, soap and sulphur matches.
But the headache did not stop, nor the worry that caused it.  He loved
his mother, he loved his sisters, he loved their home, but he did not
love the grocery business which had fallen so unexpectedly upon him at
his father's death, nor the load of debt which fell with it.

That they need never have had so large a "place" to "keep up" did not
occur to him.  He had lived there most of his life, and it was home.
That the expenses of running the household were three times what they
needed to be, he did not know.  His father had not questioned their
style of living, nor did he.  That a family of five women might, between
them, do the work of the house, he did not even consider.

Mrs. Warden's health was never good, and since her husband's death she
had made daily use of many afghans on the many lounges of the house.
Madeline was "delicate," and Adeline was "frail"; Cora was "nervous,"
Dora was "only a child."  So black Sukey and her husband Jonah did the
work of the place, so far as it was done; and Mrs. Warden held it a
miracle of management that she could "do with one servant," and the
height of womanly devotion on her daughters' part that they dusted the
parlor and arranged the flowers.

Roscoe shut his eyes and tried to rest, but his problem beset him
ruthlessly.  There was the store--their one and only source of income.
There was the house, a steady, large expense.  There were five women to
clothe and keep contented, beside himself.  There was the unappeasable
demand of the mortgage--and there was Diantha.

When Mr. Warden died, some four years previously, Roscoe was a lad of
about twenty, just home from college, full of dreams of great service to
the world in science, expecting to go back for his doctor's degree next
year.  Instead of which the older man had suddenly dropped beneath the
burden he had carried with such visible happiness and pride, such
unknown anxiety and straining effort; and the younger one had to step
into the harness on the spot.

He was brave, capable, wholly loyal to his mother and sisters, reared in
the traditions of older days as to a man's duty toward women.  In his
first grief for his father, and the ready pride with which he undertook
to fill his place, he had not in the least estimated the weight of care
he was to carry, nor the time that he must carry it.  A year, a year or
two, a few years, he told himself, as they passed, and he would make
more money; the girls, of course, would marry; he could "retire" in time
and take up his scientific work again.  Then--there was Diantha.

When he found he loved this young neighbor of theirs, and that she loved
him, the first flush of happiness made all life look easier.  They had
been engaged six months--and it was beginning to dawn upon the young man
that it might be six years--or sixteen years--before he could marry.

He could not sell the business--and if he could, he knew of no better
way to take care of his family.  The girls did not marry, and even when
they did, he had figured this out to a dreary certainty, he would still
not be free.  To pay the mortgages off, and keep up the house, even
without his sisters, would require all the money the store would bring
in for some six years ahead.  The young man set his teeth hard and
turned his head sharply toward the road.

And there was Diantha.

She stood at the gate and smiled at him.  He sprang to his feet,
headacheless for the moment, and joined her.  Mrs. Warden, from the
lounge by her bedroom window, saw them move off together, and sighed.

"Poor Roscoe!" she said to herself.  "It is very hard for him.  But he
carries his difficulties nobly.  He is a son to be proud of."  And she
wept a little.

Diantha slipped her hand in his offered arm--he clasped it warmly with
his, and they walked along together.

"You won't come in and see mother and the girls?"

"No, thank you; not this time.  I must get home and get supper.
Besides, I'd rather see just you."

He felt it a pity that there were so many houses along the road here,
but squeezed her hand, anyhow.

She looked at him keenly.  "Headache?" she asked.

"Yes; it's nothing; it's gone already."

"Worry?" she asked.

"Yes, I suppose it is," he answered.  "But I ought not to worry.  I've
got a good home, a good mother, good sisters, and--you!"  And he took
advantage of a high hedge and an empty lot on either side of them.

Diantha returned his kiss affectionately enough, but seemed preoccupied,
and walked in silence till he asked her what she was thinking about.

"About you, of course," she answered, brightly. "There are things I want
to say; and yet--I ought not to."

"You can say anything on earth to me," he answered.

"You are twenty-four," she began, musingly.

"Admitted at once."

"And I'm twenty-one and a half."

"That's no such awful revelation, surely!"

"And we've been engaged ever since my birthday," the girl pursued.

"All these are facts, dearest."

"Now, Ross, will you be perfectly frank with me?  May I ask you an--an
impertinent question?"

"You may ask me any question you like; it couldn't be impertinent."

"You'll be scandalised, I know--but--well, here goes.  What would you
think if Madeline--or any of the girls--should go away to work?"

He looked at her lovingly, but with a little smile on his firm mouth.

"I shouldn't allow it," he said.

"O--allow it?  I asked you what you'd think."

"I should think it was a disgrace to the family, and a direct reproach
to me," be answered.  "But it's no use talking about that.  None of the
girls have any such foolish notion.  And I wouldn't permit it if they
had."

Diantha smiled.  "I suppose you never would permit your wife to work?"

"My widow might have to--not my wife."  He held his fine head a trifle
higher, and her hand ached for a moment.

"Wouldn't you let me work--to help you, Ross?"

"My dearest girl, you've got something far harder than that to do for
me, and that's wait."

His face darkened again, and he passed his hand over his forehead.
"Sometimes I feel as if I ought not to hold you at all!" he burst out,
bitterly.  "You ought to be free to marry a better man."

"There aren't any!" said Diantha, shaking her head slowly from side to
side.  "And if there were--millions--I wouldn't marry any of 'em.  I
love _you,"_ she firmly concluded.

"Then we'll just _wait,"_ said he, setting his teeth on the word, as if
he would crush it.  "It won't be hard with you to help.  You're better
worth it than Rachael and Leah together."  They walked a few steps
silently.

"But how about science?" she asked him.

"I don't let myself think of it.  I'll take that up later.  We're young
enough, both of us, to wait for our happiness."

"And have you any idea--we might as well face the worst--how many years
do you think that will be, dearest?"

He was a little annoyed at her persistence.  Also, though he would not
admit the thought, it did not seem quite the thing for her to ask.  A
woman should not seek too definite a period of waiting.  She ought to
trust--to just wait on general principles.

"I can face a thing better if I know just what I'm facing," said the
girl, quietly, "and I'd wait for you, if I had to, all my life.  Will it
be twenty years, do you think?"

He looked relieved.  "Why, no, indeed, darling.  It oughtn't to be at
the outside more than five.  Or six," he added, honest though reluctant.

"You see, father had no time to settle anything; there were outstanding
accounts, and the funeral expenses, and the mortgages.  But the business
is good; and I can carry it; I can build it up."  He shook his broad
shoulders determinedly.  "I should think it might be within five,
perhaps even less. Good things happen sometimes--such as you, my heart's
delight."

They were at her gate now, and she stood a little while to say
good-night.  A step inside there was a seat, walled in by evergreen,
roofed over by the wide acacia boughs.  Many a long good-night had they
exchanged there, under the large, brilliant California moon.  They sat
there, silent, now.

Diantha's heart was full of love for him, and pride and confidence in
him; but it was full of other feelings, too, which he could not fathom.
His trouble was clearer to her than to him; as heavy to bear.  To her
mind, trained in all the minutiae of domestic economy, the Warden family
lived in careless wastefulness.  That five women--for Dora was older
than she had been when she began to do housework--should require
servants, seemed to this New England-born girl mere laziness and pride.
That two voting women over twenty should prefer being supported by their
brother to supporting themselves, she condemned even more sharply.
Moreover, she felt well assured that with a different family to
"support," Mr. Warden would never have broken down so suddenly and
irrecoverably.  Even that funeral--her face hardened as she thought of
the conspicuous "lot," the continual flowers, the monument (not wholly
paid for yet, that monument, though this she did not know)--all that
expenditure to do honor to the man they had worked to death (thus
brutally Diantha put it) was probably enough to put off their happiness
for a whole year.

She rose at last, her hand still held in his.  "I'm sorry, but I've got
to get supper, dear," she said, "and you must go.  Good-night for the
present; you'll be round by and by?"

"Yes, for a little while, after we close up," said he, and took himself
off, not too suddenly, walking straight and proud while her eves were on
him, throwing her a kiss from the corner; but his step lagging and his
headache settling down upon him again as he neared the large house with
the cupola.

Diantha watched him out of sight, turned and marched up the path to her
own door, her lips set tight, her well-shaped head as straightly held as
his.  "It's a shame, a cruel, burning shame!" she told herself
rebelliously.  "A man of his ability.  Why, he could do anything, in his
own work!  And he loved it so!

"To keep a grocery store--

""And nothing to show for all that splendid effort!

"They don't do a thing?  They just _live_--and 'keep house!'  All those
women!

"Six years?  Likely to be sixty!  But I'm not going to wait!"



WHERE THE HEART IS


I.

A small stone city, very old, built upon rock, rock-paved, rock-bound
with twenty centuries of walls.

A Ghetto, an age-old Ghetto, crowded into a stony corner of the crowded
stony city; its steep and narrow confines not more a boundary than the
iron prejudices that built them.

In the Ghetto--life, human life; close-pressed, kept to its elemental
forms, with a vitality purchased at nature's awful price--by surviving
slow extinction.

This life, denied all larger grouping, finds its sole joy in fierce deep
love of family and home.  This home a room, a low and narrow room,
unwholesome, dark, incredibly filled up, yet overflowing most with love.

Here was peace.  Here was Honor wherewith to face the outer Scorn.  Here
was Safety--the only safety known.  Here, most of all was Love, Love,
wound and interwound with the blood-tie, deepened by religion,
intensified by centuries of relentless pressure, strengthened a
thousandfold by the unbroken cruelty of the environment.  Love, one with
the family; the family one with the home; the home, for generation after
generation--one room!

*

A miracle!  Some daughter of this house, strayed as a child, found by
eccentric travellers, taken to England, reared with love and care to
strange exotic beauty, marrying a great landowner so lost in passionate
devotion that he gave her all he had, and, dying, left her heir to vast
estates.

She following, her family inherit the estate, and come to take
possession.

They enter the tall pillared gates; they wander up the shaded avenue, a
little group, huddled and silent, timid, ill at ease.  They mount the
wide, white marble-terraced steps, the children crowding close, the
mother frightened, the father striving to hold up this new strange pride
under his time-swollen burden of humility and fear.

These towering halls, these broad-curved stairways, these lofty
chambers, even the great kitchens and their clustering offices, are to
this timid group as wide and desolate as deserts or the sea.

They seek a room, a room that shall be small enough and low enough and
dark enough; they reach at last one friendly sheltering little
room--crowd into it with tumultuous affection, and find a home!

*

It is home where the heart is!


II.

A new age where new power has conquered a new element, and sky-sailors
seek for large discoveries compared to which the old "new world" was but
a dooryard venture.  Our little world now known from coast to coast and
pole to pole; its problems solved, its full powers mastered; its sweet
serviceableness and unfailing comfort the common joy of all.

Later science, piling wonder upon wonder, handling radiant energy,
packing compressed air for long excursions into outer space, sends out
some skyship on tremendous errands of interstellar search.  Days, weeks,
they flit, with speed incredible, our earth a speck, our moon invisible,
our sun a star among the others now; then having done their work, turn
the sharp prow and study their vast charts for the return.

Out of that blackness, wider than our minds, back from the awful
strangeness of new stars, they turn and fly.  All know their charts, all
have their telescopes, all see that old familiar system swinging nearer.
 They greet the sun as we Fire Island--the moon like Sandy Hook.

But that small star, bigger and bigger now, its heavenly radiance fading
softly down to the warm glow of earthly beauty, coming out round and
full at last--ah! how they choke, how they cry out to see it!

Nearer--the blue skin of the all-enclosing sea, the green of
interrupting continents; now they can recognize the hemisphere--the
tears come--this is home!

*

It is home where the heart is.



THANKSGIVING


I never thought much of the folks who pray
 The Lord to make them thankful for a meal
Expecting Him to furnish all the food
And then provide them with the gratitude
 They haven't grace to feel.

I never thought much of this yearly thanks,
 Either for what once happened long ago,
Or for "our constant mercies."  To my mind
If we're to thank a Power that's daily kind,
 Our annual's too slow.

Suppose we spread Thanksgiving--hand it round--
 Give God an honest heartful every day;
And, while we're being thankful, why not give
Some gratitude to those by whom we live--
 As well as stingy pay?



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE, or THE MAN-MADE WORLD


I.

AS TO HUMANNESS.


Let us begin, inoffensively, with sheep.  The sheep is a beast with
which we are all familiar, being much used in religious imagery; the
common stock of painters; a staple article of diet; one of our main
sources of clothing; and an everyday symbol of bashfulness and
stupidity.

In some grazing regions the sheep is an object of terror, destroying
grass, bush and forest by omnipresent nibbling; on the great plains,
sheep-keeping frequently results in insanity, owing to the loneliness of
the shepherd, and the monotonous appearance and behavior of the sheep.

By the poet, young sheep are preferred, the lamb gambolling gaily;
unless it be in hymns, where "all we like sheep" are repeatedly
described, and much stress is laid upon the straying propensities of the
animal.

To the scientific mind there is special interest in the sequacity of
sheep, their habit of following one another with automatic imitation.
This instinct, we are told, has been developed by ages of wild crowded
racing on narrow ledges, along precipices, chasms, around sudden spurs
and corners, only the leader seeing when, where and how to jump.  If
those behind jumped exactly as he did, they lived.  If they stopped to
exercise independent judgment, they were pushed off and perished; they
and their judgment with them.

All these things, and many that are similar, occur to us when we think
of sheep.  They are also ewes and rams.  Yes, truly; but what of it?
All that has been said was said of sheep, _genus ovis,_ that bland
beast, compound of mutton, wool, and foolishness. so widely known.  If
we think of the sheep-dog (and dog-ess), the shepherd (and
shepherd-ess), of the ferocious sheep-eating bird of New Zealand, the
Kea (and Kea-ess), all these herd, guard, or kill the sheep, both rams
and ewes alike.  In regard to mutton, to wool, to general character, we
think only of their sheepishness, not at all of their ramishness or
eweishness. That which is ovine or bovine, canine, feline or equine, is
easily recognized as distinguishing that particular species of animal,
and has no relation whatever to the sex thereof.

Returning to our muttons, let us consider the ram, and wherein his
character differs from the sheep.  We find he has a more quarrelsome
disposition.  He paws the earth and makes a noise.  He has a tendency to
butt.  So has a goat--Mr. Goat.  So has Mr. Buffalo, and Mr. Moose, and
Mr. Antelope.  This tendency to plunge head foremost at an
adversary--and to find any other gentleman an adversary on
sight--evidently does not pertain to sheep, to _genus ovis;_ but to any
male creature with horns.

As "function comes before organ," we may even give a reminiscent glance
down the long path of evolution, and see how the mere act of
butting--passionately and perpetually repeated--born of the beliggerent
spirit of the male--produced horns!

The ewe, on the other hand, exhibits love and care for her little ones,
gives them milk and tries to guard them.  But so does a goat--Mrs. Goat.
 So does Mrs. Buffalo and the rest.  Evidently this mother instinct is
no peculiarity of _genus ovis,_ but of any female creature.

Even the bird, though not a mammal, shows the same mother-love and
mother-care, while the father bird, though not a butter, fights with
beak and wing and spur.  His competition is more effective through
display.  The wish to please, the need to please, the overmastering
necessity upon him that he secure the favor of the female, has made the
male bird blossom like a butterfly.  He blazes in gorgeous plumage,
rears haughty crests and combs, shows drooping wattles and dangling
blobs such as the turkey-cock affords; long splendid feathers for pure
ornament appear upon him; what in her is a mere tail-effect becomes in
him a mass of glittering drapery.

Partridge-cock, farmyard-cock, peacock, from sparrow to ostrich, observe
his mien!  To strut and languish; to exhibit every beauteous lure; to
sacrifice ease, comfort, speed, everything--to beauty--for her
sake--this is the nature of the he-bird of any species; the
characteristic, not of the turkey, but of the cock!  With drumming of
loud wings, with crow and quack and bursts of glorious song, he woos his
mate; displays his splendors before her; fights fiercely with his
rivals.  To butt--to strut--to make a noise--all for love's sake; these
acts are common to the male.

We may now generalize and clearly state: That is masculine which belongs
to the male--to any or all males, irrespective of species.  That is
feminine which belongs to the female, to any or all females,
irrespective of species.  That is ovine, bovine, feline, canine, equine
or asinine which belongs to that species, irrespective of sex.

In our own species all this is changed.  We have been so taken up with
the phenomena of masculinity and femininity, that our common humanity
has largely escaped notice.  We know we are human, naturally, and are
very proud of it; but we do not consider in what our humanness consists;
nor how men and women may fall short of it, or overstep its bounds, in
continual insistence upon their special differences.  It is "manly" to
do this; it is "womanly" to do that; but what a human being should do
under the circumstances is not thought of.

The only time when we do recognize what we call "common humanity" is in
extreme cases, matters of life and death; when either man or woman is
expected to behave as if they were also human creatures.  Since the
range of feeling and action proper to humanity, as such, is far wider
than that proper to either sex, it seems at first somewhat remarkable
that we have given it so little recognition.

A little classification will help us here.  We have certain qualities in
common with inanimate matter, such as weight, opacity, resilience.  It
is clear that these are not human.  We have other qualities in common
with all forms of life; cellular construction, for instance, the
reproduction of cells and the need of nutrition.  These again are not
human.  We have others, many others, common to the higher mammals; which
are not exclusively ours--are not distinctively "human."  What then are
true human characteristics?  In what way is the human species
distinguished from all other species?

Our human-ness is seen most clearly in three main lines: it is
mechanical, psychical and social.  Our power to make and use things is
essentially human; we alone have extra-physical tools.  We have added to
our teeth the knife, sword, scissors, mowing machine; to our claws the
spade, harrow, plough, drill, dredge.  We are a protean creature, using
the larger brain power through a wide variety of changing weapons.  This
is one of our main and vital distinctions.  Ancient animal races are
traced and known by mere bones and shells, ancient human races by their
buildings, tools and utensils.

That degree of development which gives us the human mind is a clear
distinction of race.  The savage who can count a hundred is more human
than the savage who can count ten.

More prominent than either of these is the social nature of humanity.
We are by no means the only group-animal; that ancient type of industry
the ant, and even the well-worn bee, are social creatures.  But insects
of their kind are found living alone.  Human beings never.  Our
human-ness begins with some low form of social relation and increases as
that relation develops.

Human life of any sort is dependent upon what Kropotkin calls "mutual
aid," and human progress keeps step absolutely with that interchange of
specialized services which makes society organic.  The nomad, living on
cattle as ants live on theirs, is less human than the farmer, raising
food by intelligently applied labor; and the extension of trade and
commerce, from mere village market-places to the world-exchanges of
to-day, is extension of human-ness as well.

Humanity, thus considered, is not a thing made at once and unchangeable,
but a stage of development; and is still, as Wells describes it, "in the
making."  Our human-ness is seen to lie not so much in what we are
individually, as in our relations to one another; and even that
individuality is but the result of our relations to one another.  It is
in what we do and how we do it, rather than in what we are.  Some,
philosophically inclined, exalt "being" over "doing."  To them this
question may be put: "Can you mention any form of life that merely 'is,'
without doing anything?"

Taken separately and physically, we are animals, _genus homo_; taken
socially and psychically, we are, in varying degree, human; and our real
history lies in the development of this human-ness.

Our historic period is not very long.  Real written history only goes
back a few thousand years, beginning with the stone records of ancient
Egypt.  During this period we have had almost universally what is here
called an Androcentric Culture.  The history, such as it was, was made
and written by men.

The mental, the mechanical, the social development, was almost wholly
theirs.  We have, so far, lived and suffered and died in a man-made
world.  So general, so unbroken, has been this condition, that to
mention it arouses no more remark than the statement of a natural law.
We have taken it for granted, since the dawn of civilization, that
"mankind" meant men-kind, and the world was theirs.

Women we have sharply delimited.  Women were a sex, "the sex," according
to chivalrous toasts; they were set apart for special services peculiar
to femininity.  As one English scientist put it, in 1888, "Women are not
only not the race--they are not even half the race, but a subspecies
told off for reproduction only."

This mental attitude toward women is even more clearly expressed by Mr.
H. B. Marriot-Watson in his article on "The American Woman" in the
"Nineteenth Century" for June, 1904, where he says: "Her constitutional
restlessness has caused her to abdicate those functions which alone
excuse or explain her existence."  This is a peculiarly happy and
condensed expression of the relative position of women during our
androcentric culture.  The man was accepted as the race type without one
dissentient voice; and the woman--a strange, diverse creature, quite
disharmonious in the accepted scheme of things--was excused and
explained only as a female.

She has needed volumes of such excuse and explanation; also, apparently,
volumes of abuse and condemnation.  In any library catalogue we may find
books upon books about women: physiological, sentimental, didactic,
religious--all manner of books about women, as such.  Even to-day in the
works of Marholm--poor young Weininger, Moebius, and others, we find the
same perpetual discussion of women--as such.

This is a book about men--as such.  It differentiates between the human
nature and the sex nature.  It will not go so far as to allege man's
masculine traits to be all that excuse, or explain his existence: but it
will point out what are masculine traits as distinct from human ones,
and what has been the effect on our human life of the unbridled
dominance of one sex.

We can see at once, glaringly, what would have been the result of giving
all human affairs into female hands.  Such an extraordinary and
deplorable situation would have "feminized" the world.  We should have
all become "effeminate."

See how in our use of language the case is clearly shown.  The
adjectives and derivatives based on woman's distinctions are alien and
derogatory when applied to human affairs; "effeminate"--too female,
connotes contempt, but has no masculine analogue; whereas
"emasculate"--not enough male, is a term of reproach, and has no
feminine analogue.  "Virile"--manly, we oppose to "puerile"--childish,
and the very word "virtue" is derived from "vir"--a man.

Even in the naming of other animals we have taken the male as the race
type, and put on a special termination to indicate "his female," as in
lion, lioness; leopard, leopardess; while all our human scheme of things
rests on the same tacit assumption; man being held the human type; woman
a sort of accompaniment aud subordinate assistant, merely essential to
the making of people.

She has held always the place of a preposition in relation to man.  She
has been considered above him or below him, before him, behind him,
beside him, a wholly relative existence--"Sydney's sister," "Pembroke's
mother"--but never by any chance Sydney or Pembroke herself.

Acting on this assumption, all human standards have been based on male
characteristics, and when we wish to praise the work of a woman, we say
she has "a masculine mind."

It is no easy matter to deny or reverse a universal assumption.  The
human mind has had a good many jolts since it began to think, but after
each upheaval it settles down as peacefully as the vine-growers on
Vesuvius, accepting the last lava crust as permanent ground.

What we see immediately around us, what we are born into and grow up
with, be it mental furniture or physical, we assume to be the order of
nature.

If a given idea has been held in the human mind for many generations, as
almost all our common ideas have, it takes sincere and continued effort
to remove it; and if it is one of the oldest we have in stock, one of
the big, common, unquestioned world ideas, vast is the labor of those
who seek to change it.

Nevertheless, if the matter is one of importance, if the previous idea
was a palpable error, of large and evil effect, and if the new one is
true and widely important, the effort is worth making.

The task here undertaken is of this sort.  It seeks to show that what we
have all this time called "human nature" and deprecated, was in great
part only male nature, and good enough in its place; that what we have
called "masculine" and admired as such, was in large part human, and
should be applied to both sexes: that what we have called "feminine" and
condemned, was also largely human and applicable to both.  Our
androcentric culture is so shown to have been, and still to be, a
masculine culture in excess, and therefore undesirable.

In the preliminary work of approaching these facts it will be well to
explain how it can be that so wide and serious an error should have been
made by practically all men.  The reason is simply that they were men.
They were males, avid saw women as females--and not otherwise.

So absolute is this conviction that the man who reads will say, "Of
course!  How else are we to look at women except as females?  They are
females, aren't they?"  Yes, they are, as men are males unquestionably;
but there is possible the frame of mind of the old marquise who was
asked by an English friend how she could bear to have the footman serve
her breakfast in bed--to have a man in her bed-chamber--and replied
sincerely, "Call you that thing there a man?"

The world is full of men, but their principal occupation is human work
of some sort; and women see in them the human distinction
preponderantly.  Occasionally some unhappy lady marries her
coachman--long contemplation of broad shoulders having an effect,
apparently; but in general women see the human creature most; the male
creature only when they love.

To the man, the whole world was his world; his because he was male; and
the whole world of woman was the home; because she was female.  She had
her prescribed sphere, strictly limited to her feminine occupations and
interests; he had all the rest of life; and not only so, but, having it,
insisted on calling it male.

This accounts for the general attitude of men toward the now rapid
humanization of women.  From her first faint struggles toward freedom
and justice, to her present valiant efforts toward full economic and
political equality, each step has been termed "unfeminine" and resented
as an intrusion upon man's place and power.  Here shows the need of our
new classification, of the three distinct fields of life--masculine,
feminine and human.

As a matter of fact, there is a "woman's sphere," sharply defined and
quite different from his; there is also a "man's sphere," as sharply
defined and even more limited; but there remains a common sphere--that
of humanity, which belongs to both alike.

In the earlier part of what is known as "the woman's movement," it was
sharply opposed on the ground that women would become "unsexed."  Let us
note in passing that they have become unsexed in one particular, most
glaringly so, and that no one has noticed or objected to it.

As part of our androcentric culture we may point to the peculiar
reversal of sex characteristics which make the human female carry the
burden of ornament.  She alone, of all human creatures, has adopted the
essentially masculine attribute of special sex-decoration; she does not
fight for her mate as yet, but she blooms forth as the peacock and bird
of paradise, in poignant reversal of nature's laws, even wearing
masculine feathers to further her feminine ends.

Woman's natural work as a female is that of the mother; man's natural
work as a male is that of the father; their mutual relation to this end
being a source of joy and well-being when rightly held: but human work
covers all our life outside of these specialties.  Every handicraft,
every profession, every science, every art, all normal amusements and
recreations, all government, education, religion; the whole living world
of human achievement: all this is human.

That one sex should have monopolized all human activities, called them
"man's work," and managed them as such, is what is meant by the phrase
"Androcentric Culture."



COMMENT AND REVIEW


Why criticize?

Why does anybody criticize anything?  And why does THE FORERUNNER
criticize--the things herein treated?

On examination, we find several sources of criticism.  The earliest and
commonest is the mere expression of personal opinion, as is heard where
young persons are becoming acquainted, the voluble "I like this!" and
"Don't you like that?" and "Isn't such a thing horrid?"  For hours do
the impressionable young exchange their ardent sentiments; and the same
may be heard from older persons in everyday discussion.

This form of criticism has its value.  It serves to show, even
relentlessly to expose, the qualities and deficiencies of the critic.
What one "likes" merely shows what one is like.

The vitality dies out of it, however, when one learns two things; first,
that likings change with growth of character and new experience, and,
second, that few people are interested in an inventory of limitations.

Following this comes another painfully common source of criticism--the
desire to exhibit superiority.  The aged are prone to this fault in
discussion of the young and their achievements.  The elect in general
show it, seeking to prove to common people that these are not as they
are; the conservative rests his objection to anything new and different
on the same broad base; and the critic, the real, professional critic,
can hardly trust himself to approve warmly of anything, lest it weaken
his reputation.  If he does, it must be something which is caviar to the
general.

Then comes that amiable desire to instruct and assist, born of parental
instinct, fostered by pedagogy, intrusted by St. Paul to the "husband at
home."  Moved by this feeling, we point out the errors of our friends
and mark examination papers; and thus does the teacher of painting move
among his pupils and leave them in ranks of glimmering hope or dark
despair.

Another fruitful source of criticism is a natural wish to free one's
mind; as the hapless public sputters on the street, or in letters to the
papers, protesting against the stupidity and cruelty of its many
aggressors.  Under this impulse bursts forth the chattering flood of
discussion after play or lecture, merely to relieve the pressure.

Then comes a very evil cause--the desire to give pain, to injure.
Certain persons, and publications, use their critical ability with great
effect to this end.  In England it seems to be a sort of game, great
literary personages rush out into the open and belabor each other
mercilessly; while the public rejoices as at a prize-fight.  We
sometimes see a newspaper offering its readers a form of entertainment
which is not even a fight, nor yet a prompt and needed execution, but a
sort of torture-chamber exhibition, where the dumb victim is vilified
and ridiculed, grilled and "roasted," to make an American holiday.

There is one more cause of criticism--the need of money.  Some people
are hired to criticize others, the nature of their attentions wholly
dictated by the employer.  A shadowy bridge is opened here, connecting
criticism with advertisement.  Many cross it.

*

For any criticism to have value it must rest clearly and honestly upon a
definite point of view.


"The Toad beneath the harrow knows
Exactly where each tooth point goes.
The Butterfly upon the road
Preaches contentment to that Toad."


If one elects, for instance, to criticize an illustration in
particular--or a particular illustration--or the present status of
popular illustration in general--the position of the critic must be
frankly chosen and firmly held.  If it is that of the technician, either
the original artist or the reproducer or even the publisher, then a
given picture in a magazine may be discussed merely as a picture, as a
half-tone, or as a page effect, intelligently and competently.  If the
purely aesthetic viewpoint is chosen, all the above considerations may
be waived and the given picture judged as frankly ugly, or as beautiful,
quite apart from its technique.  If, again, the base of judgment is that
of the reader, in whose eyes an illustration should illustrate--i.e.,
give light, make clear the meaning of the text--then we look at a given
picture to see if it carries out the ideas expressed in the tale or
article, and value it by that.

On this base also stands the author, only one person, to be sure, as
compared with the multitude of readers, but not a dog, for all that.
The author, foaming at the mouth, remote and helpless, here makes common
ground with the reader and expects an illustration to illustrate.
Perhaps, we should say, "the intelligent reader"--leaving out such as
the young lady in the tale, who said they might read her anything, "if
it was illustrated by Christie."*

[*--This does not by any means deny intelligence to all appreciators of
Mr. Christie's work, but merely to such as select literature for the
pictures attached.]

THE FORERUNNER believes that it may voice the feelings of many writers
and more readers; almost all readers, in fact, if it here and now
records a protest against an all too frequent illustrative sin: where
the gentleman, or lady, who is engaged and paid to illustrate a story,
prefers to insert pictures of varying attractiveness which bear no
relation to the text.  This is not illustration.  It is not even honest
business.  It does not deliver the goods paid for.  It takes advantage
of author, publisher and public, and foists upon them all an art
exhibition which was not ordered.

To select a recent popular, easily obtainable, instance of vice and
virtue in illustration, let us take up the "American Magazine" for
August.  Excellent work among the advertisements--there the artist is
compelled to "follow copy"; his employer will take no nonsense.  That's
one reason why people like to look at them--the pictures are
intelligible.  Admirable pictures by Worth Brehm to Stewart White's
story--perfect.  You see the people, Mr. White's people, see them on the
page as you saw them in your mind, and better.  Good drawing, and
_personal character_--those special people and not others.  The insight
and appreciation shown in the frontispiece alone makes as fine an
instance of what illustration ought to be as need be given.

Those light sketches to the airy G. G. Letters are good, too--anything
more definite would not belong to that couple.

But Mr. Cyrus Cuneo shows small grasp of what Mr. Locke was writing
about in his "Moonlight Effect."  The tailpiece, by somebody else, is
the best picture of the lot.

Mr. Leone Brackner does better in Jack London's story, though falling
far short of the extreme loathsomeness Mr. London heaps so thickly.  J.
Scott Williams follows "Margherita's Soul" with a running accompaniment
and variations, in pleasant accord with the spirit of that compelling
tale.  He gives more than the scene represented, gives it differently,
and yet gives it.

Mr. McCutcheon and George Fitch are also harmonious in clever fooling of
pen and pencil, and Thomas Fogarty, though by no means convincing, goes
well enough with Mr. O'Higgins' story, which is not convincing, either.
The hat and dress pictures are photographs, and do artificial justice to
their artificial subjects in Mrs. Woodrow's arraignment of the Fantastic
Feminine.

But--.  Go to your library after, or send your ten cents for, or look up
on your own shelves, that August number, and turn to Lincoln Colcord's
story of "Anjer," to see what an illustrator dare do.  Here's a story,
the merits of which need not be discussed, but in which great stress is
laid on a certain Malay Princess, the free nobility of whose savage love
healed the sick heart of an exhausted man.  "I saw how beautiful she
was," says the narrator: "her breast was bare in a long slit, and
shadowed like the face of the pool."  "The most glorious native woman of
the East I've ever seen."  "She walked like a tiger, with a crouching
step of absolute grace."  "Her eyes called as if they'd spoken words of
love: the beauty of her face was beyond speech--almost beyond thought."
Thus Mr. Colcord.

And how Mr. Townshend?  It is on Page 334, Mr. Townshend's
"illustration."  ("Whit way do we ca' it the Zoo?"  "If it wasna' ca'd
the Zoo, what would we ca' it?")  A bit of railing and a pillar is the
only concession to the scene described; that and the fact that there is
a man and a woman there.  One more detail is granted--a forehead
ornament, as alleged.  For the rest?

Since the picture is so unjust to the words of the author, can the words
of the critic do any justice to the picture?  The man will do, as well
one man as another, apparently.  The big blob of an object that seems to
have been suggested by a Gargantuan ginger jar, and to be put in for
tropical effect, as also a set of wooden bananas, may be forgiven.

But the Princess--the tigress--the free, graceful, passionate woman--the
beauty beyond speech.  Look at it.

A crooked, crouching, awkward negroid type, a dress of absurd volume and
impossible outlines, the upper part a swathed bath towel, one stiff,
ugly arm hung helpless, one lifted and ending in a _hoof,_ a plain pig's
hoof; the head bent, chin sunk on chest like a hunchback's; and the
face--!  One could forgive the gross, unusual ugliness; but why no hint
of interest in her lover?  Why this expression as of a third generation
London pauper in a hospital?  What explanation is there of this meagre,
morbid, deformed female in the midst of that story?

Frank incapacity on the part of an artist is possible.  To try and try
and try again and utterly fail is possible.  To write to the author and
say, "I cannot visualize your character, or express it, and must decline
to undertake the order," or to the editor and refuse the job, is
possible.  But to take the order, to read the story (if he did read it),
to send in and accept pay for a picture like that--"Whit way would ye
ca' it?"



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


A passionate interest is shown by many persons in consulting anonymous
advisers through the columns of various publications.  Their inquiries
are mainly as to small matters of etiquette, and the care of the
complexion.

In one of the current women's papers we find such questions as these:
"When one is introduced, how does one acknowledge the introduction?
Must it be by a mention of the weather?  How should one receive a small
gift?" (x)  All these by one breathless inquirer.

Another asks pathetically: "Will you tell me how soon after a husband's
death it is permitted to a widow to return formal calls?  What is the
present form of visiting cards for a widow?" (y)

Another rudderless ship, in a somewhat less recent issue of a very
popular woman's paper, writes: "I am wearing mourning.  In the hot
weather I find the veil very heavy and close, and wish to throw it back.
 What shall I do?" (z)

These are apparently bona fide questions, but in most cases they are
answered in a style too palpably oracular.  If the questioners are
genuine and want help they get precious little.  If it is merely a game,
it seems rather a flat one.  But the popularity of the pastime
continues.

The Forerunner will give no answers to foolish questions; unless at
peril of the asker.  But to sincere inquirers, who are interested in
some moot point of conduct, some balance of conflicting duties, honest
attention will be given, and their questions answered as sincerely.

The intention is to promote discussion of the real problems of life, and
to apply to them the new standards afforded by the larger knowledge and
deeper religious sense of to-day.

If any of the above questions were sent to this office they would be
thus dismissed:

(x) Read "How To Do It," by E. E. Hale.  Learn to be sincere; have real
feelings and express them honestly.

(y) If you are truly prostrated by grief you cannot return calls.  If
you are able--and like to do it--what are you afraid of?  Whose
"permission" are you asking?  See answer to x.

(z) Mourning is a relic of barbarism, kept up by women because of their
retarded social development.  But if you must wear a heavy veil and wish
to throw it back--why don't you?

These persons would be displeased and not write again.  Truly.  Such
questions are not wanted by The Forerunner.  They would discontinue
their subscription.  Doubtless.  But this is a waste of anxiety, for
such would never have subscribed for The Forerunner in the first place.

Suppose, however, that a question like this is sent in:

"I am a girl of twenty.  My mother is an invalid.  My father is in
business difficulties.  They want me to marry an old friend of
father's--a good man, but forty years older then I am.  Is it my duty to
marry him--for their sake?" (B)

Answer.  (B)  Marriage is not an institution for the support of parents,
or the settling of business difficulties.  If you loved that old man you
would not be asking advice.  To marry a man you do not love is immoral.
Marriage is to serve the best interests of children and to give
happiness to the contracting parties.  If your parents need your
financial aid go to work and give them your earnings, but do not make a
business of matrimony.

Or again: Query.  "My mother is a widow living on a moderate income.
She has two married children, but does not like to live with them.  I am
a college graduate and wish to work at a profession.  She says it is not
necessary for me to work, and wants me to live with her--says she needs
me, claims my filial duty.  Is this right?"  (F)

Answer.  (F)  No, it is dead wrong.  Parental duty is a natural
obligation--not a loan.  Filial duty is the same from son and daughter.
You owe your mother care and service if needed, just as your brother
would.  She has no more right to prevent your going to work than if you
were a son.  By all means live with her if you both like it, but live
your own life.  You have a duty of citizenship as well as of
daughtership.

Or again: Query.  "My wife is spending more of my income on dress than I
can afford.  How can I stop her?"  (G)

There is not room to answer this in this issue.



THANKSONG


Thankful are we for life
 And the joy of living.
Baby-pleasure of taking;
 Mother-glory of giving.

Thankful are we for light
 And the joy of seeing.
Stir of emotion strong,
 And the peace of being.

Thankful are we for power,
 And the pride ensuing;
Baby-pleasure of having,
 Father-glory of doing.



[Advertisement]


LOWNEY'S


I speak as one who has cared little for candy of any kind and less for
chocolate candy.

I don't like chocolate cake, nor chocolate _blanc mange,_ nor chocolate
pudding, nor chocolate to drink--unless it is cocoa, very hot, not too
sweet, and strained carefully.

Nevertheless I fell in with friends, who feasted upon Lowney's; they
beguiled me into feasting upon Lowney's, and since then my attitude has
changed as to candy.

I had a box of Lowney's, a particularly well-made, attractive box, that
is still kept to put small treasures in, and brought it home for my
family to eat.

Always before, I had looked on with the unselfishness of a pelican, to
see others eat candy; but now I strove with them, like a frigate bird,
and made them give up some of it.  I wanted it myself.

Furthermore, I bought a small box of Lowney's chocolate almonds in
Portland, Oregon, on the fourteenth of June, and with severe
self-denial, brought it home on the twenty-ninth of July.

Then it was eaten, largely by me, and every single one of those
chocolate almonds was fresh and good.

I can state further, on the evidence of personal friends, that all the
Lowney preparations are pure and honest and perfectly reliable.

They are as good as the best in the world.

As to the candy,--That's better.


C. P. G.


Walter M.  Lowney Co.

BOSTON, MASS.


Please mention THE FORERUNNER when purchasing



[Advertisement]


FELS-NAPTHA SOAP


I took a trolley trip in New England, one Summer, carrying for my only
baggage a neat thin German "mappe"--about 15 by 12 by 2.

"But what do you do for clean underwear?" inquired my friends.

Then I produced from one corner of that restricted space, a neat small
box, and a piece of a cake of Fels-Naptha.

"Wash 'em over night, they are dry in the morning," said I.

"But are they clean?"

"Of course, they are clean, chemically clean,--if you use Fels-Naptha."

Suppose you are camping, and hot water is hard to come by; or travelling
in places where it may not be had at all; or that you merely live in the
country and have to heat it "by hand," as it were; it is warm weather,
very warm weather, and the mere thought of hot water is unpleasant; or
that you burn gas,--and gas costs money, as indeed does other fuel; or
that your laundress is unreliable and will not boil the clothes:--

In any or all of these cases, use Fels-Naptha, and use it according to
directions.

It is easy, it is quick, it is inexpensive, and the clothes are clean,
artistically and antiseptically clean.

This soap has been a solid comfort my kitchen for years.  It is a steady
travelling companion, and I have recommended it to many grateful friends
before now.


C. P. G.


Fels & Co., Philadelphia, Pa.


Please mention THE FORERUNNER when purchasing



[Advertisement]


HOLEPROOF HOISERY


Few women like to darn stockings, but most women have to.

They have to darn their own,--not many; their husband's--more; and their
childrens'--most.

The amount of time they waste in this Sisyphean task would, even at
charwoman's wages, buy socks and stockings for a dozen families.

Spent in reading, it would improve their minds--darning doesn't.  Spent
in rest, it would improve their health--darning doesn't.  Darning
stockings is one of the most foolish things women are expected to do.

"But what are we to do?  Stockings will wear out," protest the darners.

Buy new ones.

"But they wear out so fast!"

That is where you are wrong; they do not wear out fast--if you buy the
Holeproof.

I bought some once.  Did they wear out?  They did not wear out.  I wore
them and wore them and wore them, till I was so tired of those
deathless, impervious, unnaturally whole stockings that I gave them
away!

Seriously, the Holeproof Hosiery does what it promises.  I have used it,
other members of my family have used it, friends of mine have used it
and I have never heard any complaint, except of the monotony of whole
stockings.

If you don't believe it, try it--but be sure and get the real thing; of
your dealer or


The Holeproof Hoisery Co., Milwaulkee, Wis.


Please mention THE FORERUNNER when purchasing


C. P. G.



[Advertisement]


MOORE'S FOUNTAIN PEN


I have had, and lost, perhaps a dozen fountain pens, of various kinds.
Never one of them that didn't distribute ink where--and when--it wasn't
wanted, till I happened on Moore's.

1 didn't notice the name of it till after considerable use, with perfect
satisfaction; and then I looked to see who was responsible for this
wonder.

It is all very well for men, with vest pockets, to carry a sort of
leather socket, or a metal clip that holds the pen to that pocket
safely--so long as the man is vertical.

But women haven't vest pockets--and do not remain continuously erect.

A woman stoops over to look in the oven--to pick up her thimble--to take
the baby off the floor--and if she carries a fountain pen, it stoops
over too and spills its ink.

If the woman carries it about in a little black bag, it is horizontal,
and the ink ebbs slowly from the pen into the cap, afterwards swiftly to
her fingers.

With Moore's you pull the pen into the handle, and then the cap screws
on.

That's all.

The ink can not get out.

You can carry that pen up, or down, or sideways; it doesn't care.

I use it with joy, with comfort, with clean hands.  It is a constant
satisfaction.


American Fountain Pen Co.

168 Devonshire St., Boston, Mass.


Please mention THE FORERUNNER when purchasing


C. P. G.



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK


AS TO PURPOSE:


_What is The Forerunner?_  It is a monthly magazine, publishing stories
short and serial, article and essay; drama, verse, satire and sermon;
dialogue, fable and fantasy, comment and review.  It is written entirely
by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

_What is it For?_  It is to stimulate thought: to arouse hope, courage
and impatience; to offer practical suggestions and solutions, to voice
the strong assurance of better living, here, now, in our own hands to
make.

_What is it about?_  It is about people, principles, and the questions
of every-day life; the personal and public problems of to-day.  It gives
a clear, consistent view of human life and how to live it.

_Is it a Woman's magazine?_  It will treat all three phases of our
existence--male, female and human.  It will discuss Man, in his true
place in life; Woman, the Unknown Power; the  Child, the most important
citizen.

_Is it a Socialist Magazine?_  It is a magazine for humanity, and
humanity is social.  It holds that Socialism, the economic theory, is
part of our gradual Socialization, and that the duty of conscious
humanity is to promote Socialization.

_Why is it published?_  It is published to express ideas which need a
special medium; and in the belief that there are enough persons
interested in those ideas to justify the undertaking.


AS TO ADVERTISING:


We have long heard that "A pleased customer is the best advertiser."
The Forerunner offers to its advertisers and readers the benefit of this
authority.  In its advertising department, under the above heading, will
be described articles personally known and used.  So far as individual
experience and approval carry weight, and clear truthful description
command attention, the advertising pages of The Forerunner will be
useful to both dealer and buyer.  If advertisers prefer to use their own
statements The Forerunner will publish them if it believes them to be
true.


AS TO CONTENTS:


The main feature of the first year is a new book on a new subject with a
new name:--

_"Our Androcentric Culture."_  this is a study of the historic effect on
normal human development of a too exclusively masculine civilization.
It shows what man, the male, has done to the world: and what woman, the
more human, may do to change it.

_"What Diantha Did."_  This is a serial novel.  It shows the course of
true love running very crookedly--as it so often does--among the
obstructions and difficulties of the housekeeping problem--and solves
that problem.  (NOT by co-operation.)

Among the short articles will appear:

"Private Morality and Public Immorality."
"The Beauty Women Have Lost"
"Our Overworked Instincts."
"The Nun in the Kitchen."
"Genius: Domestic and Maternal."
"A Small God and a Large Goddess."
"Animals in Cities."
"How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money."
"Prize Children"
"Kitchen-Mindedness"
"Parlor-Mindedness"
"Nursery-Mindedness"

There will be short stories and other entertaining matter in each issue.
 The department of "Personal Problems" does not discuss etiquette,
fashions or the removal of freckles.  Foolish questions will not be
answered, unless at peril of the asker.


AS TO VALUE:

If you take this magazine one year you will have:


One complete novel . . . By C. P. Gilman
One new book . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve short stories . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more short articles . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more new poems . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve Short Sermons . . . By C. P. Gilman
Besides "Comment and Review" . . . By C. P. Gilman
"Personal Problems" . . . By C. P. Gilman
And many other things . . . By C. P. Gilman

DON'T YOU THINK IT'S WORTH A DOLLAR?


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________



[Advertisement]


A TOILET PREPARATION


I cannot give the name of this article, because they have not given me
the advertisement--yet.

But I hope to get it later on; for it is supremely good.  It is
scientifically and honestly made, by good people in a good place; a
place comfortable and pretty enough to live in.

It claims a good deal as to what it is good for, and as far as I have
tried it, in several capacities, it does the things it claims to do,
does them well.

It is clean and sweet to use, isn't sticky or greasy, is reasonable in
price, smells good and is nice to look at.

You can get it anywhere--it is an old standby.

I have used it exclusively for years and years, and my mother used it
before me.

And I cannot recommend any other--for I don't use any other!



[Advertisement]


 C A L E N D U L A


CHILDREN CEASE TO CRY FOR IT.


This is a gratuitous advertisement, benefitting

a) The Child; whose pain stops;

b) The Mother; who doesn't have to hear him cry;

c) The Nearest Druggist--a little.


CALENDULA is a good standard old drug--made of marigolds--in the
_materia medica._  You buy a little bottle of tincture of calendula, and
keep it on the shelf.  Nobody will drink it by mistake--it doesn't taste
good.

Presently Johnny falls down hard--he was running--he fell on a gritty
place--his poor little knee is scraped raw.  And he howls, how he howls!
square-mouthed and inconsolable.

Then you hastily get a half a tea-cupful of water, a little warm if you
have it, and put in a few drops of calendula.  Wet a soft clean rag in
it, bind it softly on the wound, keep it wet--and the pain stops.

Many many times has this quieted my infant anguish; also have I used it
as a grown up.  The effect is the same.


 C A L E N D U L A
TAKES THE PAIN FROM
A  R A W  W O U N D





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
OWNER AND PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 2
DECEMBER, 1909
The Charlton Company, 67 Wall Street, New York
Copyright for 1909, C. P. Gilman




LOVE


Not the child-god of our most childish past,
 Nor sympathy, nor worship, passionless;
 Nor gratitude, nor tenderest caress:
Nor the post-mortal glamor priests have cast
With "This to hope!  Surrender what thou hast!"
 These are but parts and can but partly bless;
 We in our new-born common consciousness
Are learning Law and Life and Love at last.

The age-old secret of the sphinx's holding,
 Incarnate triumph, infinitely strong;
 The mother's majesty, grown wide and long,
In the full power and fire of life's unfolding;
The conscious splendor and ripe joy thereof--
 Glad world-wide, life-long service--this is Love!



ACCORDING TO SOLOMON


"'He that rebuketh a man afterwards shall find more favor than he that
flattereth with his tongue,'" said Mr. Solomon Bankside to his wife
Mary.

"Its the other way with a woman, I think;" she answered him, "you might
put that in."

"Tut, tut, Molly," said he; "'Add not unto his words,'--do not speak
lightly of the wisdom of the great king."

"I don't mean to, dear, but--when you hear it all the time"--

"'He that turneth away his ear from the law, even his prayer shall be an
abomination,'" answered Mr. Bankside.

"I believe you know every one of those old Proverbs by heart," said his
wife with some heat.  "Now that's not disrespectful!--they _are_
old!--and I do wish you'd forget some of them!"

He smiled at her quizzically, tossing back his heavy silver-gray hair
with the gesture she had always loved.  His eyes were deep blue and
bright under their bushy brows; and the mouth was kind--in its iron way.
 "I can think of at least three to squelch you with, Molly," said he,
"but I won't."

"O I know the one you want!  'A continual dropping in a very rainy day
and a contentions woman are alike!'  I'm _not_ contentious, Solomon!"

"No, you are not," he frankly admitted.  "What I really had in mind was
this--'A prudent wife is from the Lord,' and 'He that findeth a wife
findeth a good thing; and obtaineth favor of the Lord.'"

She ran around the table in the impulsive way years did not alter, and
kissed him warmly.

"I'm not scolding you, my dear," he continued: "but if you had all the
money you'd like to give away--there wouldn't be much left!"

"But look at what you spend on me!" she urged.

"That's a wise investment--as well as a deserved reward," her husband
answered calmly.  "'There is that scattereth and yet increaseth,' you
know, my dear; 'And there is that withholdeth more than is meet--and it
tendeth to poverty!'  Take all you get my dear--its none too good for
you."

He gave her his goodby kiss with special fondness, put on his heavy
satin-lined overcoat and went to the office.

Mr. Solomon Bankside was not a Jew; though his last name suggested and
his first seemed to prove it; also his proficiency in the Old Testament
gave color to the idea.  No, he came from Vermont; of generations of
unbroken New England and old English Puritan ancestry, where the
Solomons and Isaacs and Zedekiahs were only mitigated by the Standfasts
and Praise-the-Lords.  Pious, persistent pigheaded folk were they, down
all the line.

His wife had no such simple pedigree.  A streak of Huguenot blood she
had (some of the best in France, though neither of them knew that), a
grandmother from Albany with a Van to her name; a great grandmother with
a Mac; and another with an O'; even a German cross came in somewhere.
Mr. Bankside was devoted to genealogy, and had been at some pains to dig
up these facts--the more he found the worse he felt, and the lower ran
his opinion of Mrs. Bankside's ancestry.

She had been a fascinating girl; pretty, with the dash and piquancy of
an oriole in a May apple-tree; clever and efficient in everything her
swift hands touched; quite a spectacular housekeeper; and the sober,
long-faced young downeasterner had married her with a sudden decision
that he often wondered about in later years.  So did she.

What he had not sufficiently weighed at the time, was her spirit of
incorrigible independence, and a light-mindedness which, on maturer
judgment, he could almost term irreligious.  His conduct was based on
principle, all of it; built firmly into habit and buttressed by
scriptural quotations.  Hers seemed to him as inconsequent as the flight
of a moth.  Studying it, in his solemn conscientious way, in the light
of his genealogical researches, he felt that all her uncertainties were
accounted for, and that the error was his--in having married too many
kinds of people at once.

They had been, and were, very happy together none the less: though
sometimes their happiness was a little tottery.  This was one of the
times.  It was the day after Christmas, and Mrs. Bankside entered the
big drawing room, redolent of popcorn and evergreen, and walked slowly
to the corner where the fruits of yesterday were lovingly arranged; so
few that she had been able to give--so many that she had received.

There were the numerous pretty interchangeable things given her by her
many friends; "presents," suitable to any lady.  There were the few
perfectly selected ones given by the few who knew her best.  There was
the rather perplexing gift of Mrs. MacAvelly.  There was her brother's
stiff white envelope enclosing a check.  There were the loving gifts of
children and grand-children.

Finally there was Solomon's.

It was his custom to bestow upon her one solemn and expensive object, a
boon as it were, carefully selected, after much thought and balancing of
merits; but the consideration was spent on the nature of the gift---not
on the desires of the recipient.  There was the piano she could not
play, the statue she did not admire, the set of Dante she never read,
the heavy gold bracelet, the stiff diamond brooch--and all the others.
This time it was a set of sables, costing even more than she imagined.

Christmas after Christmas had these things come to her; and she stood
there now, thinking of that procession of unvalued valuables, with an
expression so mixed and changeful it resembled a kaleidoscope.  Love for
Solomon, pride in Solomon, respect for Solomon's judgment and power to
pay, gratitude for his unfailing kindness and generosity, impatience
with his always giving her this one big valuable permanent thing, when
he knew so well that she much preferred small renewable cheap ones; her
personal dislike of furs, the painful conviction that brown was not
becoming to her--all these and more filled the little woman with what
used to be called "conflicting emotions."

She smoothed out her brother's check, wishing as she always did that it
had come before Christmas, so that she might buy more presents for her
beloved people.  Solomon liked to spend money on her--in his own way;
but he did not like to have her spend money on him--or on anyone for
that matter.  She had asked her brother once, if he would mind sending
her his Christmas present beforehand.

"Not on your life, Polly!" he said.  "You'd never see a cent of it!  You
can't buy 'em many things right on top of Christmas, and it'll be gone
long before the next one."

She put the check away and turned to examine her queerest gift.  Upon
which scrutiny presently entered the donor.

"I'm ever so much obliged, Benigna," said Mrs. Bankside.  "You know how
I love to do things.  It's a loom, isn't it?  Can you show me how it
works?"

"Of course I can, my dear; that's just what I ran in for--I was afraid
you wouldn't know.  But you are so clever with your hands that I'm sure
you'll enjoy it.  I do."

Whereat Mrs. MacAvelly taught Mrs. Bankside the time-honored art of
weaving.  And Mrs. Bankside enjoyed it more than any previous handicraft
she had essayed.

She did it well, beginning with rather coarse and simple weaves; and
gradually learning the finer grades of work.  Despising as she did the
more modern woolens, she bought real wool yarn of a lovely red--and made
some light warm flannelly stuff in which she proceeded to rapturously
enclose her little grandchildren.

Mr. Bankside warmly approved, murmuring affectionately, "'She seeketh
wool and flax--she worketh willingly with her hands.'"

He watched little Bob and Polly strenuously "helping" the furnace man to
clear the sidewalk, hopping about like red-birds in their new caps and
coats; and his face beamed with the appositeness of his quotation, as he
remarked, "She is not afraid of the snow for her household, for all her
household are clothed with scarlet!" and he proffered an extra, wholly
spontaneous kiss, which pleased her mightily.

"You dear man!" she said with a hug; "I believe you'd rather find a
proverb to fit than a gold mine!"

To which he triumphantly responded: "'Wisdom is better than rubies; and
all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it.'"

She laughed sweetly at him.  "And do you think wisdom stopped with that
string of proverbs?"

"You can't get much beyond it," he answered calmly.  "If we lived up to
all there is in that list we shouldn't be far out, my dear!"

Whereat she laughed again smoothed his gray mane, and kissed him in the
back of his neck.  "You _dear_ thing!" said Mrs. Bankside.

She kept herself busy with the new plaything as he called it.  Hands
that had been rather empty were now smoothly full.  Her health was
better, and any hint of occasional querulousness disappeared entirely;
so that her husband was moved to fresh admiration of her sunny temper,
and quoted for the hundredth time, "'She openeth her mouth with wisdom,
and in her tongue is the law of kindness.'"

Mrs. MacAvelly taught her to make towels.  But Mrs. Bankside's skill
outstripped hers; she showed inventive genius and designed patterns of
her own.  The fineness and quality of the work increased; and she
joyfully replenished her linen chest with her own handiwork.

"I tell you, my dear," said Mrs. MacAvelly, "if you'd be willing to sell
them you could get almost any price for those towels.  With the initials
woven in.  I know I could get you orders--through the Woman's Exchange,
you know!"

Mrs. Bankside was delighted.  "What fun!" she said.  "And I needn't
appear at all?"

"No, you needn't appear at all--do let me try."

So Mrs. Bankside made towels of price, soft, fine, and splendid, till
she was weary of them; and in the opulence of constructive genius fell
to devising woven belts of elaborate design.

These were admired excessively.  All her women friends wanted one, or
more; the Exchange got hold of it, there was a distinct demand; and
finally Mrs. MacAvelly came in one day with a very important air and a
special order.

"I don't know what you'll think, my dear," she said, "but I happen to
know the Percy's very well--the big store people, you know; and Mr.
Percy was talking about those belts of yours to me;--of course he didn't
know they are yours; but he said (the Exchange people told him I knew,
you see) he said, 'If you can place an order with that woman, I can take
all she'll make and pay her full price for them.  Is she poor?' he
asked.  'Is she dependent on her work?'  And I told him, 'Not
altogether.'  And I think he thinks it an interesting case!  Anyhow,
there's the order.  Will you do it?'

Mrs. Bankside was much excited.  She wanted to very much, but dreaded
offending her husband.  So far she had not told him of her quiet trade
in towels; but hid and saved this precious money--the first she had ever
earned.

The two friends discussed the pros and cons at considerable length; and
finally with some perturbation, she decided to accept the order.

"You'll never tell, Benigna!" she urged.  "Solomon would never forgive
me, I'm afraid."

"Why of course I won't--you needn't have a moment's fear of it.  You
give them to me--I'll stop with the carriage you see; and I take them to
the Exchange--and he gets them from there."

"It seems like smuggling!" said Mrs. Bankside delightedly.  "I always
did love to smuggle!"

"They say women have no conscience about laws, don't they?" Mrs.
MacAvelly suggested.

"Why should we?" answered her friend.  "We don't make 'em--nor God--nor
nature.  Why on earth should we respect a set of silly rules made by
some men one day and changed by some more the next?"

"Bless us, Polly!  Do you talk to Mr. Bankside like that?"

"Indeed I don't!" answered her hostess, holding out a particularly
beautiful star-patterned belt to show to advantage.  "There are lots of
things I don't say to Mr. Bankside--'A man of understanding holdeth his
peace' you know--or a woman."

She was a pretty creature, her hair like that of a powdered marchioness,
her rosy checks and firm slight figure suggesting a charmer in Dresden
china.

Mrs. MacAvelly regarded her admiringly.  "'Where there is no wood the
fire goeth out; so where there is no tale bearer the strife ceaseth,'"
she proudly offered, "I can quote that much myself."

But Mrs. Bankside had many misgivings as she pursued her audacious way;
the busy hours flying away from her, and the always astonishing checks
flying toward her in gratifying accumulation.  She came down to her
well-planned dinners gracious and sweet; always effectively dressed;
spent the cosy quiet evenings with her husband, or went out with him,
with a manner of such increased tenderness and charm that his heart
warmed anew to the wife of his youth; and he even relented a little
toward her miscellaneous ancestors.

As the days shortened and darkened she sparkled more and more; with
little snatches of song now and then; gay ineffectual strumming on the
big piano; sudden affectionate darts at him, with quaintly distributed
caresses.

"Molly!" said he, "I don't believe you're a day over twenty!  What makes
you act so?"

"Don't you like it, So?" she asked him.  That was the nearest she ever
would approximate to his name.

He did like it, naturally, and even gave her an extra ten dollars to buy
Christmas presents with; while he meditated giving her an electric
runabout;--to her!--who was afraid of a wheelbarrow!

When the day arrived and the family were gathered together, Mrs.
Bankside, wearing the diamond brooch, the gold bracelet, the point lace
handkerchief--everything she could carry of his accumulated
generosity--and such an air of triumphant mystery that the tree itself
was dim beside her; handed out to her astonished relatives such an
assortment of desirable articles that they found no words to express
their gratitude.

"Why, _Mother!"_ said Jessie, whose husband was a minister and salaried
as such, "Why, _Mother_--how did you know we wanted just that kind of a
rug!--and a sewing-machine _too!_  And this lovely suit--and--and--why
_Mother!"_

But her son-in-law took her aside and kissed her solemnly.  He had
wanted that particular set of sociological books for years--and never
hoped to get them; or that bunch of magazines either.

Nellie had "married rich;" she was less ostentatiously favored; but she
had shown her thankfulness a week ago--when her mother had handed her a
check.

"Sh, sh! my dear!" her mother had said, "Not one word.  I know!  What
pleasant weather we're having."

This son-in-law was agreeably surprised, too; and the other relatives,
married and single; while the children rioted among their tools and
toys, taking this Christmas like any other, as a season of unmitigated
joy.

Mr. Solomon Bankside looked on with growing amazement, making
computations in his practiced mind; saying nothing whatever.  Should he
criticize his wife before others?

But when his turn came--when gifts upon gifts were offered to him--sets
of silken handkerchiefs (he couldn't bear the touch of a silk
handkerchief!), a cabinet of cards and chips and counters of all sorts
(he never played cards), an inlaid chess-table and ivory men (the game
was unknown to him), a gorgeous scarf-pin (he abominated jewelery), a
five pound box of candy (he never ate it), his feelings so mounted
within him, that since he would not express, and could not repress them,
he summarily went up stairs to his room.

She found him there later, coming in blushing, smiling, crying a little
too--like a naughty but charming child.

He swallowed hard as he looked at her; and his voice was a little
strained.

"I can take a joke as well as any man, Molly.  I guess we're square on
that.  But--my dear!--where did you get it?"

"Earned it," said she, looking down, and fingering her lace
handkerchief.

"Earned it!  My wife, earning money!  How--if I may ask?"

"By my weaving, dear--the towels and the belts--I sold 'em.  Don't be
angry--nobody knows--my name didn't appear at all!  Please don't be
angry!--It isn't wicked, and it was such fun!"

"No--it's not wicked, I suppose," said he rather grimly.  "But it is
certainly a most mortifying and painful thing to me--most
unprecedented."

"Not so unprecedented, Dear," she urged, "Even the woman you think most
of did it!  Don't you remember 'She maketh fine linen and selleth
it--and delivereth girdles unto the merchants!'"

Mr. Bankside came down handsomely.

He got used to it after a while, and then he became proud of it.  If a
friend ventured to suggest a criticism, or to sympathize, he would
calmly respond, "'The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so
that he shall have no need of spoil.  Give her of the fruit of her
hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates.'"



AN OBVIOUS BLESSING


We are told, on the authority of the Greatest Sociologist, that it is
more blessed to give than to receive.

So patent and commonplace a fact as this ought to meet with general
acceptance.  Anyone can see that it is so, by a little study or by less
practice.  To give implies having.  You must be in possession before you
can give.  To receive implies wanting, at its best--to receive what you
do not want is distinctly unpleasant.  To have is more blessed than to
want.  Of course it is.

To give gratifies several natural feelings; the mother-instinct of
supplying needs, the pride of superior power and the generosity; and, if
you are a sordid soul, the desire to "lay up treasure in heaven" or, as
the Buddhists frankly put it--to "acquire merit."

None of these pleasures pertain to receiving.  There is a certain
humiliation about it always, a childish sense of dependence and
inferiority.  Only children can continuously receive without
degradation; and as soon as they begin to realize life at all they
delight to give as we all do.  "Let me help!" says the child, and plans
birthday presents for mama as eagerly as he hopes for them himself.

The instinct of giving is the pressure of the surplus; the natural outgo
of humanity, its fruit.  We are not mere receptacles, we are productive
engines, of immense capacity; and, having produced, we must distribute
the product.  To give, naturally, is to shed, to bear fruit; a healthy
and pleasurable process.

What has confused us so long on this subject?  Why have we been so blind
to this glaring truth that we have stultified our giving instinct and
made of it an abnormal process called "Charity," or a much restricted
pleasure only used in families or at Christmas time?

Two things have combined to prevent our easy acceptance of this visible
truth; one the time-honored custom of "sacrifice," and the other our
ignorance of social economics.

Sacrificing is not giving.  That black remnant of lowest savagery dates
back to the time when a pursuing beast was placated by the surrender of
something, or somebody; and a conqueror bought off by tribute.  The
medicine man made play with this race habit, and gross idols were
soothed and placated by sacrifices--on which the medicine man lived.
Always the best and finest were taken naturally by the hungry beast; as
naturally by the greedy conqueror; and not unnaturally by the dependent
priesthood.  Sacrificing is a forced surrender with personal hope as the
reason.  It is not giving.

Our economic ignorance and confusion is partly based on this same old
period of cruelty and darkness.  Labor was extorted as the price of
life; and the fruits of labor taken by force through warring centuries.
A guarded and grudging system of exchange gradually developed; the
robbing instinct slowly simmering down to legally limited extortion; but
each party surrendering his goods reluctantly, and only with the purpose
of gaining more than he lost.  Here also is the basic spirit of
sacrifice--to get something now or in the far future--always the trading
spirit at the bottom.  Selling is not giving.

The real basis of giving is motherhood; and that is merely the orderly
expression of life's progressive force.  Living forms must
increase--spread--grow--improve.  The biological channel for this force
is through mother-love; and, later, father-love.  The sociological
channel is in the pouring flood of productive activity, which fills the
world with human fruit--the million things we make and do.

This ceaseless output is not dragged out of us as a sacrifice, it is not
produced by want and hunger and the grasping spirit of exchange.  It is
the natural expression of social energy; blossoming in every form of
art, stirring the brain to ceaseless action, filling the world with the
rich fruit of human handiwork.

Having produced, we must distribute--we must discharge, we must _give._

To be human is to be a producer, to make, to do, to have some output
either in goods or services whereby the sum of welfare is increased.  To
have this productive energy and to use it normally, is to give.  Not to
have it, not to use it, is not to be human--to be a minus quantity; to
live parasitically on the labor of others--to receive.

It is more blessed to give than to receive.



STEPS


I was a slave, because I could not see
That work for one another is our law;
I hated law.  I work?  I would be free!
Therefore the heavy law laid hands on me
And I was forced to work in slavery--
 Until I saw.

I was a hireling, for I could not see
That work was natural as the breath I drew,
Natural?  I would not work without the fee!
So nature laid her heavy hands on me
And I was forced by fear of poverty--
 Until I knew.

Now I am free.  Life is new-seen, recast
To work is to enjoy, to love, to live!
The shame and pain of slavery are past,
Dishonor and extortion follow fast,
I am not owned, nor hired, full-born at last,
 My power I give.



WHY WE HONESTLY FEAR SOCIALISM


A peaceable elderly Englishman of a bald and scholarly aspect, inquired,
following a lecture on Socialism, "Will the speaker state in one
sentence what Socialism is?"  He wore an air of mild gentlemanly
triumph; apparently imagining that he had demanded the impossible.

But the speaker, seeming unconscious of any difficulty replied,
"Certainly; Socialism is the public ownership of all natural monopolies
and the means of production."

This simple definition is advanced to start with, that we may know what
we are talking about.  This is the essence of Socialism--public
ownership of public things; the real point at issue being "What things
are public?"

The vast majority of us do not yet understand this easy and clear
definition; and no wonder; for the Socialists themselves are for the
most part so lost in grief over the sufferings of the poor and in rage
over the misbehavior of the rich, that they find it hard to speak
gently.  Most of us, having but vague ideas of Socialism, fear it on
several grounds, some of them easily removable as mere mistakes; others
requiring careful treatment.

The mistakes are these:

ERROR I.  "Socialism will abolish private property."

ANSWER.  Quite wrong.  It will do no such thing.  You are thinking of
Communism.  The early Communists, like the early Christians, held all
things in common, but Socialism urges no such doctrine.  It does,
however, restrict our definition of what is private property; just as
was done when human slavery was abolished.

Slavery was once universal, and still exists In many countries.  It was
held legal and honest to personally own human beings--they were
property.  In our great civil contest of half a century since, the
north--from a southern point of view--confiscated property when the
slaves were freed.  But from the northern point of view the slave was
not property at all.  This is a very vivid instance of change of opinion
on property rights.  Such "rights" are wholly of our own making; and
change from age to age.

Parents once held property rights in children and men "owned" their
wives; they could be punished, imprisoned, sold--even killed, at will of
the owner.  The larger public sense has long since said, "Women and
children are not private property."

Laws about property are not God's laws; not Nature's laws; they are just
rules and regulations people make from time to time according to their
standards of justice.  There is nothing novel in proposing to change
them--they have often been changed.  There is nothing immoral or
dangerous in changing them; it is constantly done in all legislatures,
in varying degree, as when private estates are "condemned" for public
use.

Socialism advances the idea that private property rights do not
legitimately apply to public necessities like coal, water, oil and land.
 As a matter of fact we do not really "own" land now--we only rent it of
the government, calling our rent "taxes."  If we do not pay our rent the
government gets it again, like any other owner.

The utmost restriction of private property under Socialism leaves us
still every article of personal use and pleasure.  One may still "own"
land by paying the government for it as now; with such taxation,
however, as would make it very expensive to own too much!  One may own
one's house and all that is in it; one's clothes and tools and
decorations; one's horses, carriages and automobiles; one's flying
machines--presently.  All "personal property" remains in our personal
hands.

But no man or group of men could own the country's coal and decide how
much the public can have, and what we must pay for it.  Private holding
of public property would be abolished.

ERROR 2.  Socialism would reduce us all to a dead level.

ANSWER.  Quite wrong.  Eating at the same table in the same family does
not reduce brothers and sisters to the same level; some remain far
smarter and stronger than others.  By a wiser system of education we may
greatly increase the difference in people--Socialism would not hinder
it.  A higher average level of income--which is what Socialism ensures,
will give people a chance to differ more than they do now.  Our
machine-like educational system, long hours of labor, specialized
monotony of mill work, and "the iron law of wages" do tend to reduce us
to a dead level.  Socialism does not.

ERROR 3.  Socialists are atheists.

ANSWER.  How anyone can say this when they know of the immense
organization of Christian Socialists is amazing; but then it is always
amazing to see how queerly people think.  Some Socialists are atheists.
So are some monarchists and some republicans.  A Socialist may be an
atheist, or a homeopathist, or a Holy Roller--it has nothing to do with
Socialism.

ERROR 4.  Socialists are immoral.

ANSWER.  Again--some are; but so are some other people.  The immorality
of which we hear most in the papers is by no means that of Socialists;
but of most prominent capitalists.

ERROR 5.  Socialism is unnatural--you must "alter human nature" before
it would be possible.

ANSWER.  This is a very common position, based like most of the
foregoing, on lack of understanding.  It assumes that Socialism requires
a state of sublime unselfishness and mutual deference, in which all men
are willing to work for nothing.  But why assume this?  It is no product
of Socialism.  Our socialistic public parks and libraries do not
presuppose that people shall be angels.  They may tend to make them
such, but the progress is not rapid enough to alarm us.  In regard to
this particular error we should learn that Socialism is not a totally
new and different scheme of things; but a gradual and legitimate
extension of previous tendencies.  Human nature is socialistic--and is
progressively extending socialism.

ERROR 5.  Socialism will pay every one alike and so destroy the
incentive of personal ambition.

ANSWER.  This idea of equal payment is not Socialism.  Some socialists
hold it--more do not.  The essential idea of public ownership and
management of public property does not include this notion of equal
payment.

ERROR 7.  Socialism will destroy competition.  Competition, most of us
believe, "is the life of trade;" in other words we are supposed to work,
not merely to get something for ourselves, but to get ahead of other
people.

ANSWER.  Admitting that we do; admitting that such an incentive is
useful; the simple answer is that Socialism would not destroy
competition.

Even in financial reward some would still be paid more than others; and
far beyond this lies the larger competition for fame and glory and
public esteem, which has always moved men more strongly than the love of
money.  This remains always open.

MAIN ERROR.  Passing over all these minor objections, due to mere
ignorance and easily understood, we come to the one major objection,
honestly held by intelligent people; that under Socialism people would
not work.  This is why so many good and intelligent persons do honestly
distrust and fear it.  Their position is this:

PREMISE A.  Work must be done to keep civilization going.  Work is done
by individuals in order to get something they want.  Work would not be
done by anyone without the immediate stimulus of personal desire.

PREMISE B.  Socialism, in some mysterious way will supply the needs of
the people gratuitously.

CONCLUSION.  The people being so provided for would not work.  Then
follows the downfall of civilization.

This is the honest opinion of the individualist, the older economist,
and is entitled to respect and fair answer.

If the premises were correct the terrible conclusion would be correct,
and the Socialist position visionary and dangerous.  Of course people
are afraid of anything that controverts the laws of economics and human
nature--they ought to be.  But are those premises correct?

To remove the easiest one first let us observe the absurdity of the
idea, that Socialism will provide for people without their working.
Provide them with what, pray?  All wealth is produced by human
labor--there is no socialist patent for drawing bread and circuses from
the sky.  People must always and forever work for what they have, and
have in proportion to the quantity and quality of their work.

So thoroughly is this true that the socialist grieves to see so many
people living to-day without working; receiving wealth out of all
proportion to their usefulness.  If this was common to all of us it
would mean the downfall of civilization.  As we live now a great many
people work too hard, too long, under unsanitary conditions, a sort of
living sacrifice to the rest of the world; and a few people do visibly
and ostentatiously consume and waste the very things the workers so
painfully lack.

Socialism claims to ensure decent payment for all labor, and see that we
all receive it--all of us; not the same for everyone; but enough for
everyone.  Further, Socialism claims that by such procedure the quantity
and quality of human work would be improved; that more wealth would be
produced--far more.

By thus removing Premise B, Premise A becomes a _non sequitur._  We
will, however, remove this also, to make a clean sweep.

It is not true that work is only done in order to get something.  Some
work is done that way by some people.  But it is not the only kind of
work--and they are not the only kind of people.  Even the savage, having
exerted himself to get his dinner, and having had his dinner, and being,
in a small way, human, begins to exert himself further to decorate his
tools and weapons, his canoes and totem poles--because he likes to.
Nobody pays him for it.  He enjoys the act of doing it, and the results.

The reason any ordinary man prefers any one kind of work to another is
that he experiences a certain pleasure in the performance of certain
actions--more than others.  He is beginning to specialize.

The reason the highly specialized social servant, artist, teacher,
preacher, scientific student, true physician, inventor, chooses his
work, follows it often under disadvantages; and in the case of the
enthusiast, even under conditions of danger, pain and death--is that he
likes that kind of work, enjoys doing it, indeed _has to do it_--is
uncomfortable if prevented.

This is a social instinct which our earlier economists have not
recognized.  It is proven an instinct by the fact that children have
it--all normal children.  They like any kind of ordinary work, want to
learn how, want to help, long before they attach any idea of gain to the
labor.

The little girl in the kitchen wants to make cookies--as well as eat
them; longs to print little figures around the pies, and then hold the
plate on poised spread fingers and trim off that long broken ribbon of
superfluous pastry--wants to do things, as well as to have things.  The
one instinct is as natural as the other.

The reasons so many of us to-day hate and despise work, avoid it, give
it up as soon as possible, are simple and clear.  First because of the
cruel difficulties with which we have loaded what should be a
pleasure--the monotony, the long hours, the disagreeable surroundings,
the danger and early death, and the grossly insufficient pay.  Any
normal boy enjoys working with carpenter's tools, or blacksmith's tools;
enjoys running a machine; but when such work is saddled with the above
conditions, he does not like it.  Of course.  It is not the work we are
averse to, it is what goes with it;--difficulties of our own making.

Further; besides the physical disadvantages, we have loaded this great
natural process of human labor with a mass of superstitions and
degrading lies.  The lazy old orientals called it a curse!  Work, a
curse!  Work; which is the essential process of human life; man's
natural function and means of growth!

We have despised it because women did it.  Glory to the women--without
them we should have had no industry.  We have despised it because slaves
did it.  Glory to the slaves!  They built the pyramids--not Cheops.
They built every one of the marvelous relics and ruins of the past--the
slaves built Athens!

We despise it now because the low and ignorant do it.  If there was ever
an instance of consummate folly, of churlish ingratitude, it is our
general attitude toward work and the workers.  Here are three millions
of laboring benefactors; feeding us; clothing us; building our houses;
spinning and weaving and sewing for us;--hewing wood and drawing
water;--keeping the world alive and moving; and we look down on the work
and the workers.  As we are not really brutes and fools, how is this
absurd position to be accounted for?

By that old fallacy of Premise A.  "They are only doing it for
themselves," we say.  "They are paid for what they do.  They wouldn't do
it if they weren't paid for it!"  That is the vital core of the real
opposition to Socialism, this erroneous economic idea about work.

If that can ever be changed, if we can look at work with new eyes, then
we can look at Socialism with new eyes too; and not be afraid.  Then
cautiously and rationally, we shall say:

"So this new system of yours proposes to increase human wealth, does it?
 To promote and develop all kinds of legitimate work and to distribute
the product so as to improve the people?  That sounds pretty good to me.
 But how do you know you can do it?  I'm from Missouri myself--you'll
have to show me."

And then perhaps our wiser Socialists will appeal to the people as a
whole, of every grade and class; and teach the natural orderly
development of this simple and practical system of economics; teach its
splendid benefits to all classes; and the methods of its legitimate and
gradual introduction; by careful massing of the facts; by visible proof
of things already accomplished.  They must show us that we are not
facing a great leap in the dark, but clear straight steps in the light,
in the orderly progress of social evolution.



CHILD LABOR


The children in the Poor House
 May die of many an ill,
But the Poor House does not profit
 By their labor in the mill!

The children in the Orphanage
 Wear raiment far from fine,
But no Orphanage is financed
 By child labor in a mine.

The Cruel Law may send them
 To Reform School's iron sway,
But it does not set small children
 To hard labor by the day.

Only the Loving Family,
 Which we so much admire,
Is willing to support itself
 On little children's hire.

Only the Human Father,
 A man, with power to think,
Will take from little children
 The price of food and drink.

Only the Human Mother--
 Degraded, helpless thing!
Will make her little children work
 And live on what they bring!

No fledgling feeds the father-bird!
 No chicken feeds the hen!
No kitten mouses for the cat--
 This glory is for men.

We are the Wisest, Strongest Race--
 Loud my our praise be sung!--
The only animal alive
 That lives upon its young!

We make the poverty that takes
 The lives of babies so.
We can awake! rebuild! remake!--
 And let our children grow!



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER II.

AN UNNATURAL DAUGHTER


The brooding bird fulfills her task,
 Or she-bear lean and brown;
All parent beasts see duty true,
All parent beasts their duty do,
We are the only kind that asks
 For duty upside down.


The stiff-rayed windmill stood like a tall mechanical flower, turning
slowly in the light afternoon wind; its faint regular metallic squeak
pricked the dry silence wearingly.  Rampant fuchsias, red-jewelled,
heavy, ran up its framework, with crowding heliotrope and nasturtiums.
Thick straggling roses hung over the kitchen windows, and a row of dusty
eucalyptus trees rustled their stiff leaves, and gave an ineffectual
shade to the house.

It was one of those small frame houses common to the northeastern
states, which must be dear to the hearts of their dwellers.  For no
other reason, surely, would the cold grey steep-roofed little boxes be
repeated so faithfully in the broad glow of a semi-tropical landscape.
There was an attempt at a "lawn," the pet ambition of the transplanted
easterner; and a further attempt at "flower-beds," which merely served
as a sort of springboard to their far-reaching products.

The parlor, behind the closed blinds, was as New England parlors are;
minus the hint of cosiness given by even a fireless stove; the little
bedrooms baked under the roof; only the kitchen spoke of human living,
and the living it portrayed was not, to say the least, joyous.  It was
clean, clean with a cleanness that spoke of conscientious labor and
unremitting care.  The zinc mat under the big cook-stove was scoured to
a dull glimmer, while that swart altar itself shone darkly from its
daily rubbing.

There was no dust nor smell of dust; no grease spots, no litter
anywhere.  But the place bore no atmosphere of contented pride, as does
a Dutch, German or French kitchen, it spoke of Labor, Economy and
Duty--under restriction.

In the dead quiet of the afternoon Diantha and her mother sat there
sewing.  The sun poured down through the dangling eucalyptus leaves.
The dry air, rich with flower odors, flowed softly in, pushing the white
sash curtains a steady inch or two.  Ee-errr!--Ee-errr!--came the faint
whine of the windmill.

To the older woman rocking in her small splint chair by the rose-draped
window, her thoughts dwelling on long dark green grass, the shade of
elms, and cows knee-deep in river-shallows; this was California--hot,
arid, tedious in endless sunlight--a place of exile.

To the younger, the long seam of the turned sheet pinned tightly to her
knee, her needle flying firmly and steadily, and her thoughts full of
pouring moonlight through acacia boughs and Ross's murmured words, it
was California--rich, warm, full of sweet bloom and fruit, of boundless
vitality, promise, and power--home!

Mrs. Bell drew a long weary sigh, and laid down her work for a moment.

"Why don't you stop it Mother dear?  There's surely no hurry about these
things."

"No--not particularly," her mother answered, "but there's plenty else to
do."  And she went on with the long neat hemming.  Diantha did the "over
and over seam" up the middle.

"What _do_ you do it for anyway, Mother--I always hated this job--and
you don't seem to like it."

"They wear almost twice as long, child, you know.  The middle gets worn
and the edges don't.  Now they're reversed.  As to liking it--"  She
gave a little smile, a smile that was too tired to be sarcastic, but
which certainly did not indicate pleasure.

"What kind of work do you like best--really?" her daughter inquired
suddenly, after a silent moment or two.

"Why--I don't know," said her mother.  "I never thought of it.  I never
tried any but teaching.  I didn't like that.  Neither did your Aunt
Esther, but she's still teaching."

"Didn't you like any of it?" pursued Diantha.

"I liked arithmetic best.  I always loved arithmetic, when I went to
school--used to stand highest in that."

"And what part of housework do you like best?" the girl persisted.

Mrs. Bell smiled again, wanly.  "Seems to me sometimes as if I couldn't
tell sometimes what part I like least!" she answered.  Then with sudden
heat--"O my Child!  Don't you marry till Ross can afford at least one
girl for you!"

Diantha put her small, strong hands behind her head and leaned back in
her chair.  "We'll have to wait some time for that I fancy," she said.
"But, Mother, there is one part you like--keeping accounts!  I never saw
anything like the way you manage the money, and I believe you've got
every bill since yon were married."

"Yes--I do love accounts," Mrs. Bell admitted.  "And I can keep run of
things.  I've often thought your Father'd have done better if he'd let
me run that end of his business."

Diantha gave a fierce little laugh.  She admired her father in some
ways, enjoyed him in some ways, loved him as a child does if not
ill-treated; but she loved her mother with a sort of passionate pity
mixed with pride; feeling always nobler power in her than had ever had a
fair chance to grow.  It seemed to her an interminable dull tragedy;
this graceful, eager, black-eyed woman, spending what to the girl was
literally a lifetime, in the conscientious performance of duties she did
not love.

She knew her mother's idea of duty, knew the clear head, the steady
will, the active intelligence holding her relentlessly to the task; the
chafe and fret of seeing her husband constantly attempting against her
judgment, and failing for lack of the help he scorned.  Young as she
was, she realized that the nervous breakdown of these later years was
wholly due to that common misery of "the square man in the round hole."

She folded her finished sheet in accurate lines and laid it away--taking
her mother's also.  "Now you sit still for once, Mother dear, read or
lie down.  Don't you stir till supper's ready."

And from pantry to table she stepped, swiftly and lightly, setting out
what was needed, greased her pans and set them before her, and proceeded
to make biscuit.

Her mother watched her admiringly.  "How easy you do it!" she said.  "I
never could make bread without getting flour all over me.  You don't
spill a speck!"

Diantha smiled.  "I ought to do it easily by this time.  Father's got to
have hot bread for supper--or thinks he has!--and I've made 'em--every
night when I was at home for this ten years back!"

"I guess you have," said Mrs. Bell proudly.  "You were only eleven when
you made your first batch.  I can remember just as well!  I had one of
my bad headaches that night--and it did seem as if I couldn't sit up!
But your Father's got to have his biscuit whether or no.  And you said,
'Now Mother you lie right still on that sofa and let me do it!  I can!'
And you could!--you did!  They were bettern' mine that first time--and
your Father praised 'em--and you've been at it ever since."

"Yes," said Diantha, with a deeper note of feeling than her mother
caught, "I've been at it ever since!"

"Except when you were teaching school," pursued her mother.

"Except when I taught school at Medville," Diantha corrected.  "When I
taught here I made 'em just the same."

"So you did," agreed her mother.  "So you did!  No matter how tired you
were--you wouldn't admit it.  You always were the best child!"

"If I was tired it was not of making biscuits anyhow.  I was tired
enough of teaching school though.  I've got something to tell you,
presently, Mother."

She covered the biscuits with a light cloth and set them on the shelf
over the stove; then poked among the greasewood roots to find what she
wanted and started a fire.  "Why _don't_ you get an oil stove?  Or a
gasoline?  It would be a lot easier."

"Yes," her mother agreed.  "I've wanted one for twenty years; but you
know your Father won't have one in the house.  He says they're
dangerous.  What are you going to tell me, dear?  I do hope you and Ross
haven't quarrelled."

"No indeed we haven't, Mother.  Ross is splendid.  Only--"

"Only what, Dinah?"

"Only he's so tied up!" said the girl, brushing every chip from the
hearth.  "He's perfectly helpless there, with that mother of his--and
those four sisters."

"Ross is a good son," said Mrs. Bell, "and a good brother.  I never saw
a better.  He's certainly doing his duty.  Now if his father'd lived you
two could have got married by this time maybe, though you're too young
yet."

Diantha washed and put away the dishes she had used, saw that the pantry
was in its usual delicate order, and proceeded to set the table, with
light steps and no clatter of dishes.

"I'm twenty-one," she said.

"Yes, you're twenty-one," her mother allowed.  "It don't seem possible,
but you are.  My first baby!" she looked at her proudly

"If Ross has to wait for all those girls to marry--and to pay his
father's debts--I'll be old enough," said Diantha grimly.

Her mother watched her quick assured movements with admiration, and
listened with keen sympathy.  "I know it's hard, dear child.  You've
only been engaged six months--and it looks as if it might be some years
before Ross'll be able to marry.  He's got an awful load for a boy to
carry alone."

"I should say he had!" Diantha burst forth.  "Five helpless women!--or
three women, and two girls.  Though Cora's as old as I was when I began
to teach.  And not one of 'em will lift a finger to earn her own
living."

"They weren't brought up that way," said Mrs. Bell.  "Their mother don't
approve of it.  She thinks the home is the place for a woman--and so
does Ross--and so do I," she added rather faintly.

Diantha put her pan of white puff-balls into the oven, sliced a quantity
of smoked beef in thin shavings, and made white sauce for it, talking
the while as if these acts were automatic.  "I don't agree with Mrs.
Warden on that point, nor with Ross, nor with you, Mother," she said,
"What I've got to tell you is this--I'm going away from home.  To work."

Mrs. Bell stopped rocking, stopped fanning, and regarded her daughter
with wide frightened eyes.

"Why Diantha!" she said.  "Why Diantha!  You wouldn't go and leave your
Mother!"

Diantha drew a deep breath and stood for a moment looking at the feeble
little woman in the chair.  Then she went to her, knelt down and hugged
her close--close.

"It's not because I don't love you, Mother.  It's because I do.  And
it's not because I don't love Ross either:--it's because I _do._  I want
to take care of you, Mother, and make life easier for you as long as you
live.  I want to help him--to help carry that awful load--and I'm
going--to--do--it!"

She stood up hastily, for a step sounded on the back porch.  It was only
her sister, who hurried in, put a dish on the table, kissed her mother
and took another rocking-chair.

"I just ran in," said she, "to bring those berries.  Aren't they
beauties?  The baby's asleep.  Gerald hasn't got in yet.  Supper's all
ready, and I can see him coming time enough to run back.  Why, Mother!
What's the matter?  You're crying!"

"Am I?" asked Mrs. Bell weakly; wiping her eyes in a dazed way.

"What are you doing to Mother, Diantha?" demanded young Mrs. Peters.
"Bless me! I thought you and she never had any differences! I was always
the black sheep, when I was at home.  Maybe that's why I left so early!"

She looked very pretty and complacent, this young matron and mother of
nineteen; and patted the older woman's hand affectionately, demanding,
"Come--what's the trouble?"

"You might as well know now as later," said her sister.  "I have decided
to leave home, that's all."

"To leave home!"  Mrs. Peters sat up straight and stared at her.  "To
leave home!--And Mother!"

"Well?" said Diantha, while the tears rose and ran over from her
mother's eyes.  "Well, why not?  You left home--and Mother--before you
were eighteen."

"That's different!" said her sister sharply.  "I left to be married,--to
have a home of my own.  And besides I haven't gone far!  I can see
Mother every day."

"That's one reason I can go now better than later on," Diantha said.
"You are close by in case of any trouble."

"What on earth are you going for?  Ross isn't ready to marry yet, is
he?"

"No--nor likely to be for years.  That's another reason I'm going."

"But what _for,_ for goodness sake."

"To earn money--for one thing."

"Can't you earn money enough by teaching?" the Mother broke in eagerly.
"I know you haven't got the same place this fall--but you can get
another easy enough."

Diantha shook her head.  "No, Mother, I've had enough of that.  I've
taught for four years.  I don't like it, I don't do well, and it
exhausts me horribly.  And I should never get beyond a thousand or
fifteen hundred dollars a year if I taught for a lifetime."

"Well, I declare!" said her sister.  "What do you _expect_ to get?  I
should think fifteen hundred dollars a year was enough for any woman!"

Diantha peered into the oven and turned her biscuit pan around.

"And you're meaning to leave home just to make money, are you?"

"Why not?" said Diantha firmly.  "Henderson did--when he was eighteen.
None of you blamed him."

"I don't see what that's got to do with it," her mother ventured.
"Henderson's a boy, and boys have to go, of course.  A mother expects
that.  But a girl--Why, Diantha! How can I get along without you! With
my health!"

"I should think you'd be ashamed of yourself to think of such a thing!"
said young Mrs. Peters.

A slow step sounded outside, and an elderly man, tall, slouching,
carelessly dressed, entered, stumbling a little over the rag-mat at the
door.

"Father hasn't got used to that rug in fourteen years!" said his
youngest daughter laughingly.  "And Mother will straighten it out after
him!  I'm bringing Gerald up on better principles.  You should just see
him wait on me!"

"A man should be master in his own household," Mr. Bell proclaimed,
raising a dripping face from the basin and looking around for the
towel--which his wife handed him.

"You won't have much household to be master of presently," said Mrs.
Peters provokingly.  "Half of it's going to leave."

Mr. Bell came out of his towel and looked from one to the other for some
explanation of this attempted joke, "What nonsense are you talking?" he
demanded.

"I think it's nonsense myself," said the pretty young woman--her hand on
the doorknob.  "But you'd better enjoy those biscuits of Di's while you
can--you won't get many more!  There's Gerald--good night!"  And off she
ran.

Diantha set the plateful on the table, puffy, brown, and crisply
crusted.  "Supper's ready," she said.  "Do sit down, Mother," and she
held the chair for her.  "Minnie's quite right, Father, though I meant
not to tell you till you'd had supper.  I am going away to work."

Mr. Bell regarded his daughter with a stern, slow stare; not so much
surprised as annoyed by an untimely jesting.  He ate a hot biscuit in
two un-Fletcherized mouthfuls, and put more sugar in his large cup of
tea.  "You've got your Mother all worked up with your nonsense," said
he.  "What are you talking about anyway?"

Diantha met his eyes unflinchingly.  He was a tall old man, still
handsome and impressive in appearance, had been the head of his own
household beyond question, ever since he was left the only son of an
idolizing mother.  But he had never succeeded in being the head of
anything else.  Repeated failures in the old New England home had
resulted in his ruthlessly selling all the property there; and bringing
his delicate wife and three young children to California.  Vain were her
protests and objections.  It would do her good--best place in the world
for children--good for nervous complaints too.  A wife's duty was to
follow her husband, of course.  She had followed, willy nilly; and it
was good for the children--there was no doubt of that.

Mr. Bell had profited little by his venture.  They had the ranch, the
flowers and fruit and ample living of that rich soil; but he had failed
in oranges, failed in raisins, failed in prunes, and was now failing in
wealth-promising hens.

But Mrs. Bell, though an ineffectual housekeeper, did not fail in the
children.  They had grown up big and vigorous, sturdy, handsome
creatures, especially the two younger ones.  Diantha was good-looking
enough.  Roscoe Warden thought her divinely beautiful.  But her young
strength had been heavily taxed from childhood in that complex process
known as "helping mother."  As a little child she had been of constant
service in caring for the babies; and early developed such competence in
the various arts of house work as filled her mother with fond pride, and
even wrung from her father some grudging recognition.  That he did not
value it more was because he expected such competence in women, all
women; it was their natural field of ability, their duty as wives and
mothers.  Also as daughters.  If they failed in it that was by illness
or perversity.  If they succeeded--that was a matter of course.

He ate another of Diantha's excellent biscuits, his greyish-red whiskers
slowly wagging; and continued to eye her disapprovingly.  She said
nothing, but tried to eat; and tried still harder to make her heart go
quietly, her cheeks keep cool, and her eyes dry.  Mrs. Bell also strove
to keep a cheerful countenance; urged food upon her family; even tried
to open some topic of conversation; but her gentle words trailed off
into unnoticed silence.

Mr. Bell ate until he was satisfied and betook himself to a comfortable
chair by the lamp, where he unfolded the smart local paper and lit his
pipe.  "When you've got through with the dishes, Diantha," he said
coldly, "I'll hear about this proposition of yours."

Diantha cleared the table, lowered the leaves, set it back against the
wall, spreading the turkey-red cloth upon it.  She washed the
dishes,--her kettle long since boiling, scalded them, wiped them, set
them in their places; washed out the towels, wiped the pan and hung it
up, swiftly, accurately, and with a quietness that would have seemed
incredible to any mistress of heavy-footed servants.  Then with
heightened color and firm-set mouth, she took her place by the lamplit
table and sat still.

Her mother was patiently darning large socks with many holes--a kind of
work she specially disliked.  "You'll have to get some new socks,
Father," she ventured, "these are pretty well gone."

"O they'll do a good while yet," he replied, not looking at them.  "I
like your embroidery, my dear."

That pleased her.  She did not like to embroider, but she did like to be
praised.

Diantha took some socks and set to work, red-checked and excited, but
silent yet.  Her mother's needle trembled irregularly under and over,
and a tear or two slid down her cheeks.

Finally Mr. Bell laid down his finished paper and his emptied pipe and
said, "Now then.  Out with it."

This was not a felicitious opening.  It is really astonishing how little
diplomacy parents exhibit, how difficult they make it for the young to
introduce a proposition.  There was nothing for it but a bald statement,
so Diantha made it baldly.

"I have decided to leave home and go to work," she said.

"Don't you have work enough to do at home?" he inquired, with the same
air of quizzical superiority which had always annoyed her so intensely,
even as a little child.

She would cut short this form of discussion: "I am going away to earn my
living.  I have given up school-teaching--I don't like it, and, there
isn't money enough in it.  I have plans--which will speak for themselves
later."

"So," said Mr. Bell, "Plans all made, eh?  I suppose you've considered
your Mother in these plans?"

"I have," said his daughter.  "It is largely on her account that I'm
going."

"You think it'll be good for your Mother's health to lose your
assistance, do you?"

"I know she'll miss me; but I haven't left the work on her shoulders.  I
am going to pay for a girl--to do the work I've done.  It won't cost you
any more, Father; and you'll save some--for she'll do the washing too.
You didn't object to Henderson's going--at eighteen.  You didn't object
to Minnie's going--at seventeen.  Why should you object to my going--at
twenty-one."

"I haven't objected--so far," replied her father.  "Have your plans also
allowed for the affection and duty you owe your parents?"

"I have done my duty--as well as I know how," she answered.  "Now I am
twenty-one, and self-supporting--and have a right to go."

"O yes.  You have a right--a legal right--if that's what you base your
idea of a child's duty on!  And while you're talking of rights--how
about a parent's rights?  How about common gratitude!  How about what
you owe to me--for all the care and pains and cost it's been to bring
you up.  A child's a rather expensive investment these days."

Diantha flushed.  she had expected this, and yet it struck her like a
blow.  It was not the first time she had heard it--this claim of filial
obligation.

"I have considered that position, Father.  I know you feel that
way--you've often made me feel it.  So I've been at some pains to work
it out--on a money basis.  Here is an account--as full as I could make
it."  She handed him a paper covered with neat figures.  The totals read
as follows:

Miss Diantha Bell,
To Mr. Henderson R. Bell, Dr.

To medical and dental expenses . . . $110.00
To school expenses . . . $76.00
To clothing, in full . . . $1,130.00
To board and lodging at $3.00 a week . . . $2,184.00
To incidentals . . . $100.00
 --------
 $3.600.00

He studied the various items carefully, stroking his beard, half in
anger, half in unavoidable amusement.  Perhaps there was a tender
feeling too, as he remembered that doctor's bill--the first he ever
paid, with the other, when she had scarlet fever; and saw the exact
price of the high chair which had served all three of the children, but
of which she magnanimously shouldered the whole expense.

The clothing total was so large that it made him whistle--he knew he had
never spent $1,130.00 on one girl's clothes.  But the items explained
it.

Materials, three years at an average of $10 a year . . . $30.00
Five years averaging $20 each year . . . $100.00
Five years averaging $30 each year . . . $50.00
Five years averaging $50 each year . . . $250.00
-------
$530.00

The rest was "Mother's labor, averaging twenty full days a year at $2 a
day, $40 a year.  For fifteen years, $600.00.  Mother's labor--on one
child's, clothes--footing up to $600.00.  It looked strange to see cash
value attached to that unfailing source of family comfort and advantage.

The school expenses puzzled him a bit, for she had only gone to public
schools; but she was counting books and slates and even pencils--it
brought up evenings long passed by, the sewing wife, the studying
children, the "Say, Father, I've got to have a new slate--mine's broke!"

"Broken, Dina," her Mother would gently correct, while he demanded, "How
did you break it?" and scolded her for her careless tomboy ways.
Slates--three, $1.50--they were all down.  And slates didn't cost so
much come to think of it, even the red-edged ones, wound with black,
that she always wanted.

Board and lodging was put low, at $3.00 per week, but the items had a
footnote as to house-rent in the country, and food raised on the farm.
Yes, he guessed that was a full rate for the plain food and bare little
bedroom they always had.

"It's what Aunt Esther paid the winter she was here," said Diantha.

Circuses--three . . . $1.50
Share in melodeon . . . $50.00

Yes, she was one of five to use and enjoy it.

Music lessons . . . $30.00

And quite a large margin left here, called miscellaneous, which he
smiled to observe made just an even figure, and suspected she had put in
for that purpose as well as from generosity.

"This board account looks kind of funny," he said--"only fourteen years
of it!"

"I didn't take table-board--nor a room--the first year--nor much the
second.  I've allowed $1.00 a week for that, and $2.00 for the
third--that takes out two, you see.  Then it's $156 a year till I was
fourteen and earned board and wages, two more years at $156--and I've
paid since I was seventeen, you know."

"Well--I guess you did--I guess you did."  He grinned genially.  "Yes,"
he continued slowly, "I guess that's a fair enough account.  'Cording to
this, you owe me $3,600.00, young woman!  I didn't think it cost that
much to raise a girl."

"I know it," said she.  "But here's the other side."

It was the other side.  He had never once thought of such a side to the
case.  This account was as clear and honest as the first and full of
exasperating detail.  She laid before him the second sheet of figures
and watched while he read, explaining hurriedly:

"It was a clear expense for ten years--not counting help with the
babies.  Then I began to do housework regularly--when I was ten or
eleven, two hours a day; three when I was twelve and thirteen--real work
you'd have had to pay for, and I've only put it at ten cents an hour.
When Mother was sick the year I was fourteen, and I did it all but the
washing--all a servant would have done for $3.00 a week.  Ever since
then I have done three hours a day outside of school, full grown work
now, at twenty cents an hour.  That's what we have to pay here, you
know."

Thus it mounted up:

Mr. Henderson R. Bell,
To Miss Diantha Bell, Dr.

For labor and services--

Two years, two hours a day at 10c. an hour . . . $146.00
Two years, three hours a day at 10c. an hour . . . $219.00
One year, full wages at $5.00 a week . . . $260.00
Six years and a half, three hours a day at 20c . . . $1423.50
--------
$2048.50

Mr. Bell meditated carefully on these figures.  To think of that child's
labor footing up to two thousand dollars and over!  It was lucky a man
had a wife and daughters to do this work, or he could never support a
family.

Then came her school-teaching years.  She had always been a fine scholar
and he had felt very proud of his girl when she got a good school
position in her eighteenth year.

California salaries were higher than eastern ones, and times had changed
too; the year he taught school he remembered the salary was only
$300.00--and he was a man.  This girl got $600, next year $700, $800,
$900; why it made $3,000 she had earned in four years.  Astonishing.
Out of this she had a balance in the bank of $550.00.  He was pleased to
see that she had been so saving.  And her clothing account--little
enough he admitted for four years and six months, $300.00.  All
incidentals for the whole time, $50.00--this with her balance made just
$900.  That left $2,100.00.

"Twenty-one hundred dollars unaccounted for, young lady!--besides this
nest egg in the bank--I'd no idea you were so wealthy.  What have you
done with all that?"

"Given it to you, Father," said she quietly, and handed him the third
sheet of figures.

Board and lodging at $4.00 a week for 4 1/2 years made $936.00, that he
could realize; but "cash advance" $1,164 more--he could not believe it.
That time her mother was so sick and Diantha had paid both the doctor
and the nurse--yes--he had been much cramped that year--and nurses come
high.  For Henderson, Jr.'s, expenses to San Francisco, and again for
Henderson when he was out of a job--Mr. Bell remembered the boy's
writing for the money, and his not having it, and Mrs. Bell saying she
could arrange with Diantha.

Arrange!  And that girl had kept this niggardly account of it!  For
Minnie's trip to the Yosemite--and what was this?--for his raisin
experiment--for the new horse they simply had to have for the drying
apparatus that year he lost so much money in apricots--and for the
spraying materials--yes, he could not deny the items, and they covered
that $1,164.00 exactly.

Then came the deadly balance, of the account between them:

Her labor . . . $2,047.00
Her board . . . $936.00
Her "cash advanced" . . . $1,164.00
---------
$4,147.00
His expense for her . . . $3,600
---------
Due her from him . . . $547.00

Diantha revolved her pencil between firm palms, and looked at him rather
quizzically; while her mother rocked and darned and wiped away an
occasional tear.  She almost wished she had not kept accounts so well.

Mr. Bell pushed the papers away and started to his feet.

"This is the most shameful piece of calculation I ever saw in my life,"
said he.  "I never heard of such a thing!  You go and count up in cold
dollars the work that every decent girl does for her family and is glad
to!  I wonder you haven't charged your mother for nursing her?"

"You notice I haven't," said Diantha coldly.

"And to think," said he, gripping the back of a chair and looking down
at her fiercely, "to think that a girl who can earn nine hundred dollars
a year teaching school, and stay at home and do her duty by her family
besides, should plan to desert her mother outright--now she's old and
sick!  Of course I can't stop you!  You're of age, and children nowadays
have no sense of natural obligation after they're grown up.  You can go,
of course, and disgrace the family as you propose--but you needn't
expect to have me consent to it or approve of it--or of you.  It's a
shameful thing--and you are an unnatural daughter--that's all I've got
to say!"

Mr. Bell took his hat and went out--a conclusive form of punctuation
much used by men in discussions of this sort.



THE POOR RELATION


A certain man had a Poor Relation, who was only kept in the family as a
Servant, who was certainly open to criticism, and who got it.

"He is so dirty!" said the Head of the Family, "That is why we make him
sleep over the stable."

"He is careless and clumsy--he soils, breaks and loses things--that is
why his furniture and clothing are so poor."

"He is a stupid fellow--not to be trusted with any important
business--that is why he does the scullery work!"

"He is a sickly wretch too--it costs us a deal of money to have him
cared for in the hospital and his defects attended to."

"Worst of all he has criminal tendencies--he is a disgrace and an
expense to the Family on this account alone."

"Why do you keep him at all?" I asked.

"We have to--he is after all a relation.  Besides--someone must do the
scullery work."

"What do you pay him?" I asked.

"We don't really pay him anything; we just keep him alive--and
clothed--so that he can do his work."

"Was he born defective?" I asked.

"No--I've heard my mother say he was as good a baby as I."

"And what relation did you say he was?"

"I rather hate to own it--but he's my brother!"



HIS CRUTCHES


Why should the Stronger Sex require,
 To hold him to his tasks,
Two medicines of varied fire?
 The Weaker Vessel asks.

Hobbling between the rosy cup
 And dry narcotic brown,--
One daily drug to stir him up
 And one to soothe him down.



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


II.

THE MAN-MADE FAMILY.


The family is older than humanity, and therefore cannot be called a
human institution.  A post office, now, is wholly human; no other
creature has a post office, but there are families in plenty among birds
and beasts; all kinds permanent and transient; monogamous, polygamous
and polyandrous.

We are now to consider the growth of the family in humanity; what is its
rational development in humanness; in mechanical, mental and social
lines; in the extension of love and service; and the effect upon it of
this strange new arrangement--a masculine proprietor.

Like all natural institutions the family has a purpose; and is to be
measured primarily as it serves that purpose; which is, the care and
nurture of the young.  To protect the helpless little ones, to feed and
shelter them, to ensure them the benefits of an ever longer period of
immaturity, and so to improve the race--this is the original purpose of
the family.

When a natural institution becomes human it enters the plane of
consciousness.  We think about it; and, in our strange new power of
voluntary action do things to it.  We have done strange things to the
family; or, more specifically, men have.

Balsac, at his bitterest, observed, "Women's virtue is man's best
invention." Balsac was wrong.  Virtue--the unswerving devotion to one
mate--is common among birds and some of the higher mammals.  If Balsac
meant celibacy when he said virtue, why that is one of man's
inventions--though hardly his best.

What man has done to the family, speaking broadly, is to change it from
an institution for the best service of the child to one modified to his
own service, the vehicle of his comfort, power and pride.

Among the heavy millions of the stirred East, a child--necessarily a
male child--is desired for the credit and glory of the father, and his
fathers; in place of seeing that all a parent is for is the best service
of the child.  Ancestor worship, that gross reversal of all natural law,
is of wholly androcentric origin.  It is strongest among old patriarchal
races; lingers on in feudal Europe; is to be traced even in America
today in a few sporadic efforts to magnify the deeds of our ancestors.

The best thing any of us can do for our ancestors is to be better than
they were; and we ought to give our minds to it.  When we use our past
merely as a guide-book, and concentrate our noble emotions on the
present and future, we shall improve more rapidly.

The peculiar changes brought about in family life by the predominance of
the male are easily traced.  In these studies we must keep clearly in
mind the basic masculine characteristics: desire, combat,
self-expression--all legitimate and right in proper use; only
mischievous when excessive or out of place.  Through them the male is
led to strenuous competition for the favor of the female; in the
overflowing ardours of song, as in nightingale and tomcat; in wasteful
splendor of personal decoration, from the pheasant's breast to an
embroidered waistcoat; and in direct struggle for the prize, from the
stag's locked horns to the clashing spears of the tournament.

It is earnestly hoped that no reader will take offence at the
necessarily frequent, reference to these essential features of maleness.
 In the many books about women it is, naturally, their femaleness that
has been studied and enlarged upon.  And though women, after thousands
of years of such discussion, have become a little restive under the
constant use of the word female: men, as rational beings, should not
object to an analogous study--at least not for some time--a few
centuries or so.

How, then, do we find these masculine tendencies, desire, combat and
self-expression, affect the home and family when given too much power?

First comes the effect in the preliminary work of selection.  One of the
most uplifting forces of nature is that of sex selection.  The males,
numerous, varied, pouring a flood of energy into wide modifications,
compete for the female, and she selects the victor, this securing to the
race the new improvements.

In forming the proprietary family there is no such competition, no such
selection.  The man, by violence or by purchase, does the choosing--he
selects the kind of woman that pleases him.  Nature did not intend him
to select; he is not good at it.  Neither was the female intended to
compete--she is not good at it.

If there is a race between males for a mate--the swiftest gets her
first; but if one male is chasing a number of females he gets the
slowest first.  The one method improves our speed: the other does not.
If males struggle and fight with one another for a mate, the strongest
secures her; if the male struggles and fights with the female--(a
peculiar and unnatural horror, known only among human beings) he most
readily secures the weakest.  The one method improves our strength--the
other does not.

When women became the property of men; sold and bartered; "given away"
by their paternal owner to their marital owner; they lost this
prerogative of the female, this primal duty of selection.  The males
were no longer improved by their natural competition for the female; and
the females were not improved; because the male did not select for
points of racial superiority, but for such qualities as pleased him.

There is a locality in northern Africa, where young girls are
deliberately fed with a certain oily seed, to make them fat,--that they
may be the more readily married,--as the men like fat wives.  Among
certain more savage African tribes the chief's wives are prepared for
him by being kept in small dark huts and fed on "mealies' and molasses;
precisely as a Strasbourg goose is fattened for the gourmand.  Now
fatness is not a desirable race characteristic; it does not add to the
woman's happiness or efficiency; or to the child's; it is merely an
accessory pleasant to the master; his attitude being much as the amorous
monad ecstatically puts it, in Sill's quaint poem, "Five Lives,"


"O the little female monad's lips!
O the little female monad's eyes!
O the little, little, female, female monad!"


This ultra littleness and ultra femaleness has been demanded and
produced by our Androcentric Culture.

Following this, and part of it, comes the effect on motherhood.  This
function was the original and legitimate base of family life; and its
ample sustaining power throughout the long early period of "the
mother-right;" or as we call it, the matriarchate; the father being her
assistant in the great work.  The patriarchate, with its proprietary
family, changed this altogether; the woman, as the property of the man
was considered first and foremost as a means of pleasure to him; and
while she was still valued as a mother, it was in a tributary capacity.
Her children were now his; his property, as she was; the whole enginery
of the family was turned from its true use to this new one, hitherto
unknown, the service of the adult male.

To this day we are living under the influence of the proprietary family.
 The duty of the wife is held to involve man-service as well as
child-service, and indeed far more; as the duty of the wife to the
husband quite transcends the duty of the mother to the child.

See for instance the English wife staying with her husband in India and
sending the children home to be brought up; because India is bad for
children.  See our common law that the man decides the place of
residence; if the wife refuses to go with him to howsoever unfit a place
for her and for the little ones, such refusal on her part constitutes
"desertion" and is ground for divorce.

See again the idea that the wife must remain with the husband though a
drunkard, or diseased; regardless of the sin against the child involved
in such a relation.  Public feeling on these matters is indeed changing;
but as a whole the ideals of the man-made family still obtain.

The effect of this on the woman has been inevitably to weaken and
overshadow her sense of the real purpose of the family; of the
relentless responsibilities of her duty as a mother.  She is first
taught duty to her parents, with heavy religious sanction; and then duty
to her husband, similarly buttressed; but her duty to her children has
been left to instinct.  She is not taught in girlhood as to her
preeminent power and duty as a mother; her young ideals are all of
devotion to the lover and husband: with only the vaguest sense of
results.

The young girl is reared in what we call "innocence;" poetically
described as "bloom;" and this condition is held one of her chief
"charms."  The requisite is wholly androcentric.  This "innocence" does
not enable her to choose a husband wisely; she does not even know the
dangers that possibly confront her.  We vaguely imagine that her father
or brother, who do know, will protect her.  Unfortunately the father and
brother, under our current "double standard" of morality do not judge
the applicants as she would if she knew the nature of their offenses.

Furthermore, if her heart is set on one of them, no amount of general
advice and opposition serves to prevent her marrying him.  "I love him!"
she says, sublimely.  "I do not care what he has done.  I will forgive
him.  I will save him!"

This state of mind serves to forward the interests of the lover, but is
of no advantage to the children.  We have magnified the duties of the
wife, and minified the duties of the mother; and this is inevitable in a
family relation every law and custom of which is arranged from the
masculine viewpoint.

From this same viewpoint, equally essential to the proprietary family,
comes the requirement that the woman shall serve the man.  Her service
is not that of the associate and equal, as when she joins him in his
business.  It is not that of a beneficial combination, as when she
practices another business and they share the profits; it is not even
that of the specialist, as the service of a tailor or barber; it is
personal service--the work of a servant.

In large generalization, the women of the world cook and wash, sweep and
dust, sew and mend, for the men.

We are so accustomed to this relation; have held it for so long to be
the "natural" relation, that it is difficult indeed to show that it is
distinctly unnatural and injurious.  The father expects to be served by
the daughter, a service quite different from what he expects of the son.
 This shows at once that such service is no integral part of motherhood,
or even of marriage; but is supposed to be the proper industrial
position of women, as such.

Why is this so?  Why, on the face of it, given a daughter and a son,
should a form of service be expected of the one, which would be
considered ignominious by the other?

The underlying reason is this.  Industry, at its base, is a feminine
function.  The surplus energy of the mother does not manifest itself in
noise, or combat, or display, but in productive industry.  Because of
her mother-power she became the first inventor and laborer; being in
truth the mother of all industry as well as all people.

Man's entrance upon industry is late and reluctant; as will be shown
later in treating his effect on economics.  In this field of family
life, his effect was as follows:

Establishing the proprietary family at an age when the industry was
primitive and domestic; and thereafter confining the woman solely to the
domestic area, he thereby confined her to primitive industry.  The
domestic industries, in the hands of women, constitute a survival of our
remotest past.  Such work was "woman's work" as was all the work then
known; such work is still considered woman's work because they have been
prevented from doing any other.

The term "domestic industry" does not define a certain kind of labor,
but a certain grade of labor.  Architecture was a domestic industry
once--when every savage mother set up her own tepee.  To be confined to
domestic industry is no proper distinction of womanhood; it is an
historic distinction, an economic distinction, it sets a date and limit
to woman's industrial progress.

In this respect the man-made family has resulted in arresting the
development of half the field.  We have a world wherein men,
industrially, live in the twentieth century; and women, industrially,
live in the first--and back of it.

To the same source we trace the social and educational limitations set
about women.  The dominant male, holding his women as property, and
fiercely jealous of them, considering them always as _his,_ not
belonging to themselves, their children, or the world; has hedged them
in with restrictions of a thousand sorts; physical, as in the crippled
Chinese lady or the imprisoned odalisque; moral, as in the oppressive
doctrines of submission taught by all our androcentric religions;
mental, as in the enforced ignorance from which women are now so swiftly
emerging.

This abnormal restriction of women has necessarily injured motherhood.
The man, free, growing in the world's growth, has mounted with the
centuries, filling an ever wider range of world activities.  The woman,
bound, has not so grown; and the child is born to a progressive
fatherhood and a stationary motherhood.  Thus the man-made family reacts
unfavorably upon the child.  We rob our children of half their social
heredity by keeping the mother in an inferior position; however
legalized, hallowed, or ossified by time, the position of a domestic
servant is inferior.

It is for this reason that child culture is at so low a level, and for
the most part utterly unknown.  Today, when the forces of education are
steadily working nearer to the cradle, a new sense is wakening of the
importance of the period of infancy, and its wiser treatment; yet those
who know of such a movement are few, and of them some are content to
earn easy praise--and pay--by belittling right progress to gratify the
prejudices of the ignorant.

The whole position is simple and clear; and easily traceable to its
root.  Given a proprietary family, where the man holds the woman
primarily for his satisfaction and service--then necessarily he shuts
her up and keeps her for these purposes.  Being so kept, she cannot
develop humanly, as he has, through social contact, social service, true
social life.  (We may note in passing, her passionate fondness for the
child-game called "society" she has been allowed to entertain herself
withal; that poor simiacrum of real social life, in which people
decorate themselves and madly crowd together, chattering, for what is
called "entertainment.")  Thus checked in social development, we have
but a low grade motherhood to offer our children; and the children,
reared in the primitive conditions thus artificially maintained, enter
life with a false perspective, not only toward men and women, but toward
life as a whole.

The child should receive in the family, full preparation for his
relation to the world at large.  His whole life must be spent in the
world, serving it well or ill; and youth is the time to learn how.  But
the androcentric home cannot teach him.  We live to-day in a
democracy-the man-made family is a despotism.  It may be a weak one; the
despot may be dethroned and overmastered by his little harem of one; but
in that case she becomes the despot--that is all.  The male is esteemed
"the head of the family;" it belongs to him; he maintains it; and the
rest of the world is a wide hunting ground and battlefield wherein he
competes with other males as of old.

The girl-child, peering out, sees this forbidden field as belonging
wholly to men-kind; and her relation to it is to secure one for
herself--not only that she may love, but that she may live.  He will
feed, clothe and adorn her--she will serve him; from the subjection of
the daughter to that of the wife she steps; from one home to the other,
and never enters the world at all--man's world.

The boy, on the other hand, considers the home as a place of women, an
inferior place, and longs to grow up and leave it--for the real world.
He is quite right.  The error is that this great social instinct,
calling for full social exercise, exchange, service, is considered
masculine, whereas it is human, and belongs to boy and girl alike.

The child is affected first through the retarded development of his
mother, then through the arrested condition of home industry; and
further through the wrong ideals which have arisen from these
conditions.  A normal home, where there was human equality between
mother and father, would have a better influence.

We must not overlook the effect of the proprietary family on the
proprietor himself.  He, too, has been held back somewhat by this
reactionary force.  In the process of becoming human we must learn to
recognize justice, freedom, human rights; we must learn self-control and
to think of others; have minds that grow and broaden rationally; we must
learn the broad mutual interservice and unbounded joy of social
intercourse and service.  The petty despot of the man-made home is
hindered in his humanness by too much manness.

For each man to have one whole woman to cook for and wait upon him is a
poor education for democracy.  The boy with a servile mother, the man
with a servile wife, cannot reach the sense of equal rights we need
to-day.  Too constant consideration of the master's tastes makes the
master selfish; and the assault upon his heart direct, or through that
proverbial side-avenue, the stomach, which the dependent woman needs
must make when she wants anything, is bad for the man, as well as for
her.

We are slowly forming a nobler type of family; the union of two, based
on love and recognized by law, maintained because of its happiness and
use.  We are even now approaching a tenderness and permanence of love,
high pure enduring love; combined with the broad deep-rooted
friendliness and comradeship of equals; which promises us more happiness
in marriage than we have yet known.  It will be good for all the parties
concerned--man, woman and child: and promote our general social progress
admirably.

If it needs "a head" it will elect a chairman pro tem.  Friendship does
not need "a head."  Love does dot need "a head."  Why should a family?



COMMENT AND REVIEW


I watched and waited for Margharita's Soul through eleven glittering
chapters of fair words; and when it appeared at last, in the twelfth
chapter, it was the funniest little by-product, born of imminent peril
and ice-water.

A beautiful great body had Margharita and a beautiful great voice; but
her long-delayed soul was the size of a small island and one family.
Funny notion of a soul!  A hen might have it.  No, not a hen--she is a
light-minded promiscuous creature; but a stork, let us say; she is
monogamous and quite bound up in her family.  No--not a stork
either--storks migrate; no island would satisfy her.  Apparently it
takes a human creature to be proud of a soul that size.

It is a very pretty story.

Thesis: the only thing a woman is for is matrimony and much
childbearing!  If she don't like it--no soul.

To develop thesis: Some unusual conditions; and a weird feminine
product, of such sort that her lover's sudden surrender and frantic
marriage is as it were involuntary.  It is of the kind that requires no
soul in the beloved object, a soul might have been a little in the way
in that violent attack.

Then--to sharply accent and enforce the thesis, our soulless
charmer--(her overwhelming allure for the men about her, during this
period, casts a sharp sidelight on the value of Soul as an Attraction!)
is given a Golden Voice.

This Voice is evidently one to give measureless pleasure to thousands;
not only so, but is shown to have such power as to touch hard hearts and
lead them heavenward; she with no soul assisting the souls of others;
long careful chapters are given to this voice; evidently as one decks
out a sacrifice; for the world comforting voice is only given her that
she may give it up--for Roger!

It seems a pity--with all this arranged, to ruin that voice by the shock
and exposure which aroused her Soul, She herself regretted it--having so
much less to give up--for Roger.  She meant to give it up anyway, she
said.  Perhaps the author didn't trust that new Soul completely--knowing
her previous character.  Anyway there she is, plus a soul and minus a
voice; living on the island and populating it as rapidly as possible,
perfectly happy, and a lesson for us all.

But is there not also Madam Schumann-Heinck?  A great sweet voice and a
great sweet mother too?  Has she not a Soul?

*

This Duty of Childbearing is evidently weighing on the minds of men, in
these days.  The thing must be done--they cant do it themselves, and
they are mightily afraid we won't, if we have half a chance to do
anything else.  If a woman was by way of being a Dante or a Darwin, she
had better give it up--for Roger--and take to replenishing the earth.
She can't do both--that is the main assumption; and if she chooses to
serve the world outside of the home that is sheer loss.

Says this wise Searcher of Feminine Souls: "For if all the wisdom and
experience and training that the wonderful sex is to gain by its exodus
from the home does not get back into it ultimately, I can't (in my
masculine stupidity) quite see how it's going to get back into the race
at all!  And then what good has it done?"

The gentleman does not see any way of advancing the human race except by
physical heredity--or by domestic influence.

What Shakespeare wrought into the constitution and character of his
daughter Judy is all that matters of his life and work.  Keats, having
no children, contributed nothing to the world.  George Washington,
childless, was of no social service.  Lincoln is to be measured by the
number and quality of his offspring.  Florence Nightingale, in lifting
the grade of nursing for the world, accomplished nothing.  Uncle Tom's
Cabin was of no service except as it might in some mysterious way "get
back into the home."  What mortal perversity is it that cannot see
Humanity in women as well as Sex; see that Social Service is something
in itself, quite over and above all the domestic and personal relations.

This getting back into the race means only the boys.  It would do no
good for generations of Margaritas to inherit that Golden Voice--each
and all must give it up--for Roger.  The race gets no music till the
bass, barytone or tenor appear.

Books like this are pathetic in their little efforts to check social
progress.

We suspect the author's name to be Mr. Partington.

*

(The Life and Times of Anne Royall.  By Sarah Harvey Porter, M.A.  12mo.
 Cloth, 209 pp.  $1.50 net; postage 12 cents.)

Biography has never been a favorite study with me; but I was interested
in this book because the woman whose life it described seemed worth
while.  Reading it, I found not only the life of Anne Royall, but the
life of America in the early part of the nineteenth century, in our
young, crude, dangerous days of national formation.  A novel has been
defined as "a corner of life seen through a temperament."  If that is a
true definition, then this is a novel, for Anne Royall had "temperament"
if ever anyone had, and she saw a large corner of life through it.

Who was Anne Royall?  An American woman, pioneer born and bred, familiar
with the life-and-death struggle of the frontier, and full of the spirit
of '76.  She was born in 1769, and lived through the War of the
Revolution, the War of 1812, the Mexican War, and almost up to the Civil
War, dying in 1854.  In 1797 she was married to Captain William Royall,
an exceptional man, a Virginian, cultivated, liberal, singularly
broad-minded and public-spirited, and life with him added years of
genuine culture to the energy of a naturally bright mind.  Left a widow
at the age of forty-four, and, after ten years of travel and experience,
defrauded of the property left to her by her husband, she began to live
a brave self-supporting independent life at an age when most of the
women of her years were white-capped grandmothers.

Instead of sinking into the position of a dependent female relative, she
insisted on earning her own living.  This she did as so many women do
to-day, by the use of her pen, a rarer profession in those times.  The
more remarkable thing is that in the face of overwhelming odds she stood
for a religion, at a period when old-fashioned Calvinism was still a
dominant power.  The most remarkable, is her absolute devotion to the
public interests, to social service as she saw it.

There were a good many women writers even at that time, some of high
merit, but there were few publicists among them.  Some espoused this or
that "Cause" and gave to it the passionate devotion so natural to a
woman's heart.  But Anne Royall, while she also was passionately devoted
to several well-defined "Causes," was unique in that she kept in view
the general situation of her country, political, economic, geographic,
and educational, and wrote steadily for thirty-one years on matters of
national importance.

It is not a question of whether she was right or wrong--though she was
mostly right, as history has proved; but the impressive thing is that
this old woman, with "troubles of her own," was overwhelmingly
interested in her country and its service.  There are not so many,
either men or women, of this mind, that we can afford to overlook this
sturdy pioneer "new woman."  She had virtues, too, good solid Christian
virtues of the rarer sort; she visited the sick and afflicted, gave to
him that asked, and from him that would borrow turned not away.  Even to
her own weaker sisters she was a strength and comfort, greatly injuring
her own position by this unusual charity.  Also she was brave, honest,
truthful, persevering, industrious--"manly" virtues these.

But--and here we have the reason why Anne Royall made no greater mark,
why she was "unsuccessful," why most of us never heard of her--she
attacked great powers, and she fought unwisely.  Her abusive writing
sounds abominably to-day, but must be judged, of course, by the standard
of her time.  The worst things she said were not as bad as things
Shelley said--as the bitter invective and scurrilous attacks common to
pamphleteers of the time.  If our newspapers are yellow, theirs were
orange in the matter of personalities.

But even then this woman had a keen-cutting weapon, and used it
unsparingly.  Being alone, with no male relative to defend her; being
poor, and so further defenceless; being old, thus lacking weak woman's
usual protection of beauty, she had absolutely nothing to fall back on
when her enemies retaliated.

This picture of one lone woman defying and blackguarding what was almost
an established church, is much like Jack the Giantkiller--with a
different result.  It was deemed necessary to crush this wasp that stung
so sharply; and in 1829, in the capitol city of the United States of
America, a court of men tried--and convicted--this solitary woman of
sixty as a Common Scold.  They raked up obsolete laws, studied and
strove to wrest their meanings to apply to this case, got together some
justification, or what seemed to them justification for their deeds, and
succeeded in irretrievably damaging her reputation.

She was not to be extinguished, however.  In 1831 she started a
newspaper, with the ill-chosen name of PAUL PRY.  In 1836 another took
its place, called THE HUNTRESS.  And on the sale of these newspapers and
her books, the indomitable old lady lived to fight and fought to live
till she was eighty-five.

She is well worth reading about.  The history of her times rises and
lives around her.  In her vivid description we see the new rugged
country, over which she travelled from end to end; in her accounts of
current literature we pick up stray bits of information as to new
authors and new words.  "Playfulness," for instance, is one which she
stigmatizes as "silly in sound and significance," and declares that she
does not read the new novels "with the exception of Walter Scott's."
More interesting still to most of us is to study over the long lists of
her pen-portraits and see our ancestors as the others saw them.  Few
Americans of three generations but can find some grandfather or great
uncle halo-ed or pilloried by this clear-eyed observer.

Miss Porter has done her work well.  It is clear, strong and
entertaining--this biography.  If the writer seems more enthusiastic
about Anne Royall than the reader becomes, that is clearly due to an
unusual perception of life-values; a recognition of the noble devotion
and high courage of her subject, and an intense sympathy with such
characteristics.

*

The discussion as to whether we should or should not teach children the
Santa Claus myth pops up anew with Christmas time; and puzzles anew
anyone who regards this festival from a religious viewpoint.

If it was a choice between Santa Claus and nothing, we might prefer
Santa Claus; but here we have before us three things: first, the basis
of fact, the world old festival of the turn of the year, the coming of
the sun; second, a history of rejoicing peoples throughout all the ages,
keeping up the celebration under changing gods and dogmas; and third,
the story of beauty and wonder about the birth of Jesus.

Any child could be taught the meaning of the Coming of the Sun.  The
growing light, the longer days, the beautiful future of flowers and
birds and playing in the grass; the joy of the young year.  If we want
legends and stories, every religion behind us is full of them; stories
of sun-gods and their splendid triumph; stories of the great earth
mother and her bounty; stories of elves and gnomes and druids and all
manner of fairy tales.

But why avoid our own religion--the first which has emphatically taught
Love as the Law of Life--peace on earth and good-will to men.  Are we
ashamed of our religion or don't we believe it any more?  If we do
accept it in all the long-told tales of miracle and wonder, then we have
stories enough to tell our children; stories of simple human beauty,
stories of heavenly glory, stories of mystery and magic and delight.

If we do not wish to tell them these things as literally true; or even
as beautiful legends, there remains enough historic foundation to begin
with; and enough of the enduring glory of human love to last us a
lifetime.

"What is Christmas, Mama?"

"Christmas is a festival as old as the world, dear child--as old as our
human world; historic people have feasted and danced and sung for
thousands upon thousands of years, at this time of the year; and offered
gifts."

"Why do they give things at Christmas, Mama?"

"Because they are happy, dear; because they feel rich and glad and
loving now that the sun is coming back.  As if Mama had been away--and
you could just see her--a long, long way off.  You had seen her go--and
go--and go--farther and farther; and then she stopped a while--with her
back to you--and then all of a sudden she turned round and came toward
you!  Wouldn't you be glad?"

Then if the child wants to know about the tree and the candles and all
the details of ceremony, there are facts and fancies to account for them
all.

But if he says, "Why do they call it Christmas, Mama?"--then you must
tell him the secret of Christianity--which is love.

Now, can anyone explain--or defend, in face of all this, our preference
for a shallow local myth about St. Nicholas, and the corruption of that
into a mere comic supplement character; a bulbous benevolent goblin,
red-nosed and gross, doing impossible tricks with reindeers and
chimneys, and half the time degraded to a mere adjunct of nursery
government?  Why do we think it beautiful?  Or interesting?  Or
beneficial?  The children like it, we say.

Children like what they are used to, generally.  Also, like older
people, they are prone to like what isn't good for them.  They like
brandy-drops among sweetmeats, but that is no reason we should supply
them.

*

This brings us to a strange characteristic of most of us; we seem to
prefer small cheap shallow outside things to the deep glowing beauty of
life.  We seem afraid to take life at its splendid best; choosing rather
to live in a litter of petty ideas and feelings, and save the big ones
for Sundays--or annual holidays.

*

Yet in our hearts we all love great sweeps of emotion; and children
especially.  Prof. Thomas, of Chicago, has given us a sidelight on this
in his clever book about women, "Sex and Society."  He shows how in our
long pre-social period we were accustomed to strong excitement, long
hours of quivering suspense, mad rushes of blind fear, and orgies of
wild triumph.  Our nerve channels were like the beds of mountain
streams, in dry warm lands; lying shallow or even empty at times; and
again roaring torrents.  So that nowadays, on the paved levels of our
civilized life, the well-graduated dribble of small steady feelings, the
organism itself cries out for a change in the pressure.

Children and young people feel this more than older ones; the very old,
indeed, resent an unusual emotion.  Yet when the young grow restless and
fretfully "wish something would happen!" we rebuke them; from the
heights of our enforced contentment; and call this natural and healthy
feeling a mere "thirst for excitement."

*

We need excitement.  We have a vast capacity for it.  It is a most
useful thing--this excitement; and we ought to have more of it, much
more.  These young people are perfectly right in their uneasy feeling
that it would be nice to have something happen!

With all this to bank on, why so overlook the splendid possibilities of
Christmas?  Why continue to make our helpless children's minds the
submissive channels for poor worn-out thin old stories?  Are there no
gorgeous glowing truths in life--real life--now?

Then we tired aged people--born and reared in this atmosphere of cold
weariness; shake our heads and say--

"No.  Life is hard.  Life is dreary.  Life is one long grind!"

That is where we are wrong, and the children are right.  They come in
new every time.  The earth is as young to them as it was to Adam.

If we would but once face the dignity and beauty of childhood instead of
looking down on it as we do--then we could take advantage of that
constant influx of force, instead of doing our best to crush it down.

This brings us sharply back to our Christmas--the festival of the Child.

It is.  If celebrates the real new year; the new-born year, the opening
of another season of Life.

Dimly, very dimly, we have glimpsed this now and then, in the old triune
godhead of Isis, Osiris and Horus; and in our modern worship of the
Madonna and Child.

The time is coming very near when we shall see the meaning of The Child
more fully; and make our worship wiser.

What we see in all our thousand homes is "my child."  What the
doll-taught mother sees is a sweet pretty dressable object; far more
time and effort being given--even before its birth--to the making of
clothing, than to the making of its constitution or character.

Then we see children as "a care," and a care they are to our worldwide
incompetence.  How pathetic is the inadequacy of the young mother!  She
would never dare to undertake to run a racing stable with no more
knowledge and experience than she brings to run a family.

She loves them--?

Yes, she loves them.  And Mother love is so mighty a power that we all
love and honor Motherhood--in spite of its obvious deficiencies.  But
none of these feelings; not even the deepest mother-love, is all that we
should give the child.

He needs Understanding--and Honor.

He needs to be recognized as the forefront of the world--the world of
to-morrow--the world we are making.

As we bear and rear him--and her!--as we guide and teach them both, so
stand the Men and Women who follow us.

*

Of course we do the best we can for our own little ones.  That goes
without saying.

So does a monkey.

It is far more than that the child needs.

This Young Life, celebrated in our Christian Festival; this New Life,
Better Life, Life to Come, deserves more respect.

And the first meed of honor which we owe to our Successor, is to tell
him the truth!

*

That ought to put an end to our paltry old story of the Benign Chimney
Climber.

What we are here for, all of us, is to make the world better and the
people better.  It is an easy and a pleasant game, if we would but give
our minds to it.  The whole swiftly spreading enchantment of our varied
arts and industries is making a garden out of a wilderness; and even the
limited and defective education we now offer to our children, makes
better people than we used to have.

But what we have done for them is nothing to what we may do!  The best
brains in the world should proudly serve the child.  We should consider
him as a nation does its crown Prince--not a mere pet and darling--but a
coming Ruler.

*

Christmas will have a rejuvenation when it is recognized in this sense
as the Child's Festival.  Every beautiful myth of the past remains to
decorate it; every beautiful truth to vivify it.  It should be a
domestic, religious, civic, national and international festival.

It should mean Joy--and Hope--and Love; and teach them.

*

And Gifts?

Yes, gifts.  There could be no more appropriate testimony to Joy and
Hope and Love than these visible fruits.  Gifts to the happy child to
make him happier.  Gifts _from_ the happy child--and the new joy of
giving.  Gifts everywhere--from each to each--as showing the rich
overflow of Love and joy.

And more than that--Gifts from Each to All!  There is a custom worth
initiating!  Not charity nor anything of that sort.  Not the mere
visiting of the sick and the prisoner.  But a yearly practice of giving
something to the Community--to show you love it!

*

And suppose you don't?

If you had been properly taught as a child you would.  If you teach our
children properly they will.  Should we not gratefully recognize the
care and service that gives as everything we have?  It is the most
glaring lesson in life--this universal help of each to all.

Every day of our lives we are served and guarded and generally blessed
by--the Community.

*

It is perfectly easy to teach this to a child.  Everything that he sees
about him--that is not "a natural object," some of us dead or alive have
made.  The accumulated services of all the people gone have given us the
world as it is; those now here keep it up for us; and we--and our
children may build it better.

Not love the people who have given you the world?  How ungrateful!

*

At which you will remark disgustedly, "Given!  Not much?  They were paid
for it."

That is our mistake.

In the first place they never were paid for it--and are not now--not by
a long way.  And further--if we had outgrown this temporary custom of
paying for this--we should still have to serve each other--to live.

If we were all multi-millionaires--and so perfectly "independent"--why
we'd have to have some millionaire sailors and house-builders and
blacksmiths--that's all.  Their money would build no houses and sail no
ships.

Service is what counts--giving--the outpouring of strength and
good-will.

That is what Christmas means.  It is the Festival of Life.  Love and
Service--Loving and Giving--for the Coming Race.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


We have one, a mere sample, left over from last time.

Query: "My wife is spending more of my income on dress than I can
afford.  How can I stop her?  G.

Answer: G. "By letting her earn her own income and spend it as she
pleases."

G. would never be content with that.  G. would get back at us and say--

Query: "How can a woman do her duty as a mother and earn her own
living?"

Answer: "If your wife was doing her duty as a mother she wouldn't be
spending so much money on dress!"

Answer further: Motherhood is "piecework"--it is not done by the hour.
The value of a mother to her children is not to be measured by quantity,
but by quality.  If a mother understood any business thoroughly, she
would begin to understand her mother-work better than she does now.

Query: "But how can a mother leave her children and go to work?"

Answer: "She does not have to.  She could be a milliner or dressmaker at
home just as well as a cook."


But these problems are general rather than personal.  Here is a personal
one.

Query: "I am about thirty--a woman.  I wish very much to be married.
All the nice men in our town have left it--or are married.  There are
thirty or forty more unmarried women than men.  What shall I do?  X."

Answer: "Leave that town and go to some place where there are more men.
Go as a matter of business, earning your own living.  Keep well, be as
good as you know how, and trust in Providence."



GET YOUR WORK DONE


Get your work DONE, to remember,--
 Nothing can take it away,
Then shall the sun of December
 Shine brighter than goldenest May.

What is the Spring-time of flowers for?
 Why does the sunshine come down?
What are the harvest-day hours for
 But fruit?  In the fruit is the crown.

Why should we grieve over losses?
 Why should we fret over sin?
Death is the smallest of crosses
 To the worker whose harvest is in.



[Advertisement]


LOWNEY'S


I speak as one who has cared little for candy of any kind and less for
chocolate candy.

I don't like chocolate cake, nor chocolate _blanc mange,_ nor chocolate
pudding, nor chocolate to drink--unless it is cocoa, very hot, not too
sweet, and strained carefully.

Nevertheless I fell in with friends, who feasted upon Lowney's; they
beguiled me into feasting upon Lowney's, and since then my attitude has
changed as to candy.

I had a box of Lowney's, a particularly well-made, attractive box, that
is still kept to put small treasures in, and brought it home for my
family to eat.

Always before, I had looked on with the unselfishness of a pelican, to
see others eat candy; but now I strove with them, like a frigate bird,
and made them give up some of it.  I wanted it myself.

Furthermore, I bought a small box of Lowney's chocolate almonds in
Portland, Oregon, on the fourteenth of June, and with severe
self-denial, brought it home on the twenty-ninth of July.

Then it was eaten, largely by me, and every single one of those
chocolate almonds was fresh and good.

I can state further, on the evidence of personal friends, that all the
Lowney preparations are pure and honest and perfectly reliable.

They are as good as the best in the world.

As to the candy,--That's better.


C. P. G.


Walter M.  Lowney Co.

BOSTON, MASS.


Please mention THE FORERUNNER when purchasing



[Advertisement]


SOAPINE

Did you ever see the Soapine Whale?

If this paper took half-tones I'd like to put in a picture of that
whale--for auld lang syne.

When I was a girl I used to paint it, making the small advertising cards
then so popular.

I could do it with a clear conscience, for my mother always used Soapine
and I used it after her.

That box, with the mercilessly scrubbed whale on it, stood on the shelf
over the sink, and was used continually; to wash dishes, wash floors,
wash clothes, wash anything.  It's good stuff.

Make a pail of suds with hot water and Soapine, and apply where it's
needed--you'll be satisfied.

There are plenty of alleged "just as good"s, but give me Soapine every
time.


C.P.G.


IT IS MADE BY

Kendall Mfg. Co. = Providence, R.I.


Please mention THE FORERUNNER when purchasing



[Advertisement]


WOMAN'S ERA

THE NEW MAGAZINE
OF INSPIRATION FOR
WOMEN OF AMERICA

IN A CLASS OF ITS OWN!

A monthly world-wide review of women's activities, achievements and aims
in all the broader fields of work; reviews and original, authoritative
articles on

Economics, Ethics, Civics, Arts and Crafts, Music, Literature, Club and
College Work, etc.

Among its contributors are:

Ella Wheeler Wilcox
Charlotte Perkins Gilman
Maude Ballington Booth
Florence Kelley
Mme. Sara Anderson
Prof. Margaret Cross
Miss Emma Church
Alice Hubbard
Kate Barnard
Mrs. Eva Perry Moore
Rev. Anna Shaw

And a host of other equally noted authorities in the world of women.

Initial Number out January 15, 1910

Subscribe NOW

Secure each valuable number from the start.  Prospectus now ready upon
request.  Address

Woman's Era Publishing Co.
NEW ORLEANS, LA.



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK


AS TO PURPOSE:


_What is The Forerunner?_  It is a monthly magazine, publishing stories
short and serial, article and essay; drama, verse, satire and sermon;
dialogue, fable and fantasy, comment and review.  It is written entirely
by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

_What is it For?_  It is to stimulate thought: to arouse hope, courage
and impatience; to offer practical suggestions and solutions, to voice
the strong assurance of better living, here, now, in our own hands to
make.

_What is it about?_  It is about people, principles, and the questions
of every-day life; the personal and public problems of to-day.  It gives
a clear, consistent view of human life and how to live it.

_Is it a Woman's magazine?_  It will treat all three phases of our
existence--male, female and human.  It will discuss Man, in his true
place in life; Woman, the Unknown Power; the  Child, the most important
citizen.

_Is it a Socialist Magazine?_  It is a magazine for humanity, and
humanity is social.  It holds that Socialism, the economic theory, is
part of our gradual Socialization, and that the duty of conscious
humanity is to promote Socialization.

_Why is it published?_  It is published to express ideas which need a
special medium; and in the belief that there are enough persons
interested in those ideas to justify the undertaking.


AS TO ADVERTISING:


We have long heard that "A pleased customer is the best advertiser."
The Forerunner offers to its advertisers and readers the benefit of this
authority.  In its advertising department, under the above heading, will
be described articles personally known and used.  So far as individual
experience and approval carry weight, and clear truthful description
command attention, the advertising pages of The Forerunner will be
useful to both dealer and buyer.  If advertisers prefer to use their own
statements The Forerunner will publish them if it believes them to be
true.


AS TO CONTENTS:


The main feature of the first year is a new book on a new subject with a
new name:--

_"Our Androcentric Culture."_  this is a study of the historic effect on
normal human development of a too exclusively masculine civilization.
It shows what man, the male, has done to the world: and what woman, the
more human, may do to change it.

_"What Diantha Did."_  This is a serial novel.  It shows the course of
true love running very crookedly--as it so often does--among the
obstructions and difficulties of the housekeeping problem--and solves
that problem.  (NOT by co-operation.)

Among the short articles will appear:

"Private Morality and Public Immorality."
"The Beauty Women Have Lost"
"Our Overworked Instincts."
"The Nun in the Kitchen."
"Genius: Domestic and Maternal."
"A Small God and a Large Goddess."
"Animals in Cities."
"How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money."
"Prize Children"
"Kitchen-Mindedness"
"Parlor-Mindedness"
"Nursery-Mindedness"

There will be short stories and other entertaining matter in each issue.
 The department of "Personal Problems" does not discuss etiquette,
fashions or the removal of freckles.  Foolish questions will not be
answered, unless at peril of the asker.


AS TO VALUE:

If you take this magazine one year you will have:


One complete novel . . . By C. P. Gilman
One new book . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve short stories . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more short articles . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more new poems . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve Short Sermons . . . By C. P. Gilman
Besides "Comment and Review" . . . By C. P. Gilman
"Personal Problems" . . . By C. P. Gilman
And many other things . . . By C. P. Gilman

DON'T YOU THINK IT'S WORTH A DOLLAR?


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________



[Advertisement]


 C A L E N D U L A


CHILDREN CEASE TO CRY FOR IT.


This is a gratuitous advertisement, benefitting

a) The Child; whose pain stops;

b) The Mother; who doesn't have to hear him cry;

c) The Nearest Druggist--a little.


CALENDULA is a good standard old drug--made of marigolds--in the
_materia medica._  You buy a little bottle of tincture of calendula, and
keep it on the shelf.  Nobody will drink it by mistake--it doesn't taste
good.

Presently Johnny falls down hard--he was running--he fell on a gritty
place--his poor little knee is scraped raw.  And he howls, how he howls!
square-mouthed and inconsolable.

Then you hastily get a half a tea-cupful of water, a little warm if you
have it, and put in a few drops of calendula.  Wet a soft clean rag in
it, bind it softly on the wound, keep it wet--and the pain stops.

Many many times has this quieted my infant anguish; also have I used it
as a grown up.  The effect is the same.


 C A L E N D U L A
TAKES THE PAIN FROM
A  R A W  W O U N D





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 3
JANUARY, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

Forgive the Past--and forget it!--don't carry a grudge against
graveyards.
Accept the Present--you have to--here it is.
Concentrate on the Future--still yours to make--and get busy!




A CENTRAL SUN

A Song


Given a central sun--and a rolling world;
 Into the light we whirl--and call it day;
 Into the dark we turn--and call it night;
Glow of the dawn--glory of midday light--
Shadow of eve--rest of the fragrant night
 And the dawn again!

Given a constant Power--and a passing frame;
 Into the light we grow--and call it life;
 Into the dark we go--and call It death;
Glory of youth--beauty and pride and power--
Shadow of age--rest of the final hour--
 And are born again!



REASONABLE RESOLUTIONS


The trouble with our "New Year Resolutions" is that they are too
personal.  We are always fussing about our little individual tempers and
weaknesses and bad habits.

While we, Socially, behave as badly as we do, we individually can
accomplish little.

Says the wiseacre--"Ah! but if each of us was individually perfect
Society would be perfect!"

Not at all!  You can amass any number of perfect parts of a
mechanism--or organism--but if they do not _work together right_ the
thing is no good.

And you can't learn to work together by trying to be perfect separately.
 Can you?

We need collective aims, collective efforts, collective attainments.

Let us collectively resolve:

That we will stop wasting our soil and our forests and our labor!

*

That we will stop poisoning and clogging our rivers and harbors.

*

That we will stop building combustible houses.

*

That we will _now_--_this year_--begin in good earnest to prevent all
preventable diseases.

*

That we will do our duty by our children and young people, as a wise
Society should, and cut off the crop of criminals by not making them.

*

That--; no; here are quite enough resolutions for one year.



HER HOUSEKEEPER


On the top floor of a New York boarding-house lived a particularly
attractive woman who was an actress.  She was also a widow, not
divorcee, but just plain widow; and she persisted in acting under her
real name, which was Mrs. Leland.  The manager objected, but her
reputation was good enough to carry the point.

"It will cost you a great deal of money, Mrs. Leland," said the manager.

"I make money enough," she answered.

"You will not attract so many--admirers," said the manager.

"I have admirers enough," she answered; which was visibly true.

She was well under thirty, even by daylight--and about eighteen on the
stage; and as for admirers--they apparently thought Mrs. Leland was a
carefully selected stage name.

Besides being a widow, she was a mother, having a small boy of about
five years; and this small boy did not look in the least like a "stage
child," but was a brown-skinned, healthy little rascal of the ordinary
sort.

With this boy, an excellent nursery governess, and a maid, Mrs. Leland
occupied the top floor above mentioned, and enjoyed it.  She had a big
room in front, to receive in; and a small room with a skylight, to sleep
in.  The boy's room and the governess' rooms were at the back, with
sunny south windows, and the maid slept on a couch in the parlor.  She
was a colored lady, named Alice, and did not seem to care where she
slept, or if she slept at all.

"I never was so comfortable in my life," said Mrs. Leland to her
friends.  "I've been here three years and mean to stay.  It is not like
any boarding-house I ever saw, and it is not like any home I ever had.
I have the privacy, the detachment, the carelessness of a
boarding-house, and 'all the comforts of a home.'  Up I go to my little
top flat as private as you like.  My Alice takes care of it--the
housemaids only come in when I'm out.  I can eat with the others
downstairs if I please; but mostly I don't please; and up come my little
meals on the dumbwaiter--hot and good."

"But--having to flock with a lot of promiscuous boarders!" said her
friends.

"I don't flock, you see; that's just it.  And besides, they are not
promiscuous--there isn't a person in the house now who isn't some sort
of a friend of mine.  As fast as a room was vacated I'd suggest
somebody--and here we all are.  It's great."

"But do you _like_ a skylight room?" Mrs. Leland's friends further
inquired of her?"

"By no means!" she promptly replied.  "I hate it.  I feel like a mouse
in a pitcher!"

"Then why in the name of reason--?"

"Because I can sleep there!  _Sleep_!--It's the only way to be quiet in
New York, and I have to sleep late if I sleep at all.  I've fixed the
skylight so that I'm drenched with air--and not drenched with rain!--and
there I am.  Johnny is gagged and muffled as it were, and carried
downstairs as early as possible.  He gets his breakfast, and the
unfortunate Miss Merton has to go out and play with him--in all
weathers--except kindergarten time.  Then Alice sits on the stairs and
keeps everybody away till I ring."

Possibly it was owing to the stillness and the air and the sleep till
near lunchtime that Mrs. Leland kept her engaging youth, her vivid
uncertain beauty.  At times you said of her, "She has a keen intelligent
face, but she's not pretty."  Which was true.  She was not pretty.  But
at times again she overcame you with her sudden loveliness.

All of which was observed by her friend from the second floor who wanted
to marry her.  In this he was not alone; either as a friend, of whom she
had many, or as a lover, of whom she had more.  His distinction lay
first in his opportunities, as a co-resident, for which he was heartily
hated by all the more and some of the many; and second in that he
remained a friend in spite of being a lover, and remained a lover in
spite of being flatly refused.

His name in the telephone book was given "Arthur Olmstead, real estate;"
office this and residence that--she looked him up therein after their
first meeting.  He was rather a short man, heavily built, with a quiet
kind face, and a somewhat quizzical smile.  He seemed to make all the
money he needed, occupied the two rooms and plentiful closet space of
his floor in great contentment, and manifested most improper domesticity
of taste by inviting friends to tea.  "Just like a woman!" Mrs. Leland
told him.

"And why not?  Women have so many attractive ways--why not imitate
them?" he asked her.

"A man doesn't want to be feminine, I'm sure," struck in a pallid,
overdressed youth, with openwork socks on his slim feet, and perfumed
handkerchief.

Mr. Olmstead smiled a broad friendly smile.  He was standing near the
young man, a little behind him, and at this point he put his hands just
beneath the youth's arms, lifted and set him aside as if he were an
umbrella-stand.  "Excuse me, Mr. Masters," he said gravely, but you were
standing on Mrs. Leland's gown."

Mr. Masters was too much absorbed in apologizing to the lady to take
umbrage at the method of his removal; but she was not so oblivious.  She
tried doing it to her little boy afterwards, and found him very heavy.

When she came home from her walk or drive in the early winter dusk, this
large quietly furnished room, the glowing fire, the excellent tea and
delicate thin bread and butter were most restful.  "It is two more
stories up before I can get my own;" she would say--"I must stop a
minute."

When he began to propose to her the first time she tried to stop him.
"O please don't!" she cried.  _"Please_ don't!  There are no end of
reasons why I will not marry anybody again.  Why can't some of you men
be nice to me and not--that!  Now I can't come in to tea any more!"

"I'd like to know why not," said he calmly.  "You don't have to marry me
if you don't want to; but that's no reason for cutting my acquaintance,
is it?"

She gazed at him in amazement.

"I'm not threatening to kill myself, am I?  I don't intend going to the
devil.  I'd like to be your husband, but if I can't--mayn't I be a
brother to you?"

She was inclined to think he was making fun of her, but no--his proposal
had had the real ring in it.  "And you're not--you're not going to--?"
it seemed the baldest assumption to think that he was going to, he
looked so strong and calm and friendly.

"Not going to annoy you?  Not going to force an undesired affection on
you and rob myself of a most agreeable friendship?  Of course not.  Your
tea is cold, Mrs. Leland--let me give you another cup.  And do you think
Miss Rose is going to do well as 'Angelina?'"

So presently Mrs. Leland was quite relieved in her mind, and free to
enjoy the exceeding comfortableness of this relation.  Little Johnny was
extremely fond of Mr Olmstead; who always treated him with respect, and
who could listen to his tales of strife and glory more intelligently
than either mother or governess.  Mr. Olmstead kept on hand a changing
supply of interesting things; not toys--never, but real things not
intended for little boys to play with.  No little boy would want to play
with dolls for instance; but what little boy would not be fascinated by
a small wooden lay figure, capable of unheard-of contortions.  Tin
soldiers were common, but the flags of all nations--real flags, and true
stories about them, were interesting.  Noah's arks were cheap and
unreliable scientifically; but Barye lions, ivory elephants, and
Japanese monkeys in didactic groups of three, had unfailing attraction.
And the books this man had--great solid books that could be opened wide
on the floor, and a little boy lie down to in peace and comfort!


Mrs. Leland stirred her tea and watched them until Johnny was taken
upstairs.

"Why don't you smoke?" she asked suddenly.  "Doctor's orders?"

"No--mine," he answered.  "I never consulted a doctor in my life."

"Nor a dentist, I judge," said she.

"Nor a dentist."

"You'd better knock on wood!" she told him.

"And cry 'Uncle Reuben?' he asked smilingly.

"You haven't told me why you don't smoke!" said she suddenly.

"Haven't I?" he said.  "That was very rude of me.  But look here.
There's a thing I wanted to ask you.  Now I'm not pressing any sort of
inquiry as to myself; but as a brother, would you mind telling me some
of those numerous reasons why you will not marry anybody?"

She eyed him suspiciously, but he was as solid and calm as usual,
regarding her pleasantly and with no hint of ulterior purpose.  "Why--I
don't mind," she began slowly.  "First--I have been married--and was
very unhappy.  That's reason enough."

He did not contradict her; but merely said, "That's one," and set it
down in his notebook.

"Dear me, Mr. Olmstead!  You're not a reporter, are you!"

"O no--but I wanted to have them clear and think about them," he
explained.  "Do you mind?"  And he made as if to shut his little book
again.

"I don't know as I mind," she said slowly.  "But it looks
so--businesslike."

"This is a very serious business, Mrs. Leland, as you must know.  Quite
aside from any personal desire of my own, I am truly 'your sincere
friend and well-wisher,' as the Complete Letter Writer has it, and there
are so many men wanting to marry you."

This she knew full well, and gazed pensively at the toe of her small
flexible slipper, poised on a stool before the fire.

Mr. Olmstead also gazed at the slipper toe with appreciation.

"What's the next one?" he said cheerfully.

"Do you know you are a real comfort," she told him suddenly.  "I never
knew a man before who could--well leave off being a man for a moment and
just be a human creature."

"Thank you, Mrs. Leland," he said in tones of pleasant sincerity.  "I
want to be a comfort to you if I can.  Incidentally wouldn't you be more
comfortable on this side of the fire--the light falls better--don't
move."  And before she realized what he was doing he picked her up,
chair and all, and put her down softly on the other side, setting the
footstool as before, and even daring to place her little feet upon
it--but with so businesslike an air that she saw no opening for rebuke.
It is a difficult matter to object to a man's doing things like that
when he doesn't look as if he was doing them.

"That's better," said he cheerfully, taking the place where she had
been.  "Now, what's the next one?"

"The next one is my boy."

"Second--Boy," he said, putting it down.  "But I should think he'd be a
reason the other way.  Excuse me--I wasn't going to criticize--yet!  And
the third?"

"Why should you criticize at all, Mr. Olmstead?"

"I shouldn't--on my own account.  But there may come a man you love."
He had a fine baritone voice.  When she heard him sing Mrs. Leland
always wished he were taller, handsomer, more distinguished looking; his
voice sounded as if he were.  And I should hate to see these reasons
standing in the way of your happiness," he continued.

"Perhaps they wouldn't," said she in a revery.

"Perhaps they wouldn't--and in that case it is no possible harm that you
tell me the rest of them.  I won't cast it up at you.  Third?"

"Third, I won't give up my profession for any man alive."

"Any man alive would be a fool to want you to," said he setting down,
"Third--Profession."

"Fourth--I like _Freedom!"_ she said with sudden intensity.  "You don't
know!--they kept me so tight!--so _tight_--when I was a girl!  Then--I
was left alone, with a very little money, and I began to study for the
stage--that was like heaven!  And then--O what _idiots_ women are!"  She
said the word not tragically, but with such hard-pointed intensity that
it sounded like a gimlet.  "Then I married, you see--I gave up all my
new-won freedom to _marry!_--and he kept me tighter than ever."  She
shut her expressive mouth in level lines--stood up suddenly and
stretched her arms wide and high.  "I'm free again, free--I can do
exactly as I please!"  The words were individually relished.  "I have
the work I love.  I can earn all I need--am saving something for the
boy.  I'm perfectly independent!"

"And perfectly happy!" he cordially endorsed her.  "I don't blame you
for not wanting to give it up."

"O well--happy!" she hesitated.  "There are times, of course, when one
isn't happy.  But then--the other way I was unhappy all the time."

"He's dead--unfortunately," mused Mr. Olmstead.

"Unfortunately?--Why?"

He looked at her with his straightforward, pleasant smile.  "I'd have
liked the pleasure of killing him," he said regretfully.

She was startled, and watched him with dawning alarm.  But he was quite
quiet--even cheerful.  "Fourth--Freedom," he wrote.  "Is that all?"

"No--there are two more.  Neither of them will please you.  You won't
think so much of me any more.  The worst one is this.  I like--lovers!
I'm very much ashamed of it, but I do!  I try not to be unfair to
them--some I really try to keep away from me--but honestly I like
admiration and lots of it."

"What's the harm of that?" he asked easily, setting down,
"Fifth--Lovers."

"No harm, so long as I'm my own mistress," said she defiantly.  "I take
care of my boy, I take care of myself--let them take care of themselves!
 Don't blame me too much!"

"You're not a very good psychologist, I'm afraid," said he.

"What do you mean?" she asked rather nervously.

"You surely don't expect a man to blame you for being a woman, do you?"

"All women are not like that," she hastily asserted.  "They are too
conscientious.  Lots of my friends blame me severely."

"Women friends," he ventured.

"Men, too.  Some men have said very hard things of me."

"Because you turned 'em down.  That's natural."

"You don't!"

"No, I don't.  I'm different.".

"How different?" she asked.

He looked at her steadily.  His eyes were hazel, flecked with changing
bits of color, deep, steady, with a sort of inner light that grew as she
watched till presently she thought it well to consider her slipper
again; and continued, "The sixth is as bad as the other almost.  I
hate--I'd like to write a dozen tragic plays to show how much I
hate--Housekeeping!  There!  That's all!"

"Sixth--Housekeeping," he wrote down, quite unmoved.  "But why should
anyone blame you for that--it's not your business."

"No--thank goodness, it's not!  And never will be!  I'm _free,_ I tell
you and I stay free!--But look at the clock!"  And she whisked away to
dress for dinner.

He was not at table that night--not at home that night--not at home for
some days--the landlady said he had gone out of town; and Mrs. Leland
missed her afternoon tea.

She had it upstairs, of course, and people came in--both friends and
lovers; but she missed the quiet and cosiness of the green and brown
room downstairs.

Johnny missed his big friend still more.  "Mama, where's Mr. Olmstead?
Mama, why don't Mr. Olmstead come back?  Mama!  When is Mr. Olmstead
coming back?  Mama!  Why don't you write to Mr. Olmstead and tell him to
come back?  Mama!--can't we go in there and play with his things?"

As if in answer to this last wish she got a little note from him saying
simply, "Don't let Johnny miss the lions and monkeys--he and Miss Merton
and you, of course, are quite welcome to the whole floor.  Go in at any
time."

Just to keep the child quiet she took advantage of this offer, and
Johnnie introduced her to all the ins and outs of the place.  In a
corner of the bedroom was a zinc-lined tray with clay in it, where
Johnnie played rapturously at making "making country."  While he played
his mother noted the quiet good taste and individuality of the place.

"It smells so clean!" she said to herself.  "There! he hasn't told me
yet why he doesn't smoke.  I never told him I didn't like it."

Johnnie tugged at a bureau drawer.  "He keeps the water in here!" he
said, and before she could stop him he had out a little box with bits of
looking-glass in it, which soon became lakes and rivers in his clay
continent.

Mrs. Leland put them back afterward, admiring the fine quality and
goodly number of garments in that drawer, and their perfect order.  Her
husband had been a man who made a chowder of his bureau drawers, and who
expected her to find all his studs and put them in for him.

"A man like this would be no trouble at all," she thought for a
moment--but then she remembered other things and set her mouth hard.
"Not for mine!" she said determinedly.

By and by he came back, serene as ever, friendly and unpresuming.

"Aren't you going to tell me why you don't smoke?" she suddenly demanded
of him on another quiet dusky afternoon when tea was before them.

He seemed so impersonal, almost remote, though nicer than ever to
Johnny; and Mrs. Leland rather preferred the personal note in
conservation.

"Why of course I am," he replied cordially.  "That's easy," and he
fumbled in his inner pocket.

"Is that where you keep your reasons?" she mischievously inquired.

"It's where I keep yours," he promptly answered, producing the little
notebook.  "Now look here--I've got these all answered--you won't be
able to hold to one of 'em after this.  May I sit by you and explain?"

She made room for him on the sofa amiably enough, but defied him to
convince her.  "Go ahead," she said cheerfully.

"First," he read off, "Previous Marriage.  This is not a sufficient
objection.  Because you have been married you now know what to choose
and what to avoid.  A girl is comparatively helpless in this matter; you
are armed.   That your first marriage was unhappy is a reason for trying
it again.  It is not only that you are better able to choose, but that
by the law of chances you stand to win next time.  Do you admit the
justice of this reasoning?"

"I don't admit anything," she said.  "I'm waiting to ask you a
question."

"Ask it now."

"No--I'll wait till you are all through.  Do go on."

"'Second--The Boy,'" he continued.  "Now Mrs. Leland, solely on the
boy's account I should advise you to marry again.  While he is a baby a
mother is enough, but the older he grows the more he will need a father.
 Of course you should select a man the child could love--a man who could
love the child."

"I begin to suspect you of deep double-dyed surreptitious designs, Mr.
Olmstead.  You know Johnnie loves you dearly.  And you know I won't
marry you," she hastily added.

"I'm not asking you to--now, Mrs. Leland.  I did, in good faith, and I
would again if I thought I had the shadow of a chance--but I'm not at
present.  Still, I'm quite willing to stand as an instance.  Now, we
might resume, on that basis.  Objection one does not really hold against
me--now does it?"

He looked at her cheerily, warmly, openly; and in his clean, solid
strength and tactful kindness he was so unspeakably different from the
dark, fascinating slender man who had become a nightmare to her youth,
that she felt in her heart he was right--so far.  "I won't admit a
thing," she said sweetly.  "But, pray go on."

He went on, unabashed.  "'Second--Boy,' Now if you married me I should
consider the boy as an added attraction.  Indeed--if you do marry
again--someone who doesn't want the boy--I wish you'd give him to me.  I
mean it.  I think he loves me, and I think I could be of real service to
the child."

He seemed almost to have forgotten her, and she watched him curiously.

"Now, to go on," he continued.  "'Third-Profession.'  As to your
profession," said he slowly, clasping his hands over one knee and gazing
at the dark soft-colored rug, "if you married me, and gave up your
profession I should find it a distinct loss, I should lose my favorite
actress."

She gave a little start of surprise.

"Didn't you know how much I admire your work?" he said.  "I don't hang
around the stage entrance--there are plenty of chappies to do that; and
I don't always occupy a box and throw bouquets--I don't like a box
anyhow.  But I haven't missed seeing you in any part you've played
yet--some of 'em I've seen a dozen times.  And you're growing--you'll do
better work still.  It is sometimes a little weak in the love
parts--seems as if you couldn't quite take it seriously--couldn't let
yourself go--but you'll grow.  You'll do better--I really think--after
you're married "

She was rather impressed by this, but found it rather difficult to say
anything; for he was not looking at her at all.  He took up his notebook
again with a smile.

"So--if you married me, you would be more than welcome to go on with
your profession.  I wouldn't stand in your way any more than I do now.
'Fourth--Freedom,'" he read slowly.  "That is easy in one way--hard in
another.  If you married me,"--She stirred resentfully at this constant
reference to their marriage; but he seemed purely hypothetical in tone;
"_I_ wouldn't interfere with your freedom any.  Not of my own will.  But
if you ever grew to love me--or if there were children--it would make
_some_ difference.  Not much.  There mightn't be any children, and it
isn't likely you'd ever love me enough to have that stand in your way.
Otherwise than that you'd have freedom--as much as now.  A little more;
because if you wanted to make a foreign tour, or anything like that, I'd
take care of Johnnie.  'Fifth--Lovers.'"  Here he paused leaning forward
with his chin in his hands, his eyes bent down.  She could see the broad
heavy shoulders, the smooth fit of the well-made, coat, the spotless
collar, and the fine, strong, clean-cut neck.  As it happened she
particularly disliked the neck of the average man--either the cordy, the
beefy or the adipose, and particularly liked this kind, firm and round
like a Roman's, with the hair coming to a clean-cut edge and stopping
there.

"As to lovers," he went on--"I hesitate a little as to what to say about
that.  I'm afraid I shall shock you.  Perhaps I'd better leave out that
one."

"As insuperable?" she mischievously asked.

"No, as too easy," he answered.

"You'd better explain," she said.

"Well then--it's simply this: as a man--I myself admire you more because
so many other men admire you.  I don't sympathize with them, any!--Not
for a minute.  Of course, if you loved any one of them you wouldn't be
my wife.  But if you were my wife--"

"Well?" said she, a little breathlessly.  "You're very irritating!  What
would you do?  Kill 'em all?  Come--If I were your wife?--"

"If you were my wife--" he turned and faced her squarely, his deep eyes
blazing steadily into hers, "In the first place the more lovers you had
that you didn't love the better I'd be pleased."

"And if I did?" she dared him.

"If you were my wife," he purused with perfect quietness, "you would
never love anyone else."

There was a throbbing silence.

"'Sixth--Housekeeping,'" he read.

At this she rose to her feet as if released.  "Sixth and last and
all-sufficient!" she burst out, giving herself a little shake as if to
waken.  "Final and conclusive and admitting no reply!"--I will not keep
house for any man.  Never!  Never!!  Never!!!"

"Why should you?" he said, as he had said it before; "Why not board?"

"I wouldn't board on any account!"

"But you are boarding now.  Aren't you comfortable here?"

"O yes, perfectly comfortable.  But this is the only boarding-house I
ever saw that was comfortable."

"Why not go on as we are--if you married me?"

She laughed shrilly.  "With the other boarders round them and a whole
floor laid between," she parodied gaily.  "No, sir!  _If_ I ever married
again--and I wont--I'd want a home of my own--a whole house--and have it
run as smoothly and perfectly as this does.  With no more care than I
have now!"

"If I could give you a whole house, like this, and run it for you as
smoothly and perfectly as this one--then would you marry me?" he asked.

"O, I dare say I would," she said mockingly.

"My dear," said he, "I have kept this house--for you--for three years."

"What do you mean?" she demanded, flushingly.

"I mean that it is my business,"  he answered serenely.  "Some men run
hotels and some restaurants: I keep a number of boarding houses and make
a handsome income from them.  All the people are comfortable--I see to
that.  I planned to have you use these rooms, had the dumbwaiter run to
the top so you could have meals comfortably there.  You didn't much like
the first housekeeper.  I got one you liked better; cooks to please you,
maids to please you.  I have most seriously tried to make you
comfortable.  When you didn't like a boarder I got rid of him--or
her--they are mostly all your friends now.  Of course if we were
married, we'd fire 'em all."  His tone was perfectly calm and business
like.  "You should keep your special apartments on top; you should also
have the floor above this, a larger bedroom, drawing-room, and bath and
private parlor for you;--I'd stay right here as I am now--and when you
wanted me--I'd be here."

She stiffened a little at this rather tame ending.  She was stirred,
uneasy, dissatisfied.  She felt as if something had been offered and
withdrawn; something was lacking.

"It seems such a funny business--for a man," she said.

"Any funnier than Delmonico's?" he asked.  "It's a business that takes
some ability--witness the many failures.  It is certainly useful.  And
it pays--amazingly."

"I thought it was real estate," she insisted.

"It is.  I'm in a real estate office.  I buy and sell houses--that's how
I came to take this up!"

He rose up, calmly and methodically, walked over to the fire, and laid
his notebook on it.  "There wasn't any strength in any of those
objections, my dear," said he.  "Especially the first one.  Previous
marriage, indeed!  You have never been married before.  You are going to
be--now."


It was some weeks after that marriage that she suddenly turned upon
him--as suddenly as one can turn upon a person whose arms are about
one--demanding.

"And why don't you smoke?--You never told me!"

"I shouldn't like to kiss you so well if you smoked!"--said he.


"I never had any idea," she ventured after a while, "that it could
be--like this."



LOCKED INSIDE


She beats upon her bolted door,
 With faint weak hands;
Drearily walks the narrow floor;
Sullenly sits, blank walls before;
 Despairing stands.

Life calls her, Duty, Pleasure, Gain--
 Her dreams respond;
But the blank daylights wax and wane,
Dull peace, sharp agony, slow pain--
 No hope beyond.

Till she comes a thought!  She lifts her head,
 The world grows wide!
A voice--as if clear words were said--
"Your door, o long imprisoned,
 Is locked inside!"



PRIVATE MORALITY AND PUBLIC IMMORALITY


There is more sense in that convenient trick of blaming "the old Adam"
for our misbehavior than some of us have thought.  That most culpable
sinner we no longer see as a white-souled adult baby, living on uncooked
food in a newmade garden, but as a husky, hairy, highly carnivorous and
bloodthirsty biped, just learning his giant strength, and exercising it
like a giant.

Growing self-conscious and intelligent, he developed an ethical sense,
and built up system after system of morals, all closely calculated to
advance his interests in this world or the next.  The morals of the
early Hebrews, for instance, with which we are most familiar, were
strictly adjusted to their personal profit; their conception of Diety
definitely engaging to furnish protection and reward in return for
specified virtuous conduct.

This is all reasonable and right in its way.  If good conduct were not
ultimately advantageous it would not be good.  The difficulty with the
ancient scheme of morality lies in its narrow range.  "The soul that
sinneth it shall die," is the definite statement; the individual is the
one taken to task, threatened, promised, exhorted and punished.  Our
whole race-habit of thought on questions of morality is personal.  When
goodness is considered it is "my" goodness or "your" goodness--not ours;
and sins are supposed to be promptly traceable to sinners; visible,
catchable, hangable sinners in the flesh.  We have no mental machinery
capable of grasping the commonest instances of collective sin; large,
public continuing sin, to which thousands contribute, for generations
upon generations; and under the consequences of which more thousands
suffer for succeeding centuries.  Yet public evils are what society
suffer from most to-day, and must suffer from most in increasing ratio,
as years pass.

In concrete instance, we are most definitely clear as to the verb "to
steal."  This is wrong.  It says so in the Bible.  It if a very simple
commandment.  If a man steals he is a thief.  And our law following
slowly along after our moral sense, punishes stealing.  But it is one
man stealing from one other man who is a thief.  It is the personal
attack upon personal property, done all at once, which we can see, feel,
and understand.  Let a number of men in combination gradually alienate
the property of a number of other men--a very large number of other men,
and our moral sense makes no remark.  This is not intended in any ironic
sense--it is a plain fact, a physiological, or psychological fact.

The racial mind, long accustomed to attach moral values to personal acts
only, cannot, without definite effort, learn to attach them to
collective acts.  We can do it, in crude instances, when mere numbers
are in question and the offence is a plain one.  If a number of men in a
visible moving group commit murder or arson before our eyes, we had as
lief hang a dozen as one: but when it comes to tracing complicity and
responsibility in the deaths of a few screaming tenants of firetrap
tenements, a death unnecessary perhaps, but for the bursting of the fire
hose--then we are at fault.  The cringing wretch who lit the oilsoaked
rags in the cellar we seize in triumph.  He did it.  Him we can hang.
"The soul that sinneth it shall die."  But if the fire is "an accident,"
owing to "a defective flue," if the fire-escape breaks, the stairs give
away under a little extra weight, or ill-built walls crumble
prematurely--who can we lay hands on?  Where is the soul that sinneth?

Our brains are not trained to follow a complex moral relation; we travel
in the deep ruts of mental habit as old as Adam aforesaid.  Our sense of
duty, of obligation, of blame or praise is all hopelessly egotistic.
"Who is to blame?" we continue to say; when we should say, "Who are to
blame?"  One heavy dose of poison resulting in one corpse shows us
murder.  A thousand tiny doses of poison, concealed in parcels of food,
resulting in the lowered vitality, increased illness and decreased
efficiency of thousands of persons, shows us nothing.  There is need
to-day for very honest mental effort in readjusting our moral sense so
that we may recognize social evils, social offenders and social
responsibility.

Here we are all together, rising and falling in masses under the
influence of other person's conduct, with no possibility of tracing the
death of this particular baby to the dirty hands of that particular
milker of far-off cows.  It wasn't murder--he never saw the baby.  You
can't hang a man for not washing his hands.  We see babies die, look in
vain for the soul that sinneth, and do nothing.

We should have a poor opinion of any state where there was no moral
sense ai all, no weight of public opinion to uphold standards, no
measures to protect innocence and punish crime.  This we should call
barbarism or savagery, and feel proud of our Christian civilization,
where we legislate so profusely and punish so severely--when we can lay
hands on individual offenders, whose crimes, though small, are at least
whole ones.  But we are in precisely that state of barbarism in regard
to the fractional crimes of our complex social life.

If seven doctors in succession refuse to answer a poor man's call and he
dies for lack of medical aid--who has killed him?  Has he seven
murderers--or is each doctor one-seventh of a murderer?  Or is it not
murder at all just to let a man die?

If again,  the doctor does his duty and the man dies because the
medicine given him was different from what the doctor ordered--a
cheaper, weaker drug, an adulteration or substitute--then who killed
him?  The druggist who sold--the clerk who put up the prescription--the
advertiser of the stuff--the manufacturer of it--or those who live on
money invested in the manufacturing company?  "The clerk!" we cry,
delightedly.  "He put up the poison!  He knew it was not what was
ordered!  He did it with his hands!"  "The soul that sinneth _it_ shall
die."  And perhaps it does--or at least the body of it.  Yet the same
drug goes on poisoning.

We might perhaps pass on from that shaggy Adam of our remote past and
his necessary limitations, and begin to study the real relation of human
beings in modern life, learning at last that human conduct changes as
society develops, that morality is no longer a mere matter of "thou
shalt" and "thou shalt not," but a vast complex of mutually interactive
conduct in which personal responsibility has small place.

Take an evil like our railroad management with its yearly tale of
bloodshed and dismemberment, its hundreds and thousands of killed and
wounded.  We cannot pick out and hang a director or president when the
dead brakeman is dragged out from between the cars that did not have
automatic couplers.  The man is dead, is killed, is murdered--but we
cannot fix responsibility.  Can we arrest for murder the poor mother who
is caring for her boy sick with typhoid fever; just because she empties
slops on a watershed that feeds a little brook, that feeds a river, that
feeds a city--and thousands die of that widespread disease?  She is not
personally guilty of murder.  There are others in plenty between her and
the victim and many back of her to blame for her ignorance.  Who can
untangle the responsibility for the ruin of a girl who was utterly
untaught, underpaid, improperly dressed, ill-fed, influenced by every
gorgeously dressed idle woman who stood before her counter, and tempted
by many men in turn?  There is the one "sin"--but is she the only
"sinner"?

Consider the two awful instances of recent date--the Iroquois Theatre
fire in Chicago, the Slocum disaster in New York.  Even if it were
possible to "fix responsibility," to find the one person, or more than
one whom we could prove to blame for these holocausts, what could we do
to these persons as fit punishment for such an injury to society?  If we
could devise tortures prolonged and painful enough to make such
criminals feel as felt their dying victims, what good would that do?  It
would raise no dead, restore no health, prevent no repetition of similar
horrors.  That much has been established by the history of our primitive
systems--punishment does not prevent.

What does?

Here is the real question for society to ask--Adam did not know enough.
The age of personal morals is the age of personal punishment.  The age
of recognized public evils is the age of prevention.  This we are
beginning to see, beginning to do.  After the Iroquois fire we were more
stringent in guarding our theatres.  After the Slocum disaster the
inspection of steamships was more thorough.  After the slaughter of the
innocents in the burning schoolhouse, many other school buildings were
condemned and more were safeguarded.

But this is only a beginning--a feeble, temporary, ineffectual effort.
Social morality does not consist in spasmodic attempts to be good,
following upon some terrible catastrophe.  A mother's duty to a child is
not mere passionate protection after it has fallen through the ice; the
soldier's duty is not confined to wild efforts to recover the flag after
it has been lost.  We have a constant definite active duty to society,
each one of us; there lies our responsibility and failing therein is our
fault.

When men or women fail in full honest efficient performance of their
social service, which means their special kind of work, they sin--if we
must call it sin--against society.  Better drop the very name and
thought of "sin" and say merely, "Why are we to-day so inefficient and
unreliable in our social duty?"  For reason good.  We are not taught
social duty.  For further reason that we are taught much that militates
against it.  Our social instinct is not yet strong enough to push and
pull us into perfect relation with one another without conscious effort.
 We need to be taught from infancy, which way our duty lies--the most
imperative duty of a human creature--to give his life's best service to
humanity.

This would call for new standards in the nursery, the school and the
shop, as well as the platform, press and pulpit.  That is our crying
need; a truer standard of duty, and the proper development of it.  The
School City is a step this way, a long one; as is the George Junior
Republic and other specific instances of effort to bring out the social
sense.

But it is in our work that we need it most.  From babyhood we should be
taught that we are here dependent on one another, beautifully
specialized that we may serve one another; owing to the State, our great
centralized body, the whole service of our lives.  What every common
soldier knows and most of them practice is surely not too difficult for
a common business man.  Our public duty is most simple and clear--to do
our best work for the service of the world.  And our personal sin--the
one sin against humanity--is to let that miserable puny outgrown
Ego--our exaggerated sense of personality--divert us from that service.



[Untitled]


With God Above--Beneath--Beside--
 Without--Within--and Everywhere;
Rising with the resistless tide
 Of life, and Sure of Getting There.

Patient with Nature's long delay,
 Proud of our conscious upward swing;
Not sorry for a single day,
 And Not Afraid of Anything!

With Motherhood at last awake--
 With Power to Do and Light to See--
Women may now begin to Make
 The People we are Meant to Be!



THE HUMANNESS OF WOMEN


A woman by the river's brim,
A wife and servant is to him--
And she is nothing more.


We have made mistakes, as old as humanity, about the world, and about
women.

First, as to the world:

This we have assumed to be a general battlefield for men to struggle in;
a place for free competition; full of innumerable persons whose natural
mode of life was to struggle, for existence, with one another.

This is the individualist view, and is distinctly masculine.

Males are essentially individualistic--born to vary and compete; and an
exclusively masculine world must be individualistic and competitive.

We have been wrong.  The new Social Philosophy recognizes Society as an
orderly life-form, having its own laws of growth; and that we, as
individuals, live only as active parts of Society.  Instead of accepting
this world of warfare, disease, and crime, of shameful, unnecessary
poverty and pain, as natural and right, we now see that all these evils
may be removed, and we propose to remove them.  Humanity is waking up,
is beginning to understand its own nature, is beginning to face a new
and a possible problem, instead of the dark enigma of the past.

Second, as to the woman:

Our mistake about her was a very strange one.  No one knows yet how or
why it was made; yet there it stands; one of the most colossal blunders
ever made by mankind.  In the face of all creation, where the female is
sometimes found quite self-sufficient, often superior, and always equal
to the male, our human race set up the "andro-centric theory," holding
that man alone is the race type; and that woman was "his female."  In
what "Mr. Venus" described as "the vicious pride of his youth," our
budding humanity distinguished itself by discrediting its mother.  "You
are a female," said Ancient Man, "and that's all.  We are the People!"

This is the alpha and omega of the old idea about woman.  It saw in her
only sex--not Humanity.

The New Woman is Human first, last and always.  Incidentally she is
female; as man is male.  As a male he has done his small share in the
old physical process of reproduction; but as a Human Creature he has
done practically all in the new Social processes which make
civilization.

He has been Male--and Human:--She has been Female--and nothing
else;--that is, in our old idea.

Holding this idea; absurd, erroneous, and mischievous to a terrible
degree; we strove to carry it out in our behavior; and human history so
far is the history of a wholly masculine world, competing and fighting
as males must, forever seeking and serving the female as males must, yet
building this our world as best they could alone.

Theirs is the credit--and the shame--of the world behind us, the world
around us; but the world before us has a new element--the Humanness of
Woman.

For a little over a century we have become increasingly conscious of a
stir, an uprising, and protest among women.  The long-suppressed "better
half" of humanity has begun to move and push and lift herself.  This
Woman's movement is as natural, as beneficial, as irresistible as the
coming of spring; but it has been misunderstood and opposed from the
first by the glacial moraine of old ideas, the inert force of sheer
blank ignorance, and prejudice as old as Adam.

At first the women strove for a little liberty, for education; then for
some equality before the law, for common justice; then, with larger
insight, for full equal rights with men in every human field; and as
essential base of these, for the right of suffrage.

Woman suffrage is but one feature of the movement, but it is a most
important one.  The opposition to it is wholly one of sex-prejudice, of
feeling, not of reason; the opposition of a masculine world; and of an
individualism also masculine.  The male is physiologically an
individualist.  It is his place in nature to vary, to introduce new
characteristics, and to strive mightily with his rivals for the favor of
the females.  A world of males must fight.

With the whole of history of this combative sort; with masculinity and
humanity identical, in the average mind; there is something alien,
unnatural, even revolting, in the claim of woman to her share in the
work and management of the world.  Against it he brings up one constant
cry--that woman's progress will injure womanhood.  All that he sees in
woman is her sex; and he opposes her advance on the ground that "as a
woman" she is unfit to take part in "a man's world"--and that if she
did, it would mysteriously but inevitably injure her "as a woman."

Suggest that she might be able to take part in "a woman's world,"--and
has as much right to a world made her way as he has to his man-made
world!  Suggest that without any such extreme reversal, she has a right
to half the world; half the work, half the pay, half the care, half the
glory!

To all this replies the Male-individualist:

"The World has to be as it is.  It is a place to fight in; fight for
life, fight for money.  Work is for slaves and poor people generally.
Nobody would work unless they had to.  You are females and no part of
the world at all.  Your place is at home: to bear and rear children--and
to cook."

Now what is the position toward women of this new philosophy that sees
Society as one thing, and the main thing to be considered; that sees the
world as a place open to ceaseless change and improvement; that sees the
way so to change and improve it that the major part of our poor silly
sins and sorrows will disappear utterly for lack of cause?

From this viewpoint male and female fall into two lower positions, both
right and proper; useful, beautiful, essential for the replenishment of
the race on earth.  From this viewpoint men and women rise, together,
from that lower relation, to the far higher one of Humanness, that
common Humanness which is hers as much as his.  Seeing Society as the
real life-form; and our individual lives as growing in glory and power
as we serve and develop Society; the movement of women becomes of
majestic importance.  It is the advance of an entire half the race, from
a position of arrested development, into full humanness.

The world is no longer seen as a battlefield, where it is true, women do
not belong; but as a garden--a school--a church--a home, where they
visibly do belong.  In the great task of cultivating the earth they have
an equal interest and an equal power.  Equality is not identity.  There
is work of all kinds and sizes--and half of it is woman's.

In that vast labor of educating humanity, till all of us understand one
another; till the thoughts and feelings necessary to our progress can
flow smooth and clear through the world-mind, women have preeminent
part.  They are the born teachers, by virtue of their motherhood, as
well as in the human joy of it.

In the power of organization which is essential to our progress we have
special need of women, and their rapid and universal movement in this
direction is one of the most satisfactory proofs of our advance.  In
every art, craft and profession they have the same interests, the same
power.  We rob the world of half its service when we deny women their
share in it.

In direct political action there is every reason for women's voting that
there is for men's; and every reason for a spreading universal suffrage
that there is for democracy.  As far as any special power in government
is called for, the mother is the natural ruler, the natural
administrator and executive.  The functions of democratic government may
be wisely and safely shared between men and women.

Here we have our great position fairly before us:--the improvement of
the world is ours to make; women are coming forward to help make it;
women are human with every human power; democracy is the highest form of
government--so far; and the use of the ballot is essential to democracy;
therefore women should vote!

Against this rises the tottering fortress of the ultra-masculine,
abetted by a petty handful of witless traitors--those petticoated
creatures who also see in women nothing but their sex.  They may be, in
some cases, honest in their belief; but their honesty does no credit to
their intelligence.  They are obsessed by this dominant idea of sex; due
clearly enough to the long period of male dominance--to our androcentric
culture.  The male naturally sees in the female, sex; first, last and
always.  For all these centuries she has been restricted to the exercise
of feminine duties only, with the one addition of house-service.

The wife-and-mother sex, the servant sex, she is to him; and nothing
more.  The woman does not look at men in this light.  She has to
consider them as human creatures, because they monopolize the human
functions.  She does not consider the motorman and conductor as males,
but as promotors of travel; she does not chuck the bellboy under the
chin and kiss the waiter!

Inextricably mingled with the masculine view is the individualist view,
seeing the world forever and ever as a place of struggle.

Then comes this great change of our time, the dawning of the Social
consciousness.  Here is a world of combination, of ordered grouping and
inter-service.  Here is a world now wasting its wealth like water--all
this waste may be saved.  Here is a world of worse than unnecessary war.
 We will stop this warfare.  Here is a world of hideous diseases.  We
will exterminate them.  Here is a world of what we call "Sin"--almost
all of which is due to Ignorance, Ill-health, Unhappiness, Injustice.

When the world learns how to take care of itself decently; when there
are no dirty evil places upon it, with innocent children born daily and
hourly into conditions which inevitably produce a certain percentage of
criminality; when the intelligence and good breeding which now
distinguish some of us are common to all of us--we shan't hear so much
about sin!

A socially conscious world, intelligent, courageous, earnest to improve
itself, seeking to establish a custom of peaceful helpful
interservice--such a world has no fear of woman, and no feeling that she
is unfit to participate in its happy labors.  The new social philosophy
welcomes woman suffrage.

*

But suppose you are not in any sense Socialistically inclined.  Suppose
you are still an Individualist, albeit a believer in votes for women.
Even so, merely from the woman's point of view, enough can be said to
justify the promise of a New World.

What makes the peace and beauty of the Home--its
order--comfort--happiness?--the Woman.

Her service is given, not hired.  Her attitude is of one seeking to
administer a common fund for the common good.  She does not set her
children to compete for their dinner--does not give most to the
strongest and leave the weakest to go to the wall.  It is only in her
lowest helplessness; under the degrading influence of utter poverty,
that she is willing to exploit her children and let them work before
their time.

If she, merely as Woman, merely as wife and mother, comes forward to
give the world the same service she has given the home, it will be
wholly to its advantage.

Go and look at the legislation initiated or supported by women in every
country where women vote--and you will see one unbroken line of social
service.  Not self-interest--not mercenary profit--not competition; but
one steady upward pressure; the visible purpose to uplift and help the
world.

This world is ours as much as man's.  We have not only a right to half
its management but a duty to half its service.  It is our duty as human
beings to help make the world better--quickly!  It is our duty as Women
to bring our Motherhood to comfort and help humanity--our children every
one!



HERE IS THE EARTH


Here is the earth: As big, as fresh, as clean,
 As when it first grew green;
Our little spots of dirt walled in,
As easy to outgrow as sin,
In the swift, sweet, triumphal hour
 Of nature's power.

We have not hurt the world: Still safe we rest
 On that great loving breast.
Proud, patient mother!  Strong and still!
Our little years of doing ill
Lost in her smooth, unmeasured time
 Of life sublime.

We need not grieve, nor kneel our faults to own;
 She has not even known
That we offended!  Our misdeeds
She covers with one summer's weeds:
Her love we thought so long away--
 Is ours to-day.

And here are we.  Our bodies are as new
 As ever Adam grew:
Replenished still with daily touch,
By the fair mother, loving much.
Glad living things!  Still conscious part
 Of earth's rich heart!

And for the soul which these fair bodies give
 Increasing room to live--?
It is the same soul that was born
In the dim, lovely, unknown morn
Of Nature's waking--the same soul--
 Still here, and whole!

Strong? `Tis the force that governs ring on ring
 Where quiet planets swing.
Glad?  `Tis the joy of riotous flowers
And meadow-larks in May, now ours,
Ours endlessly--to have--to give--
 To all who live!

No grief behind have we, no fear before
 But only more and more
The splendid passion of the soul
In new creation to unroll:
All life, poured new in all the lands,
 Through our glad hands!



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER III.

BREAKERS


Duck! Dive! Here comes another one!
Wait till the crest-ruffles show!
Beyond is smooth water in beauty and wonder--
Shut your mouth!  Hold your breath!  Dip your head under!
Dive through the weight and the wash, and the thunder--
Look out for the undertow!


If Diantha imagined that her arithmetical victory over a too-sordid
presentation of the parental claim was a final one, she soon found
herself mistaken.

It is easy to say--putting an epic in an epigram--"She seen her duty and
she done it!" but the space and time covered are generally as far beyond
our plans as the estimates of an amateur mountain climber exceed his
achievements.

Her determination was not concealed by her outraged family.  Possibly
they thought that if the matter was well aired, and generally discussed,
the daring offender might reconsider.  Well-aired it certainly was, and
widely discussed by the parents of the little town before young people
who sat in dumbness, or made faint defense.  It was also discussed by
the young people, but not before their parents.

She had told Ross, first of all, meaning to have a quiet talk with him
to clear the ground before arousing her own family; but he was suddenly
away just as she opened the subject, by a man on a wheel--some wretched
business about the store of course--and sent word that night that he
could not come up again.  Couldn't come up the next night either.  Two
long days--two long evenings without seeing him.  Well--if she went away
she'd have to get used to that.

But she had so many things to explain, so much to say to make it right
with him; she knew well what a blow it was.  Now it was all over
town--and she had had no chance to defend her position.

The neighbors called.  Tall bony Mrs. Delafield who lived nearest to
them and had known Diantha for some years, felt it her duty to make a
special appeal--or attack rather; and brought with her stout Mrs.
Schlosster, whose ancestors and traditions were evidently of German
extraction.

Diantha retired to her room when she saw these two bearing down upon the
house; but her mother called her to make a pitcher of lemonade for
them--and having entered there was no escape.  They harried her with
questions, were increasingly offended by her reticence, and expressed
disapproval with a fullness that overmastered the girl's self-control.

"I have as much right to go into business as any other citizen, Mrs.
Delafield," she said with repressed intensity.  "I am of age and live in
a free country.  What you say of children no longer applies to me."

"And what is this mysterious business you're goin' into--if one may
inquire?  Nothin you're ashamed to mention, I hope?" asked Mrs.
Delafield.

"If a woman refuses to mention her age is it because she's ashamed of
it?" the girl retorted, and Mrs. Delafield flushed darkly.

"Never have I heard such talk from a maiden to her elders," said Mrs.
Schlosster.  "In my country the young have more respect, as is right."

Mrs. Bell objected inwardly to any reprimand of her child by others; but
she agreed to the principle advanced and made no comment.

Diantha listened to quite a volume of detailed criticism, inquiry and
condemnation, and finally rose to her feet with the stiff courtesy of
the young.

"You must excuse me now," she said with set lips.  "I have some
necessary work to do."

She marched upstairs, shut her bedroom door and locked it, raging
inwardly.  "Its none of their business!  Not a shadow!  Why should
Mother sit there and let them talk to me like that!  One would think
childhood had no limit--unless it's matrimony!"

This reminded her of her younger sister's airs of superior wisdom, and
did not conduce to a pleasanter frame of mind.  "With all their
miserable little conventions and idiocies!  And what 'they'll say,' and
'they'll think'!  As if I cared!  Minnie'll be just such another!"

She heard the ladies going out, still talking continuously, a faint
response from her mother now and then, a growing quiet as their steps
receded toward the gate; and then another deeper voice took up the theme
and heavily approached.

It was the minister!  Diantha dropped into her rocker and held the arms
tight.  "Now I'll have to take it again I suppose.  But he ought to know
me well enough to understand."

"Diantha!" called her mother, "Here's Dr. Major;" and the girl washed
her face and came down again.

Dr. Major was a heavy elderly man with a strong mouth and a warm hand
clasp.  "What's all this I hear about you, young lady?" he demanded,
holding her hand and looking her straight in the eye.  "Is this a new
kind of Prodigal Daughter we're encountering?"

He did not look nor sound condemnatory, and as she faced him she caught
a twinkle in the wise old eyes.

"You can call it that if you want to," she said, "Only I thought the
Prodigal Son just spent his money--I'm going to earn some."

"I want you to talk to Diantha, Doctor Major," Mrs. Bell struck in.
"I'm going to ask you to excuse me, and go and lie down for a little.  I
do believe she'll listen to you more than to anybody."

The mother retired, feeling sure that the good man who had known her
daughter for over fifteen years would have a restraining influence now;
and Diantha braced herself for the attack.

It came, heavy and solid, based on reason, religion, tradition, the
custom of ages, the pastoral habit of control and protection, the
father's instinct, the man's objection to a girl's adventure.  But it
was courteous, kind, and rationally put, and she met it point by point
with the whole-souled arguments of a new position, the passionate
enthusiasm of her years.

They called a truce.

"I can see that you _think_ its your duty, young, woman--that's the main
thing.  I think you're wrong.  But what you believe to be right you have
to do.  That's the way we learn my dear, that's the way we learn!
Well--you've been a good child ever since I've known you.  A remarkably
good child.  If you have to sow this kind of wild oats--" they both
smiled at this, "I guess we can't stop you.  I'll keep your secret--"

"Its not a secret really," the girl explained, "I'll tell them as soon
as I'm settled.  Then they can tell--if they want to."  And they both
smiled again.

"Well--I won't tell till I hear of it then.  And--yes, I guess I can
furnish that document with a clean conscience."

She gave him paper and pen and he wrote, with a grin, handing her the
result.

She read it, a girlish giggle lightening the atmosphere.  "Thank you!"
she said earnestly.  "Thank you ever so much.  I knew you would help
me."

"If you get stuck anywhere just let me know," he said rising.  "This
Proddy Gal may want a return ticket yet!"

"I'll walk first!" said Diantha.

"O Dr. Major," cried her mother from the window, "Don't go!  We want you
to stay to supper of course!"

But he had other calls to make, he said, and went away, his big hands
clasped behind him; his head bent, smiling one minute and shaking his
head the next.

Diantha leaned against a pearly eucalyptus trunk and watched him.  She
would miss Dr. Major.  But who was this approaching?  Her heart sank
miserably.  Mrs. Warden--and _all_ the girls.

She went to meet them--perforce.  Mrs. Warden had always been kind and
courteous to her; the girls she had not seen very much of, but they had
the sweet Southern manner, were always polite.  Ross's mother she must
love.  Ross's sisters too--if she could.  Why did the bottom drop out of
her courage at sight of them?

"You dear child!" said Mrs. Warden, kissing her.  "I know just how you
feel!  You want to help my boy!  That's your secret!  But this won't do
it, my dear!"

"You've no idea how badly Ross feels!" said Madeline.  "Mrs. Delafield
dropped in just now and told us.  You ought to have seen him!"

"He didn't believe it of course," Adeline put in.  "And he wouldn't say
a thing--not a thing to blame you."

"We said we'd come over right off--and tried to bring him--but he said
he'd got to go back to the store," Coraline explained.

"He was mad though!" said Dora--"_I_ know."

Diantha looked from one to the other helplessly.

"Come in!  Come in!" said Mrs. Bell hospitably.  "Have this rocker, Mrs.
Warden--wouldn't you like some cool drink?  Diantha?"

"No indeed!" Mrs. Warden protested.  "Don't get a thing.  We're going
right back, it's near supper time.  No, we can't think of staying, of
course not, no indeed!--But we had to come over and hear about this dear
child's idea!--Now tell us all about it, Diantha!"

There they sat--five pairs of curious eyes--and her mother's sad
ones--all kind--all utterly incapable of understanding.

She moistened her lips and plunged desperately.  "It is nothing
dreadful, Mrs. Warden.  Plenty of girls go away to earn their livings
nowadays.  That is all I'm doing."

"But why go away?"

"I thought you were earning your living before!"

"Isn't teaching earning your living?"

"What _are_ you going to do?" the girls protested variously, and Mrs.
Warden, with a motherly smile, suggested--

"That doesn't explain your wanting to leave Ross, my dear--and your
mother!"

"I don't want to leave them," protested Diantha, trying to keep her
voice steady.  "It is simply that I have made up my mind I can do better
elsewhere."

"Do what better?" asked Mrs. Warden with sweet patience, which reduced
Diantha to the bald statement, "Earn more money in less time."

"And is that better than staying with your mother and your lover?"
pursued the gentle inquisitor; while the girls tried, "What do you want
to earn more money for?" and "I thought you earned a lot before."

Now Diantha did not wish to state in so many words that she wanted more
money in order to marry sooner--she had hardly put it to herself that
way.  She could not make them see in a few moments that her plan was to
do far more for her mother than she would otherwise ever be able to.
And as to making them understand the larger principles at stake--the
range and depth of her full purpose--that would be physically
impossible.

"I am sorry!" she said with trembling lips.  "I am extremely sorry.
But--I cannot explain!"

Mrs. Warden drew herself up a little.  "Cannot explain to me?--Your
mother, of course, knows?"

"Diantha is naturally more frank with me than with--anyone," said Mrs.
Bell proudly, "But she does not wish her--business--plans--made public
at present!"

Her daughter looked at her with vivid gratitude, but the words "made
public" were a little unfortunate perhaps.

"Of course," Mrs. Warden agreed, with her charming smile, "that we can
quite understand.  I'm sure I should always wish my girls to feel so.
Madeline--just show Mrs. Bell that necktie you're making--she was asking
about the stitch, you remember."

The necktie was produced and admired, while the other girls asked
Diantha if she had her fall dressmaking done yet--and whether she found
wash ribbon satisfactory.  And presently the whole graceful family
withdrew, only Dora holding her head with visible stiffness.

Diantha sat on the floor by her mother, put her head in her lap and
cried.  "How splendid of you, Mother!" she sobbed.  "How simply
splendid!  I will tell you now--if--if--you won't tell even
Father--yet."

"Dear child" said her Mother, "I'd rather not know in that case.  It
is--easier."

"That's what I kept still for!" said the girl.  "It's hard enough,
goodness knows--as it is!  Its nothing wicked, or even risky, Mother
dear--and as far as I can see it is right!"

Her mother smiled through her tears.  "If you say that, my dear child, I
know there's no stopping you.  And I hate to argue with you--even for
your own sake, because it is so much to my advantage to have you here.
I--shall miss you--Diantha!"

"Don't, Mother!" sobbed the girl.

"Its natural for the young to go.  We expect it--in time.  But you are
so young yet--and--well, I had hoped the teaching would satisfy you till
Ross was ready."

Diantha sat up straight.

"Mother! can't you see Ross'll never be ready!  Look at that family!
And the way they live!  And those mortgages!  I could wait and teach and
save a little even with Father always losing money; but I can't see Ross
wearing himself out for years and years--I just _can't_ bear it!"

Her mother stroked her fair hair softly, not surprised that her own plea
was so lost in thought of the brave young lover.

"And besides," the girl went on "If I waited--and saved--and married
Ross--what becomes of _you,_ I'd like to know?  What I can't stand is to
have you grow older and sicker--and never have any good time in all your
life!"

Mrs. Bell smiled tenderly.  "You dear child!" she said; as if an
affectionate five-year old had offered to get her a rainbow, "I know you
mean it all for the best.  But, O my _dearest_!  I'd rather have
you--here--at home with me---than any other 'good time' you can
imagine!"

She could not see the suffering in her daughter's face; but she felt she
had made an impression, and followed it up with heart-breaking
sincerity.  She caught the girl to her breast and held her like a little
child.  "O my baby! my baby!  Don't leave your mother.  I can't bear
it!"

A familiar step outside, heavy, yet uncertain, and they both looked at
each other with frightened eyes.

They had forgotten the biscuit.


"Supper ready?" asked Mr. Bell, with grim humor.

"It will be in a moment, Father," cried Diantha springing to her feet.
"At least--in a few moments."

"Don't fret the child, Father," said Mrs. Henderson softly.  "She's
feeling bad enough."

"Sh'd think she would," replied her husband.  "Moreover--to my mind--she
ought to."

He got out the small damp local paper and his pipe, and composed himself
in obvious patience: yet somehow this patience seemed to fill the
kitchen, and to act like a ball and chain to Diantha's feet.

She got supper ready, at last, making griddle-cakes instead of biscuit,
and no comment was made of the change: but the tension in the atmosphere
was sharply felt by the two women; and possibly by the tall old man, who
ate less than usual, and said absolutely nothing.

"I'm going over to see Edwards about that new incubator," he said when
the meal was over, and departed; and Mrs. Bell, after trying in vain to
do her mending, wiped her clouded glasses and went to bed.

Diantha made all neat and tidy; washed her own wet eyes again, and went
out under the moon.  In that broad tender mellow light she drew a deep
breath and stretched her strong young arms toward the sky in dumb
appeal.

"I knew it would be hard," she murmured to herself, "That is I knew the
facts--but I didn't know the feeling!"

She stood at the gate between the cypresses, sat waiting under the
acacia boughs, walked restlessly up and down the path outside, the dry
pepper berries crush softly under foot; bracing herself for one more
struggle--and the hardest of all.

"He will understand!" he told herself, over and over, but at the bottom
of her heart she knew he wouldn't.

He came at last; a slower, wearier step than usual; came and took both
her hands in his and stood holding them, looking at her questioningly.
Then he held her face between his palms and made her look at him.  Her
eyes were brave and steady, but the mouth trembled in spite of her.

He stilled it with a kiss, and drew her to a seat on the bench beside
him.  "My poor Little Girl!  You haven't had a chance yet to really tell
me about this thing, and I want you to right now.  Then I'm going to
kill about forty people in this town!  _Somebody_ has been mighty
foolish."

She squeezed his hand, but found it very difficult to speak.  His love,
his sympathy, his tenderness, were so delicious after this day's
trials--and before those further ones she could so well anticipate.  She
didn't wish to cry any more, that would by no means strengthen her
position, and she found she couldn't seem to speak without crying.

"One would think to hear the good people of this town that you were
about to leave home and mother for--well, for a trip to the moon!" he
added.  "There isn't any agreement as to what you're going to do, but
they're unanimous as to its being entirely wrong.  Now suppose you tell
me about it."

"I will," said Diantha.  "I began to the other night, you know, you
first of course--it was too bad! your having to go off at that exact
moment.  Then I had to tell mother--because--well you'll see presently.
Now dear--just let me say it _all_--before you--do anything."

"Say away, my darling.  I trust you perfectly."

She flashed a grateful look at him.  "It is this way, my dear.  I have
two, three, yes four, things to consider:--My own personal problem--my
family's--yours--and a social one."

"My family's?" he asked, with a faint shade of offence in his tone.

"No no dear--your own," she explained.

"Better cut mine out, Little Girl," he said.  "I'll consider that
myself."

"Well--I won't talk about it if you don't want me to.  There are the
other three."

"I won't question your second, nor your imposing third, but isn't the
first one--your own personal problem--a good deal answered?" he
suggested, holding her close for a moment.

"Don't!" she said.  "I can't talk straight when you put it that way."

She rose hurriedly and took a step or two up and down.  "I don't
suppose--in spite of your loving me, that I can make you see it as I do.
 But I'll be just as clear as I can.  There are some years before us
before we can be together.  In that time I intend to go away and
undertake a business I am interested in.  My purpose is to--develop the
work, to earn money, to help my family, and to--well, not to hinder
you."

"I don't understand, I confess," he said.  "Don't you propose to tell me
what this 'work' is?"

"Yes--I will--certainly.  But not yet dear!  Let me try to show you how
I feel about it."

"Wait," said he.  "One thing I want to be sure of.  Are you doing this
with any quixotic notion of helping me--in _my_ business?  Helping me to
take care of my family?  Helping me to--" he stood up now, looking very
tall and rather forbidding, "No, I won't say that to you."

"Would there be anything wrong in my meaning exactly that?" she asked,
holding her own head a little higher; "both what you said and what you
didn't?"

"It would be absolutely wrong, all of it," he answered.  "I cannot
believe that the woman I love would--could take such a position."

"Look here, Ross!" said the girl earnestly.  "Suppose you knew where
there was a gold mine--_knew it_--and by going away for a few years you
could get a real fortune--wouldn't you do it?"

"Naturally I should," he agreed.

"Well, suppose it wasn't a gold mine, but a business, a new system like
those cigar stores--or--some patent amusement specialty--or
_anything_--that you knew was better than what you're doing--wouldn't
you have a right to try it?"

"Of course I should--but what has that to do with this case?"

"Why it's the same thing!  Don't you see?  I have plans that will be of
real benefit to all of us, something worth while to _do_--and not only
for us but for _everybody_--a real piece of progress--and I'm going to
leave my people--and even you!--for a little while--to make us all
happier later on."

He smiled lovingly at her but shook his head slowly.  "You dear, brave,
foolish child!" he said.  "I don't for one moment doubt your noble
purposes.  But you don't get the man's point of view--naturally.  What's
more you don't seem to get the woman's."

"Can you see no other point of view than those?" she asked.

"There are no others," he answered.  "Come! come! my darling, don't add
this new difficulty to what we've got to carry!  I know you have a hard
time of it at home.  Some day, please God, you shall have an easier one!
 And I'm having a hard time too--I don't deny it.  But you are the
greatest joy and comfort I have, dear--you know that.  If you go
away--it will be harder and slower and longer--that's all.  I shall have
you to worry about too.  Let somebody else do the gold-mine, dear--you
stay here and comfort your Mother as long as you can--and me.  How can I
get along without you?"

He tried to put his arm around her again, but she drew back.  "Dear,"
she said.  "If I deliberately do what I think is right--against your
wishes--what will you do?"

"Do?" The laughed bitterly.  "What can I do?  I'm tied by the leg
here--l can't go after you.  I've nothing to pull you out of a scrape
with if you get in one.  I couldn't do anything but--stand it."

"And if I go ahead, and do what you don't like--and make
you--suffer--would you--would you rather be free?"  Her voice was very
low and shaken, but he heard her well enough.

"Free of you?  Free of _you_?"  He caught her and held her and kissed
her over and over.

"You are mine!" he said.  "You have given yourself to me!  You cannot
leave me.  Neither of us is free--ever again."  But she struggled away
from him.

"Both of us are free--to do what we think right, _always_ Ross!  I
wouldn't try to stop you if you thought it was your duty to go to the
North Pole!"  She held him a little way off.  "Let me tell you, dear.
Sit down--let me tell you all about it."  But he wouldn't sit down.

"I don't think I want to know the details," he said.  "It doesn't much
matter what you're going to do--if you really go away.  I can't stop
you--I see that.  If you think this thing is your 'duty' you'll do it if
it kills us all--and you too!  If you have to go--I shall do
nothing--can do nothing--but wait till you come back to me!  Whatever
happens, darling--no matter how you fail--don't ever be afraid to come
back to me."

He folded his arms now--did not attempt to hold her--gave her the
freedom she asked and promised her the love she had almost feared to
lose--and her whole carefully constructed plan seemed like a child's
sand castle for a moment; her heroic decision the wildest folly.

He was not even looking at her; she saw his strong, clean-cut profile
dark against the moonlit house, a settled patience in its lines.  Duty!
Here was duty, surely, with tenderest happiness.  She was leaning toward
him--her hand was seeking his, when she heard through the fragrant
silence a sound from her mother's room--the faint creak of her light
rocking chair.  She could not sleep--she was sitting up with her
trouble, bearing it quietly as she had so many others.

The quiet everyday tragedy of that distasteful life--the slow withering
away of youth and hope and ambition into a gray waste of ineffectual
submissive labor--not only of her life, but of thousands upon thousands
like her--it all rose up like a flood in the girl's hot young heart.

Ross had turned to her--was holding out his arms to her.  "You won't go,
my darling!" he said.

"I am going Wednesday on the 7.10," said Diantha.



THE "ANTI" AND THE FLY


The fly upon the Cartwheel
 Thought he made all the Sound;
He thought he made the Cart go on--
 And made the wheels go round.

The Fly upon the Cartwheel
 Has won undying fame
For Conceit that was colossal,
 And Ignorance the same.

But to-day he has a Rival
 As we roll down History's Track--
For the "Anti" on the Cartwheel
 Thinks she makes the Wheels go back!



THE BARREL


I was walking, peacefully enough, along a plain ordinary road, when I
lifted my head and observed an impressive gateway.  The pillars were of
stone, high, carven, massive; mighty gates of wrought iron hung between
them, the gray wall stretched away on either side.

As the gates were open and there was no prohibitory sign, I entered, and
for easy miles walked on; under the springing arches of tall elms, flat
roofs of beech, and level fans of fir and pine; through woodland, park
and meadow, with glimpses of starred lily-ponds, blue lakelets, and
bright brooks; seeing the dappled deer, the swans and pheasants--a
glorious place indeed.

Then a smooth turn, and across velvet lawns and statued gardens I saw a
towering palace, so nobly beautiful, so majestic, I took off my hat
involuntarily.  Approaching it I was met by courteous servingmen; told
that it was open to visitors; and shown from hall to hall, from floor to
floor; where every object was a work of art; where line, color and
proportion, perfect architecture and fitting decoration made an
overwhelming beauty.

"Whose it is?" I inquired.  "Some Duke?--King?--Emperor?  Who owns this
palace?--this glorious estate?"

They bowed and offered to lead me to him.

Downward and toward the back; through servants' apartments; through
workroom, scullery and stable; out to the last and least and meanest
little yard; narrow and dark, stone-paved, stone-walled, shadowed by
caves of barns; there, huddled in a barrel, they pointed out a man.

They bowed to him, they called him master.  They told me he was the
owner of this vast estate.

I could not believe it--but they stood bowing--and he ordered them away.

"What!" I cried.  "_You!_--you are the owner--the master of all this
wealth of beauty--this beauty of wealth!  You own these miles of breezy
upland and rich valley--still forests and bright lakes!  You own these
noble trees--those overflowing flowers--those glades of browsing deer!
You own this palace--a joy to the eye and uplift to the soul!  This
majesty and splendor--this comfort, beauty, form, you own all this--and
are living--_here._"

He regarded me superciliously, with a weary expression.

"Young man," he said, "you are a dreamer--a visionary--a Utopian!--an
idealist!  You should consider Facts, my young sir; fix your mind on
Facts!  The _Fact_ is that I live in this Barrel."


It was a fact;--he did visibly live in the Barrel.

It was also a fact that he owned that vast estate.

And there was no lid on the Barrel.



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


III.

HEALTH AND BEAUTY.


NOTE--The word "Androcentric" we owe to Prof. Lester F. Ward.  In his
book, "Pure Sociology," Chap. 14, he describes the Androcentric Theory
of life, hitherto universally accepted; and introduces his own
"Gyneacocentric Theory."  All who are interested in the deeper
scientific aspects of this question are urged to read that chapter.
Prof. Ward's theory is to my mind the most important that has been
offered the world since the Theory of Evolution; and without exception
the most important that has ever been put forward concerning women.


Among the many paradoxes which we find in human life is our low average
standard of health and beauty, compared with our power and knowledge.
All creatures suffer from conflict with the elements; from enemies
without and within--the prowling devourers of the forest, and "the
terror that walketh in darkness" and attacks the body from inside, in
hidden millions.

Among wild animals generally, there is a certain standard of excellence;
if you shoot a bear or a bird, it is a fair sample of the species; you
do not say, "O what an ugly one!" or "This must have been an invalid!"

Where we have domesticated any animal, and interfered with its natural
habits, illness has followed; the dog is said to have the most diseases
second to man; the horse comes next; but the wild ones put us to shame
by their superior health and the beauty that belongs to right
development.

In our long ages of blind infancy we assume that sickness was a
visitation frown the gods; some still believe this, holding it to be a
special prerogative of divinity to afflict us in this way.  We speak of
"the ills that flesh is heir to" as if the inheritance was entailed and
inalienable.  Only of late years, after much study and long struggle
with this old belief which made us submit to sickness as a blow from the
hand of God, we are beginning to learn something of the many causes of
our many diseases, and how to remove some of them.

It is still true, however, that almost every one of us is to some degree
abnormal; the features asymmetrical, the vision defective, the digestion
unreliable, the nervous system erratic--we are but a job lot even in
what we call "good health"; and are subject to a burden of pain and
premature death that would make life hideous if it were not so
ridiculously unnecessary.

As to beauty--we do not think of expecting it save in the rarely
exceptional case.  Look at the faces--the figures--in any crowd you
meet; compare the average man or the average woman with the normal type
of human beauty as given us in picture and statue; and consider if there
is not some general cause for so general a condition of ugliness.

Moreover, leaving our defective bodies concealed by garments; what are
those garments, as conducive to health and beauty?  Is the practical
ugliness of our men's attire, and the impractical absurdity of our
women's, any contribution to human beauty?  Look at our houses--are they
beautiful?  Even the houses of the rich?

We do not even know that we ought to live in a world of overflowing
loveliness; and that our contribution to it should be the loveliest of
all.  We are so sodden in the dull ugliness of our interiors, so used to
calling a tame weary low-toned color scheme "good taste," that only
children dare frankly yearn for Beauty--and they are speedily educated
out of it.

The reasons specially given for our low standards of health and beauty
are ignorance, poverty, and the evil effects of special trades.  The Man
with the Hoe becomes brother to the ox because of over-much hoeing; the
housepainter is lead-poisoned because of his painting; books have been
written to show the injurious influence of nearly all our industries
upon workers.

These causes are sound as far as they go; but do not cover the whole
ground.

The farmer may be muscle-bound and stooping from his labor; but that
does not account for his dyspepsia or his rheumatism.

Then we allege poverty as covering all.  Poverty does cover a good deal.
 But when we find even a half-fed savage better developed than a well
paid cashier; and a poor peasant woman a more vigorous mother than the
idle wife of a rich man, poverty is not enough.

Then we say ignorance explains it.  But there are most learned
professors who are ugly and asthmathic; there are even doctors who can
boast no beauty and but moderate health; there are some of the petted
children of the wealthy, upon whom every care is lavished from birth,
and who still are ill to look at and worse to marry.

All these special causes are admitted, given their due share in lowering
our standards, but there is another far more universal in its
application and its effects.  Let us look back on our little ancestors
the beasts, and see what keeps them so true to type.

The type itself set by that balance of conditions and forces we call
"natural selection."  As the environment changes they must be adapted to
it, if they cannot so adapt themselves they die.  Those who live are, by
living, proven capable of maintaining themselves.  Every creature which
has remained on earth, while so many less effective kinds died out,
remains as a conqueror.  The speed of the deer--the constant use of
speed--is what keeps it alive and makes it healthy and beautiful.  The
varied activities of the life of a leopard are what have developed the
sinuous gracile strength we so admire.  It is what the creature does for
its living, its daily life-long exercise which makes it what it is.

But there is another great natural force which works steadily to keep
all animals up to the race standard; that is sexual selection.
Throughout nature the male is the variant, as we have already noted.
His energy finds vent not only in that profuse output of decorative
appendages Ward defines as "masculine efflorescence" but in variations
not decorative, not useful or desirable at all.

The female, on the other hand, varies much less, remaining nearer the
race type; and her function is to select among these varying males the
specimens most valuable to the race.  In the intense masculine
competition the victor must necessarily be stronger than his fellows; he
is first proven equal to his environment by having lived to grow up,
then more than equal to his fellows by overcoming them.  This higher
grade of selection also develops not only the characteristics necessary
to make a living; but secondary ones, often of a purely aesthetic
nature, which make much of what we call beauty.  Between the two, all
who live must be up to a certain grade, and those who become parents
must be above it; a masterly arrangement surely!

Here is where, during the period of our human history, we in our newborn
consciousness and imperfect knowledge, have grieviously interfered with
the laws of nature.  The ancient proprietary family, treating the woman
as a slave, keeping her a prisoner and subject to the will of her
master, cut her off at once from the exercise of those activities which
alone develop and maintain the race type.

Take the one simple quality of speed.  We are a creature built for
speed, a free swift graceful animal; and among savages this is still
seen--the capacity for running, mile after mile, hour after hour.
Running is as natural a gait for _genus homo_ as for _genus cervus._
Now suppose among deer, the doe was prohibited from running; the stag
continuing free on the mountain; the doe living in caves and pens,
unequal to any exercise.  The effect on the species would be,
inevitably, to reduce its speed.

In this way, by keeping women to one small range of duties, and in most
cases housebound, we have interfered with natural selection and its
resultant health and beauty.  It can easily be seen what the effect on
the race would have been if all men had been veiled and swathed, hidden
in harems, kept to the tent or house, and confined to the activities of
a house-servant.  Our stalwart laborers, our proud soldiers, our
athletes, would never have appeared under such circumstances.  The
confinement to the house alone, cutting women off from sunshine and air,
is by itself an injury; and the range of occupation allowed them is not
such as to develop a high standard of either health or beauty.  Thus we
have cut off half the race from the strengthening influence of natural
selection, and so lowered our race-standards in large degree.

This alone, however, would not have hid such mischievous effects but for
our further blunder in completely reversing nature's order of sexual
selection.  It is quite possible that even under confinement and
restriction women could have kept up the race level, passably, through
this great function of selection; but here is the great fundamental
error of the Androcentric Culture.  Assuming to be the possessor of
women, their owner and master, able at will to give, buy and sell, or do
with as he pleases, man became the selector.

It seems a simple change; and in those early days, wholly ignorant of
natural laws, there was no suspicion that any mischief would result.  In
the light of modern knowledge, however, the case is clear.  The woman
was deprived of the beneficent action of natural selection, and the man
was then, by his own act, freed from the stern but elevating effect of
sexual selection.  Nothing was required of the woman by natural
selection save such capacity as should please her master; nothing was
required of the man by sexual selection save power to take by force, or
buy, a woman.

It does not take a very high standard of feminine intelligence,
strength, skill, health, or beauty to be a houseservant, or even a
housekeeper; witness the average.

It does not take a very high standard of masculine, intelligence,
strength, skill, health or beauty to maintain a woman in that
capacity--witness average.

Here at the very root of our physiological process, at the beginning of
life, we have perverted the order of nature, and are suffering the
consequences.

It has been held by some that man as the selector has developed beauty,
more beauty than we had before; and we point to the charms of our women
as compared with those of the squaw.  The answer to this is that the
squaw belongs to a decadent race; that she too is subject to the man,
that the comparison to have weight should be made between our women and
the women of the matriarchate--an obvious impossibility.  We have not on
earth women in a state of normal freedom and full development; but we
have enough difference in their placing to learn that human strength and
beauty grows with woman's freedom and activity.

The second answer is that much of what man calls beauty in woman is not
human beauty at all, but gross overdevelopment of certain points which
appeal to him as a male.  The excessive fatness, previously referred to,
is a case in point; that being considered beauty in a woman which is in
reality an element of weakness, inefficiency and ill-health.  The
relatively small size of women, deliberately preferred, steadfastly
chosen, and so built into the race, is a blow at real human progress in
every particular.  In our upward journey we should and do grow larger,
leaving far behind us our dwarfish progenitors.  Yet the male, in his
unnatural position as selector, preferring for reasons both practical
and sentimental, to have "his woman" smaller than himself, has
deliberately striven to lower the standard of size in the race.  We used
to read in the novels of the last generation, "He was a magnificent
specimen of manhood"--"Her golden head reached scarcely to his
shoulder"--"She was a fairy creature--the tiniest of her sex."  Thus we
have mated, and yet expected that by some hocus pocus the boys would all
"take after their father," and the girls, their mother.  In his efforts
to improve the breed of other animals, man has never tried to
deliberately cross the large and small and expect to keep up the
standard of size.

As a male he is appealed to by the ultra-feminine, and has given small
thought to effects on the race.  He was not designed to do the
selecting.  Under his fostering care we have bred a race of women who
are physically weak enough to be handed about like invalids; or mentally
weak enough to pretend they are--and to like it.  We have made women who
respond so perfectly to the force which made them, that they attach all
their idea of beauty to those characteristics which attract men;
sometimes humanly ugly without even knowing it.

For instance, our long restriction to house-limits, the heavy
limitations of our clothing, and the heavier ones of traditional
decorum, have made women disproportionately short-legged.  This is a
particularly undignified and injurious characteristic, bred in women and
inherited by men, most seen among those races which keep their women
most closely.  Yet when one woman escapes the tendency and appears with
a normal length of femur and tibia, a normal height of hip and shoulder,
she is criticized and called awkward by her squatty sisters!

The most convenient proof of the inferiority of women in human beauty is
shown by those composite statues prepared by Mr. Sargent for the World's
Fair of '93.  These were made from gymnasium measurements of thousands
of young collegians of both sexes all over America.  The statue of the
girl has a pretty face, small hands and feet, rather nice arms, though
weak; but the legs are too thick and short; the chest and shoulders
poor; and the trunk is quite pitiful in its weakness.  The figure of the
man is much better proportioned.

Thus the effect on human beauty of masculine selection.

Beyond this positive deteriorative effect on women through man's
arbitrary choice comes the negative effect of woman's lack of choice.
Bought or stolen or given by her father, she was deprived of the
innately feminine right and duty of choosing.  "Who giveth this woman?"
we still inquire in our archaic marriage service, and one man steps
forward and gives her to another man.

Free, the female chose the victor, and the vanquished went unmated--and
without progeny.  Dependent, having to be fed and cared for by some man,
the victors take their pick perhaps, but the vanquished take what is
left; and the poor women, "marrying for a home," take anything.  As a
consequence the inferior male is as free to transmit his inferiority as
the superior to give better qualities, and does so--beyond computation.
In modern days, women are freer, in some countries freer than in others;
here in modern America freest of all; and the result is seen in our
improving standards of health and beauty.

Still there remains the field of inter-masculine competition, does there
not?  Do not the males still struggle together?  Is not that as of old,
a source of race advantage?

To some degree it is.  When life was simple and our activities consisted
mainly in fighting and hard work; the male who could vanquish the others
was bigger and stronger.  But inter-masculine competition ceases to be
of such advantage when we enter the field of social service.  What is
required in organized society is the specialization of the individual,
the development of special talents, not always of immediate benefit to
the man himself, but of ultimate benefit to society.  The best social
servant, progressive, meeting future needs, is almost always at a
disadvantage besides the well-established lower types.  We need, for
social service, qualities quite different from the simple masculine
characteristics--desire, combat, self-expression.

By keeping what we call "the outside world" so wholly male, we keep up
masculine standards at the expense of human ones.  This may be broadly
seen in the slow and painful development of industry and science as
compared to the easy dominance of warfare throughout all history until
our own times.

The effect of all this ultra masculine competition upon health and
beauty is but too plainly to be seen.  Among men the male idea of what
is good looking is accentuated beyond reason.  Read about any "hero" you
please; or study the products of the illustrator and note the broad
shoulders, the rugged features, the strong, square, determined jaw.
That jaw is in evidence if everything else fails.  He may be cross-eyed,
wide-eared, thick-necked, bandy-legged--what you please; but he must
have a more or less prognathous jaw.

Meanwhile any anthropologist will show you that the line of human
development is away from that feature of the bulldog and the alligator,
and toward the measured dignity of the Greek type.  The possessor of
that kind of jaw may enable male to conquer male, but does not make him
of any more service to society; of any better health or higher beauty.

Further, in the external decoration of our bodies, what is the influence
here of masculine dominance.

We have before spoken of the peculiar position of our race in that the
woman is the only female creature who carries the burden of sex
ornament.  This amazing reversal of the order of nature results at its
mildest in a perversion of the natural feminine instincts of love and
service, and an appearance of the masculine instincts of self-expression
and display.  Alone among all female things do women decorate and preen
themselves and exhibit their borrowed plumage (literally!) to attract
the favor of the male.  This ignominy is forced upon them by their
position of economic dependence; and their general helplessness.  As all
broader life is made to depend, for them, on whom they marry, indeed as
even the necessities of life so often depend on their marrying someone,
they have been driven into this form of competition, so alien to the
true female attitude.

The result is enough to make angels weep--and laugh.  Perhaps no step in
the evolution of beauty went farther than our human power of making a
continuous fabric; soft and mobile, showing any color and texture
desired.  The beauty of the human body is supreme, and when we add to it
the flow of color, the ripple of fluent motion, that comes of a soft,
light garment over free limbs--it is a new field of loveliness and
delight.  Naturally this should have filled the whole world with a new
pleasure.  Our garments, first under right natural selection developing
perfect use, under right sex selection developing beauty; and further,
as our human aesthetic sense progresses, showing a noble symbolism,
would have been an added strength and glory, a ceaseless joy.

What is the case?

Men, under a too strictly inter-masculine environment, have evolved the
mainly useful but beautiless costume common to-day; and women--?

Women wear beautiful garments when they happen to be the fashion; and
ugly garments when they are the fashion, and show no signs of knowing
the difference.  They show no added pride in the beautiful, no hint of
mortification in the hideous, and are not even sensitive under
criticism, or open to any persuasion or argument.  Why should they be?

Their condition, physical and mental, is largely abnormal, their whole
passionate absorption in dress and decoration is abnormal, and they have
never looked, from a frankly human standpoint, at their position and its
peculiarities, until the present age.

In the effect of our wrong relation on the world's health, we have
spoken of the check to vigor and growth due to the housebound state of
women and their burdensome clothes.  There follow other influences,
similar in origin, even more evil in result.  To roughly and briefly
classify we may distinguish the diseases due to bad air, to bad food,
and that field of cruel mischief we are only now beginning to
discuss--the diseases directly due to the erroneous relation between men
and women.

We are the only race where the female depends on the male for a
livelihood.  We are the only race that practices prostitution.  From the
first harmless-looking but abnormal general relation follows the well
recognized evil of the second, so long called "a social necessity," and
from it, in deadly sequence, comes the "wages of sin;" death not only of
the guilty, but of the innocent.  It is no light part of our criticism
of the Androcentric Culture that a society based on masculine desires
alone, has willingly sacrificed such an army of women; and has repaid
the sacrifice by the heaviest punishments.

That the unfortunate woman should sicken and die was held to be her just
punishment; that man too should bear part penalty was found unavoidable,
though much legislation and medical effort has been spent to shield him;
but to the further consequences society is but now waking up.



COMMENT AND REVIEW


Mr. H. G. Wells is an author whose work I have followed with delight,
interest and respect for years--since first I read that sinister vision
of dead worlds, "The Time Machine."  He is a successful craftsman, an
artist of power; and has that requisite so often missing in our literary
craftsmen and artists--something to say.  In his mighty work of
electrifying the world's slow mind to the splendid possibilities of life
as it might be, may be, will be, as soon as we wake up, he has my
admiring sympathy.

But alas! and alas!  Like many another great man, Mr. Wells loses his
perspective and clear vision when he considers women.  He sees women as
females--and does not see that they are human; the universal mistake of
the world behind us; but one unworthy of a mind that sees the world
before us so vividly.

He has knowledge, the scientific habit of mind, an enormous imagination
and the courage to use it; he is not, usually, afraid of facts, even
when an admission carries reproach.  But in this field he shows simply
the old race-mind, that attitude which considers women as mothers,
potential, active, and in retrospect; and as nothing else.  He likes
them as mothers.  He honors them as mothers.  He wants to have them
salaried, as mothers.  But he thinks it quite beyond reason that they
should appear as regular members of the working world; their motherhood,
to his mind, would prevent it.

In this attitude he has produced a vivid novel called Ann Veronica; a
book of keen analysis and delicate observation, full of amusing darts
and flashes; seeing and showing much that is absurd in our modern
uneasiness and wavering discussion; and thus explained by himself in The
Spectator (which had denounced the work as "poisonous").

"My book was written primarily to express the resentment and distress
which many women feel nowadays at their unavoidable practical dependence
upon some individual man not of their deliberate choice"; and he further
says he sympathizes with the woman who lives with a man she does not
love; and respects her natural desire to prefer some one man as her
husband and father of her children--a harmless position surely.

To carry out these feelings he has described a girl, vigorous and
handsome, a nice, normal girl, who is crushed and stultified in her home
life and wants to get out of it; as is the case with so many girls
today.  She wants freedom--room to grow--more knowledge and power--again
as is so common nowadays.  We read with sympathy, admiring his keen sure
touch, hoping much for this brave woman in her dash for freedom.

Then he makes this girl, so strong and intelligent, deliberately refuse
various kinds of work she might have done because they did not please
her; and borrow money from a man in preference to earning her living.
She exposes herself to insult and even danger with an idiocy that even a
novel-reared child of sixteen would have scorned.  She falls in love,
healthfully enough, with a fine strong man; and sees no reason for
avoiding him when she learns he is married.  She cheerfully elopes with
him--quite forgetting the money she had borrowed, and when she remembers
about that abhorrent debt, expects her companion to pay it, without a
qualm apparently.

The ex-wife must have conveniently died after a while; and the man
develops a sudden new talent as a playwright; for they wind up very
respectably in a nice flat, having Ann Veronica's father and aunt to
dinner, and regarding them as a pair of walking mummies.  Nothing more
is said of any desire on the part of the heroine for freedom, knowledge,
independence; having attained her man she has attained all; indeed Mr.
Wells goes to the pains to fully express his idea of the case, by
describing her early struggle and outburst as like "the nuptial flight
of an ant."

It is hard to see why Mr. Wells, in seeking "to express the resentment
and distress which many women feel nowadays" at their dependence; and in
showing sympathy with their natural right of choice, should have
burdened himself with all this unnecessary complication of special
foolishness on the part of his heroine which alienates our sympathy; and
special illegality on the man's position.  Perhaps this is to add
heroism to her effort to secure the right mate, to indicate how small
are any other considerations in comparison to this primary demand of
life.

Waiving all objections to this framework of the story, there remains the
painful exhibition of Mr. Wells's misapprehension of the larger causes
of the present unrest among women.  What later historians will point out
as the most distinguishing feature of our time, its importance shared
only by the movement towards economic democracy, is the sudden and
irresistible outburst of human powers, human feeling, human activities,
and in that half the world hitherto denied such experiences.

Ann Veronica, as at first portrayed, shared in this world impulse.  She
wanted to be human, and tried to be.  Her masculine interpreter, seeing
no possible interests in the woman's life except those of sex, dismisses
all that passionate outgoing as comparable to the mating impulse of
insects.  He overestimates the weight of this department of life, a
mistake common to most men and some women.

When opposed, the protagonists of this position cry that their opponent
wishes to unsex women; to repudiate motherhood; and see in all the
natural development of the modern woman only a threat of decreased
population.

Cannot Mr. Wells, as one acquainted with zoology, see that both male and
female of a species are alike in the special qualities of that species,
although differing in sex?  Can he not see that the area of human life,
the social development of humanity, is one quite common to both men and
women; and that a woman, however amply occupied in wife and mother-hood,
suffers from lack of human relation, if denied it, even as a man would,
whose activities were absolutely limited to husband- and father-hood?

*

If you are a believer in women's voting why don't you take the best
equal suffrage paper in the country?  Not the Forerunner--which is only
a suffrage paper because of its interest in women, and only a woman's
paper because of its interest in humanity, but this one:


Vol. XL.
The Woman's Journal

FOUNDED BY
LUCY STONE AND HENRY B. BLACKWELL

A weekly newspaper published every Saturday in Boston, devoted to the
interests of women--to their educational, industrial, legal and
political equality, and especially to their right of suffrage

Entered at the Post Office, Boston, Mass., as second-class mail matter

EDITOR:
ALICE STONE BLACKWELL

ASSOCIATE EDITORS:
FLORENCE M. ADKINSON, CATHARINE WILDE

OFFICE: NO. 6 BEACON STREET, BOSTON, MASS.
ROOM 1018


The love and faith, the hope and courage, the steady unflinching
devotion of forty years of solid work, and the quality of brain power,
which have fed this lamp of liberty, make a Iight that is worth
following.

Two noble lives have been given to it, and the daughter of one of those
two is carrying it on superbly.  It is a paper that will broaden, live
and grow, and carry on its larger work long after this one political
question is rightly settled.

It carries news--the kind of news progressive women want.  It is broad
and bright, and interesting; full of short and memorable bits that prick
the mind to understanding.

I have read this paper, myself, many years, and know its merits well.

Try it.

*

The Sea of Matrimony.  By Jessie H. Childs.  Broadway Pub. Co., New York
and Baltimore.

Here is quite another kind of a novel.  Earnest, thoughtful, sincere,
lacking in humor and in technical finish, yet holding one's attention by
the complete preoccupation of the author in her theme, and by the common
interests of the discussion.

It reminds one vaguely of "Together," giving pair after pair of
ill-mated persons, but one happy marriage in the lot, and that a
childless one, and offering no solution to the problem raised save in
that searching philosophy we seek to cover by the term New Thought.

There is much keen observation in this book; and so intimate an analysis
of character that one wonders who this person and that may be; and the
courage shown in giving spades their names is worthy of respect

The author shows a power of keen appreciation of the daily problems of
life.  The description of the woman who tried to change even her
husband's cigars to the brand her father used to smoke is particularly
good.

Many men and women may see their troubles reflected in this study of the
intricate difficulties of married life; and some will find strength and
hope in its conclusions.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


Here is a question of financial ethics sent by one of our readers: "A
woman is sent out on a trip of inspection for her State School, or for
her Club.  She is told to keep accurate accounts of her expenditures,
and is expected to send in an itemized account.  Shall she send in the
regular two or three dollars a day account?  Or shall she itemize each
street carfare and meal?  Shall she not be justified in using a dollar
to-day which she did not spend on yesterday's dinner, in livening up her
mind by a visit to the theatre?  Or shall she eat, whether hungry or
not, and pay all her own minor expenses?"

This is a good long question, and seems open to some discussion.  The
simplest answer seems to be, "If the woman is required to send in an
itemized account, she should do so, accurately.  If her expenses are
within the usual amount allowed it should make no difference to the
employer whether the money is spent on a dinner or a theatre.

She visibly could not suppress the theatre expense and yet have an
accurate account; nor could she call it a dinner--and be truthful.

If it is simply a matter of having such and such an allowance for
expenses, then it is no one's business how she spends it; but if she has
agreed to itemize she ought to do so.



PLAY-TIME


THE MELANCHOLY RABBIT

(A Pantoum.)


A melancholy rabbit in distress,
 Was heard complaining on the moonlit mead,
And neither we, nor anyone, could guess
 If he were ill at ease, or ill indeed

We heard complaining on the moonlit mead,
 We sought the lonely wanderer to relieve;
If he were ill at ease or ill indeed
 We did not ask--sufficient he should grieve.

We sought the lonely wanderer to relieve
 With sundry bundles of electric hay;
We did not ask--sufficient he should grieve--
 If he were used to dieting that way.

With sundry bundles of electric hay
 The suffering hare was speedily supplied;
If he were used to dieting that way
 It could not be the reason that he died.

The suffering hare was speedily supplied--
 A melancholy rabbit in distress;
It could not be the reason that he died--
 And neither we, nor anyone, could guess.



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK


AS TO PURPOSE:


_What is The Forerunner?_  It is a monthly magazine, publishing stories
short and serial, article and essay; drama, verse, satire and sermon;
dialogue, fable and fantasy, comment and review.  It is written entirely
by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

_What is it For?_  It is to stimulate thought: to arouse hope, courage
and impatience; to offer practical suggestions and solutions, to voice
the strong assurance of better living, here, now, in our own hands to
make.

_What is it about?_  It is about people, principles, and the questions
of every-day life; the personal and public problems of to-day.  It gives
a clear, consistent view of human life and how to live it.

_Is it a Woman's magazine?_  It will treat all three phases of our
existence--male, female and human.  It will discuss Man, in his true
place in life; Woman, the Unknown Power; the  Child, the most important
citizen.

_Is it a Socialist Magazine?_  It is a magazine for humanity, and
humanity is social.  It holds that Socialism, the economic theory, is
part of our gradual Socialization, and that the duty of conscious
humanity is to promote Socialization.

_Why is it published?_  It is published to express ideas which need a
special medium; and in the belief that there are enough persons
interested in those ideas to justify the undertaking.


AS TO ADVERTISING:


We have long heard that "A pleased customer is the best advertiser."
The Forerunner offers to its advertisers and readers the benefit of this
authority.  In its advertising department, under the above heading, will
be described articles personally known and used.  So far as individual
experience and approval carry weight, and clear truthful description
command attention, the advertising pages of The Forerunner will be
useful to both dealer and buyer.  If advertisers prefer to use their own
statements The Forerunner will publish them if it believes them to be
true.


AS TO CONTENTS:


The main feature of the first year is a new book on a new subject with a
new name:--

_"Our Androcentric Culture."_  this is a study of the historic effect on
normal human development of a too exclusively masculine civilization.
It shows what man, the male, has done to the world: and what woman, the
more human, may do to change it.

_"What Diantha Did."_  This is a serial novel.  It shows the course of
true love running very crookedly--as it so often does--among the
obstructions and difficulties of the housekeeping problem--and solves
that problem.  (NOT by co-operation.)

Among the short articles will appear:

"Private Morality and Public Immorality."
"The Beauty Women Have Lost"
"Our Overworked Instincts."
"The Nun in the Kitchen."
"Genius: Domestic and Maternal."
"A Small God and a Large Goddess."
"Animals in Cities."
"How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money."
"Prize Children"
"Kitchen-Mindedness"
"Parlor-Mindedness"
"Nursery-Mindedness"

There will be short stories and other entertaining matter in each issue.
 The department of "Personal Problems" does not discuss etiquette,
fashions or the removal of freckles.  Foolish questions will not be
answered, unless at peril of the asker.


AS TO VALUE:

If you take this magazine one year you will have:


One complete novel . . . By C. P. Gilman
One new book . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve short stories . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more short articles . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more new poems . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve Short Sermons . . . By C. P. Gilman
Besides "Comment and Review" . . . By C. P. Gilman
"Personal Problems" . . . By C. P. Gilman
And many other things . . . By C. P. Gilman

DON'T YOU THINK IT'S WORTH A DOLLAR?


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________



[Advertisement]


Confidential Remarks About Our Advertising


This magazine was planned to carry twenty-four pages of reading matter
and eight of advertising matter.

A careful list was made of about twenty first class articles, personally
known and used by the editor; and the offer was made to write absolutely
true descriptions and recommendations of them.

The value of this form of advertisement was not in the extent of the
circulation, but in

a.  The unique and attractive method.

b.  The select class of goods.

c.  The select class of readers.

d.  The weight of a personal authority specially known to these select
readers.

Our readers as far as heard from have almost without exception spoken
highly of our advertisements and declared they would purchase the goods.

If, however, the amount of sales secured does not equal the price of the
advertisement, there is no reason whatever why any dealer should use our
pages.

*

There is a tooth-paste, specially recommended by physicians, well used
and found of marked value, noticeably checking decay of the teeth and
improving mouth and throat conditions.

Now, suppose the makers take one page in one issue of The Forerunner at
$25.00.  Then suppose that only one thousand of our readers spend 25
cents each to try that tooth-paste.  That makes $250.00; and the makers
ought to get at least half of it.

if only two hundred did it, the makers would still get their money
back--to say nothing of the additional advertising given by each new
purchaser who likes it.

*

Here is an experiment The Forerunner would like to try.

If all the readers who did purchase goods on the strength of these
recommendations would waste a cent in sending me a post card saying they
had done so, it would definitely show whether this small experiment in
honesty has any practical value.

Meanwhile The Forerunner will continue to run one or two as samples; put
in real ones when it gets them; and may find it necessary to take out
the eight pages which would have been so useful if properly filled.

Best of all; if enough subscriptions come in, we can get along without
any advertising whatever--and furnish more reading matter.

For this ideal state we look forward hopefully.



[Advertisement]


Things we wish to Advertise


This is the list of articles the editor wishes to secure, having known
and used them for from two to forty years; some were used by her mother
before her.  They are things you can buy anywhere or order by mail.

A TOILET PREPARATION: Used by mother and self.
A COURTPLASTER: Used from infancy, perfect.
SOMETHING SIMILAR TO ABOVE, Most excellent.
A SILVER CLEANER: Very satisfactory.
SEVEN KINDS OF SOAP--and such like--all good.
A BREAKFAST FOOD: Used unvaryingly for nine years.
SIX OTHER BREAKFAST FOODS: All first-rate.
ONE VARIETY OF SOUPS: Absolutely good.
FOUR OTHER FOOD-MAKERS: Safe to recommend.
FOUR KINDS OF COCOA: All very good.
A HAIRBRUSH: A real delight--if you have hair.
MY TYPEWRITER: I _would_ have this kind.
A PEN: All my books were written with this pen.
A VOICE TABLOID: A blessing to a speaker.
A TOOTHPASTE: The best out of many.
PERFECTION IN HAIRPINS.
TWO KINDS OF UNDERWEAR: Good ones.
TWO KINDS OF HOSIERY: They wear well.
A HOUSEHOLD COMFORT AND TIME-SAVER.
A MATTRESS: Continuously satisfactory.
BOOKCASES: The kind you want.
A MUSIC MACHINE: Or how to keep the boys at home.
FIVE FOOD ARTICLES: Long valued.
A DRESS SHIELD: That can be trusted.
SOMETHING BETTER THAN WHALEBONE.
TWO KINDS OF SKIRT-BINDING: Always reliable.
THE BEST OF CRACKERS.
FOUNTAIN PEN THAT NEVER LEAKS.

These are "preferred stock."  More may be tried and found worthy; but
these have been used long and continuously--just because they were good.

If this list could be filled out at reasonable rates, it would form a
very useful little collection, to seller and buyer.  And to

THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK



[Advertisement]


 C A L E N D U L A


CHILDREN CEASE TO CRY FOR IT.


This is a gratuitous advertisement, benefitting

a) The Child; whose pain stops;

b) The Mother; who doesn't have to hear him cry;

c) The Nearest Druggist--a little.


CALENDULA is a good standard old drug--made of marigolds--in the
_materia medica._  You buy a little bottle of tincture of calendula, and
keep it on the shelf.  Nobody will drink it by mistake--it doesn't taste
good.

Presently Johnny falls down hard--he was running--he fell on a gritty
place--his poor little knee is scraped raw.  And he howls, how he howls!
square-mouthed and inconsolable.

Then you hastily get a half a tea-cupful of water, a little warm if you
have it, and put in a few drops of calendula.  Wet a soft clean rag in
it, bind it softly on the wound, keep it wet--and the pain stops.

Many many times has this quieted my infant anguish; also have I used it
as a grown up.  The effect is the same.


 C A L E N D U L A
TAKES THE PAIN FROM
A  R A W  W O U N D





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 4
FEBRUARY, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

There is one large obstacle to woman suffrage which has nothing to do
with sex.
Men, the governing class, hesitate in extending equal political
responsibility and power to their domestic servants.  Do you wonder?




TWO PRAYERS

Only for these I pray,
 Pray with assurance strong:
Light to discover the way,
 Power to follow it long.

Let me have light to see,
 Light to be sure and know,
When the road is clear to me
 Willingly I go.

Let me have Power to do,
 Power of the brain and nerve,
Though the task is heavy and new
 Willingly I will serve.

My prayers are lesser than three,
 Nothing I pray but two;
Let me have light to see,
 Let me have power to do.



AN OFFENDER


"Where's Harry?" was Mr. Gortlandt's first question.

"He's gone to the country, to mother.  It was so hot this last day or
two, I've sent him out, with Miss Colton.  I'm going Saturday.  Sit
down."

"I miss him," said her visitor, "more than I thought I could.  I've
learned more in these seven years than I thought there was to know.  Or
in the last two perhaps, since I've found you again."

She looked at him with a little still smile, but there was a puzzled
expression behind it, as of one whose mind was not made up.

They sat in the wide window of a top floor apartment, awning-shaded.  A
fresh breeze blew in upon them, and the city dust blew in upon them
also, lying sandy on the broad sill.

She made little wavy lines in it with one finger--

"These windows ought to be shut tight, I suppose, and the blinds, and
the curtains.  Then we should be cleaner."

"As to furniture," he agreed, "but not as to our lungs."

"I don't know about that," she said; "we get plenty of air--but see
what's in it."

"A city is a dirty place at the best; but Mary--I didn't come to
consider the ethics of the dust--how much longer must I wait?" he asked,
after a little pause.  "Isn't two years courting, re-courting--enough?
Haven't I learned my lesson yet?"

"Some of it, I think," she admitted, "but not all."

"What more do you ask?" he pursued earnestly.  "Can't we come to a
definite understanding?  You'll be chasing off again in a few days; it's
blessed luck that brought you to town just now, and that I happened to
be here too."

"I don't how about the luck," said she.  "It was business that brought
me.  I never was in town before when it was so hot."

"Why don't you go to a hotel?  This apartment is right under the roof,
gets the sun all day."

"It gets the breeze too, and sunlight is good.  No, I'm better off in
the apartment, with Harry.  It was very convenient of the Grants to be
away, and let me have it."

"How does Hal stand the weather?"

"Pretty well.  But he was getting rather fretful, so I sent him off two
hours ago.  I do hope he won't run away from Miss Colton again.  She's
as nervous as I am about him."

"Don't you think he is fond of me?" asked the man.  "I've got to catch
up, you see.  He can't help being mine--half mine," he hastily added,
seeing a hint of denial in her look.

"Why yes, he seems fond of you, he is fond of you," she conceded.  "I
hope he always will be, and I believe you are beginning to love him."

"A pretty strong beginning, Mary," said the man.  "Of course I don't
pretend to have cared much at first, but now!--why he's so handsome, and
quick, and such a good little duffer; and so affectionate!  When he
gives a jump and gets his arms around my neck and his legs around my
waist and 'hugs me all over' as he calls it, I almost feel as if I was a
mother!  I can't say more than that, can I?"

"No, you certainly can't say more than that.  I believe you, I'm not
questioning," for he looked up sharply at her tone.

"I've never had much to do with children, you see," he went on slowly,
"no little brothers or sisters, and then only-- What astonishes me is
how good they feel in your arms!  The little fellow's body is so firm
and sinewy--he wriggles like a fish--a big fish that you're trying to
hold with both hands."

The mother smiled tenderly.  She knew the feel of the little body so
well!  From the soft pink helplessness, the little head falling so
naturally into the hollow of the arm or neck, the fumbling little hands;
then the gradual gain in size and strength, till now she held that eager
bounding little body, almost strong enough to get away from her--but not
wanting to.  He still loved to nestle up to "Muzz," and was but newly
and partially won by this unaccustomed father.

"It's seven years Mary!  That makes a man all over, they say.  I'm sure
it has made me over.  I'm an older man--and I think, wiser.  I've
repented, I've outgrown my folly and seen the justice of my punishment.
I don't blame you an atom for divorcing me--I think you did right, and I
respect you for it.  The biggest lesson I've learned is to love you!  I
can see--now--that I didn't before.

Her face hardened as she looked at him.  "No, you didn't, Harry, you
certainly didn't, nor the child-- When I think of what I was when you
married me!  Of my proud health!--"

"_You_ are not hurt!" he cried.  "I don't mean that you haven't been
hurt, I could kill myself when I think of how I made you suffer!  But
you are a finer woman now than you were then; sweeter, stronger, wiser,
and more beautiful.  When I found you again in Liverpool two years ago
it was a revelation.  Now see--I don't even ask you to forgive me!  I
ask you to try me again and let me prove I can make it up to you and the
boy!"

"It's not easy for me to forgive," she answered slowly-- "I'm not of the
forgiving nature.  But there is a good deal of reason in your position.
You were my husband, you are Hal's father, there's no escaping that."

"Perhaps, if you will let the rest of my life make up for that time of
my Godforsaken meanness, you won't want to escape it, Mary!  See--I have
followed you about for two years.  I accepted your terms, you did not
promise me anything, but for the child's sake I might try once more, try
only as one of many, to see if I could win you--again.  And I love you
now a hundred times better than I did when I married you!"

She fanned herself slowly with a large soft fan, and looked out across
the flickering roofs.  Below them lay the highly respectable street on
which the house technically fronted, and the broad, crowded, roaring
avenue which it really overlooked.

The rattle of many drays and more delivery wagons rose up to them.  An
unusual jangle drowned his words just then and she smilingly interpreted
"that's railroad iron--or girders, I can tell lots of them now.  About
four A. M. there is a string of huge milk wagons.  But the worst is the
cars.  Hear that now--that's a flat wheel.  How do you like it?"

"Mary--why do you bring up these cars again when I'm trying my best to
show you my whole heart?  Don't put things like that between us!"

"But they are between us, Henry, all the time.  I hear you tell me you
love me, and I don't doubt you do in a way; yes, as well as you can,
very much indeed!--I know.  But when it comes to this car question; when
I talk to you of these juggernauts of yours; you are no more willing to
do the right thing than you were when I first knew you."

Mr. Cortlandt's face hardened.  He drew himself up from the eager
position in which he had leaned forward, and evidently hesitated for a
moment as to his words.

In spite of his love for this woman, who, as he justly said, was far
more beautiful and winsome than the strong, angular, over-conscientious
girl he had married, neglected and shamed, his feelings as a business
man were strong within him.

"My dear--I am not personally responsible for the condition of these
cars."

"You are President of the Company.  You hold controlling shares of the
stock.  It was your vote that turned down the last improvement
proposition."

He looked at her sharply.

"I'm afraid someone has been prejudicing you against me Mary.  You have
more technical information than seems likely to have reached you by
accident."

"It's not prejudice, but it is information; and Mr. Graham did tell me,
if that's what you mean.  But he cares.  You know how hard the
Settlement has worked to get the Company to make the streets safer for
children--and you wouldn't do a thing."

Mr. Cortlandt hesitated.  It would never do to pile business details on
his suit for a love once lost and not yet regained.

"You make it hard for me Mary," he said.  "Hard because it is difficult
to explain large business questions to a--to anyone not accustomed to
them.  I cannot swing the affairs of a great corporation for personal
ends, even to please you."

"That is not the point," she said quickly.

He flushed, and hastily substituted "Even to suit the noblest
humanitarian feelings."

"Why not?" said she.

"Because that is not what street cars are run for," he pursued
patiently.  "But why must we talk of this?  It seems to put you so far
away.  And you have given me no answer."

"I am sorry, but I am not ready yet."

"Is it Hugh Graham?" he demanded.  The hot color leaped to her face, but
she met his eyes steadily.  "I am much interested in Mr. Graham," she
said, "and in the noble work he is doing.  I think I should really be
happier with him than with you.  We care for the same things, he calls
out the best in me.  But I have made no decision in his favor yet, nor
in yours.  Both of you have a certain appeal to my heart, both to my
duty.  With you the personal need, with him the hope of greater service.
 But--you are the father of the child, and that gives you a great claim.
 I have not decided."

The man looked relieved, and again drew his chair a little closer.  The
sharp clangor of the cars rose between the,.

"You think I dragged in this car question," she said.  "Really, I did it
because it is that sort of thing which does most to keep us apart,
and--I would like to remove it."

He leaned forward, playing with her big fan.  "Let's remove it by all
means!" he said.

She looked at his bent head, the dark hair growing somewhat thin on top,
almost tenderly.

"If I could feel that you were truly on the right side, that you
considered your work as social service, that you tried to run your cars
to carry people--not to kill them!--If you could change your ground here
I think--almost--" she stopped, smiling up at him, her fan in her lap,
her firm delicate white hands eagerly clasped; then went on,

"Don't you care at all for the lives lost every day in this great
city--under your cars?"

"It cannot be helped, my dear.  Our men are as careful as men can be.
But these swarming children will play in the streets--"

"Where else can they play!" she interjected.

"And they get right in front of the cars.  We are very sorry; we pay out
thousands of dollars in damages: but it cannot be helped!"

She leaned back in her chair and her face grew cold.

"You speak as if you never heard of such things as fenders," she said.

"We have fenders!--almost every car--"

"Fenders!  Do you call that piece of rat-trap a fender!  Henry
Cortlandt!  We were in Liverpool when this subject first came up between
us!  They have fenders there that _fend_ and no murder list!"

"Conditions are different there," said he with an enforced quiet.  "Our
pavement is different."

"Our children are not so different, are they?" she demanded.  "Our
mothers are made of the same stuff I suppose?"

"You speak at if I wanted to kill them!  As if I liked to!"

"I thought at first it would hurt you as it did me," she said warmly.
"I turned to you with real hope when we met in Liverpool.  I was glad to
think I knew you, and I had not been glad of that for long!  I thought
you would care, would do things."

Do what he would, his mouth set hard in its accustomed lines.  "Those
English fender are not practicable in this country, Mary.  They have
been tried."

"When?  Where?  By whom?" she threw at him.  "I have read about it, and
heard about it.  I know there was an effort to get them adopted, and
that they were refused.  They cost more than this kind!" and she pointed
disdainfully at the rattling bit of stub-toed slat-work in front of a
passing car.

"Do you expect me to make a revolution in the street car system of
America--to please you?  Do you make it a condition?  Perhaps I can
accomplish it.  Is it a bargain?  Come--"

"No," she said slowly.  "I'm not making bargains.  I'm only wishing, as
I have wished so often in years past--that you were a different kind of
man--"

"What kind do you want me to be?"

"I want you to be--I wish you were--a man who cared to give perfect
service to his country, in his business."

"Perhaps I can be yet.  I can try.  If I had you to help me, with your
pure ideals, and the boy to keep my heart open for the children.  I
don't know much about these things, but I can learn.  I can read, you
can tell me what to read.  We could study together.  And in my position
perhaps, I could really be of some service after all."

"Perhaps?"  She watched him, the strong rather heavy face, the
attractive smile, the eyes that interested and compelled.  He was an
able, masterful man.  He surely loved her now.  She could feel a power
over him that her short miserable marriage had never given her; and her
girlhood's attraction toward him reasserted itself.

A new noise rose about them, a dissonant mingled merry outcry, made into
a level roaring sound by their height above the street.

"That's when the school up here lets out," she said.  "We hear it every
day.  Just see the crowds of them!"

They leaned on the broad sill and watched the many-colored torrent of
juveniles pouring past.

"One day it was different," she said.  "A strange jarring shrillness in
it, a peculiar sound.  I looked out, and there was a fight going on; two
boys tumbling about from one side of the street to the other, with a
moving ring around them, a big crowd, all roaring in one key."

"You get a birdseye view of life in these streets, don't you.  Can you
make out that little chap with the red hair down there?"

"No--we are both near-sighted, you know.  I can't distinguish faces at
this distance.  Can you?"

"Not very clearly," he said.  "But what a swarm they are!"

"Come away," said she, "I can't bear to look at them.  So many children
in that stony street, and those cars going up and down like roaring
lions!"

They drew back into the big sunny room, and she seated herself at the
piano and turned over loose sheets of music.

He watched her with a look of intensest admiration, she was so tall, so
nobly formed, her soft rich gown flowed and followed as she walked, her
white throat rose round and royal from broad smooth shoulders.

He was beside her; he took away the music, laid it out of reach,
possessed himself of her hands.

"Give them back to me, Mary," he pleaded.  "Come to me and help me to be
a better man!  Help me to be a good father.  I need you!"

She looked at him almost pleadingly.  His eyes, his voice, his
hands,--they had their old-time charm for her.  Yet he had only said
"Perhaps"--and he _might_ study, _might_ learn.

He asked her to help him, but he did not say "I will do this"--only "I
may."

In the steady bright June sunshine, in the sifting dust of a city
corner, in the dissonant, confused noise of the traffic below, they
stood and looked at one another.

His eyes brightened and deepened as he watched her changing color.
Softly he drew her towards him.  "Even if you do not love me now, you
shall in time, you shall, my darling!"

But she drew back from him with a frightened start, a look of terror.

"What has happened!" she cried.  "It's so still!"

They both rushed to the window.  The avenue immediately below them was
as empty as midnight, and as silent.  A great stillness widened and
spread for the moment around one vacant motionless open car.  Without
passenger, driver, or conductor, it stood alone in the glaring space;
and then, with a gasp of horror, they both saw.

Right under their eyes, headed towards them, under the middle of the
long car--a little child.

He was quite still, lying face downward, dirty and tumbled, with
helpless arms thrown wide, the great car holding him down like a mouse
in a trap.

Then people came rushing.

She turned away, choking, her hands to her eyes.

"Oh!" she cried, "Oh!  It's a child, a little child!"

"Steady, Mary, steady!" said he, "the child's dead.  It's all over.
He's quite dead.  He never knew what hit him."  But his own voice
trembled.

She made a mighty effort to control herself, and he tried to take her in
his arms, to comfort her, but she sprang away from him with fierce
energy.

"Very well!" she said.  "You are right!  The child is dead.  We can not
save him.  No one can save him.  Now come back--come here to the
window--and see what follows.  I want to see with my own eyes--and have
you see--what is done when your cars commit murder!  Child murder!"

She held up her watch.  "It's 12:10 now," she said.

She dragged him back to the window, and so evident was the struggle with
which she controlled herself, so intense her agonized excitement, that
he dared not leave her.

"Look!" she cried.  "Look!  See the them crowd now!"

The first horrified rush away from the instrument of death was followed
by the usual surging multitude.

From every direction people gathered thickly in astonishing numbers,
hustling and pushing about the quiet form upon the ground; held so flat
between iron rails and iron wheels, so great a weight on so small a
body!  The car, still empty, rose like an island from the pushing sea of
heads.  Men and women cried excited directions.  They tried with
swarming impotent hands to lift the huge mass of wood and iron off the
small broken thing beneath it, so small that it did not raise the
crushing weight from the ground.

A whole line of excited men seized the side rail and strove to lift the
car by it, lifting only the rail.

The crowd grew momently, women weeping, children struggling to see, men
pushing each other, policemen's helmets rising among them.  And still
the great car stood there, on the body of the child.

"Is there no means of lifting these monsters?" she demanded.  "After
they have done it, can't they even get off."

He moistened his lips to answer.

"There is a jacking crew," he said.  "They will be here presently."

"Presently!" she cried.  "Presently!  Couldn't these monsters use their
own power to lift themselves somehow? not even that?"

He said nothing.

More policemen came, and made a scant space around the little body,
covering it with a dark cloth.  The motorman was rescued from many would
be avengers, and carried off under guard.

"Ten minutes," said she looking at her watch.  "Ten minutes and it isn't
even off him yet!" and she caught her breath in a great sob.

Then she turned on the man at her side: "Suppose his mother is in that
crowd!  She may be!  Their children go to this school, they live all
about below here, she can't even get in to see!  And if she could, if
she knew it was her child, she can't _get him out_!"

Her voice rose to a cry.

"Don't, Mary," said he, hoarsely.  "It's--it's horrible!  Don't make it
worse!"

She kept her eyes on her watch-face, counting the minutes She looked
down at the crowd shudderingly, and said over and over, under breath, "A
little child!  A little soft child!"

It was twelve minutes and a-half before the jacking crew drove up, with
their tools.  It was a long time yet before they did their work, and
that crushed and soiled little body was borne to a near-by area grating
and laid there, wrapped in its dingy shroud, and guarded by a policeman.

It was a full half hour before the ambulance arrived to take it away.

She drew back then and crouched sobbing by the sofa.  "O the poor
mother!  God help his mother!"

He sat tense and white for a while; and when she grew quieter he spoke.

"You were right, Mary.  I--naturally, I never--visualized it!  It is
horrible!  I am going to have those fenders on every car of the four
systems!"

She said nothing.  He spoke again.

"I hate to leave you feeling so, Dear.  Must I go?"

She raised a face that was years older, but did not look at him.

"You must go.  And you must never come back.  I cannot bear to see your
face again!"

And she turned from him, shuddering.



BEFORE WARM FEBRUARY WINDS


Before warm February winds
 Arouse an April dream--
Or sudden rifts of azure sky
 Suggest the bluebird's gleam;

Before the reddening woods awake,
 Before the brooks are free--
Here where all things are sold and hired,
 The driven months we see.

Wither along our snow-soiled streets,
 Or under glass endure,
Fruits of the days that have not come,
 Exotic--premature.

I hear in raw, unwelcome dawns
 The sordid sparrows sing,
And in the florist's windows watch
 The forced and purchased spring.



KITCHEN-MINDEDNESS


It is physically possible to see through a knot-hole.  If the eye be
near enough, and the board be movable, one can, with patient rotation,
see the universe in spots, through a knot-hole.  Such a purview is
limited of necessity, and while suitable to the microscope, is not
congenial to the study of life in general.

When those who would save the forests of America began their work, the
burden of effort lay in so stimulating and stretching the mental vision
of our people, that they could see wider than their own immediate
acreage, deeper than their own immediate profit, further than their own
immediate time.  Some such struggle was no doubt gone through, when that
far-seeing iconoclast of early times strove to prove to the greedy
hunter that more food was to be attained by breeding cattle than by
killing them all at once; that meat kept better when alive.  What mental
labor, what arduous conflict between that prehistoric ant and
grasshopper!

Steadily up the ages the mind of man has had to stretch, and sturdily
has he resisted the process.  That protoplasmic substance of the brain,
used so much and understood so little, astonishes us no less by its
infinite capacity for new extension, for endless fluent combination,
than by its leaden immobility.  Here are some, open-minded, sensitive
and hospitable to new impressions; and here are others, an innumerable
majority, preferring always to know only what they have known, to think
only what they have thought before.  The distinction does not seem
innate.  A normal child provided with proper stimulus, responds with
ever fresh interest as field after field of new fact and new idea opens
before him.

Twenty years later that same child has lost this capacity, has become
dull, inert, conventional, conservative, contented.  Upon his growing
mind have been imposed in long succeeding years, the iron limitations of
his "elders and betters"; only in the rarest of cases has he the mental
strength to resist these influences and "think new," think for himself.

Here we all are, living together in relations as complex as the pattern
of some mighty tapestry; each of us, seeing only his own part in it,
considering the pattern from the point of view of a stitch.  This
attitude is exquisitely expressed by the reply of a dull student to the
earnest teacher who strove to arouse in him some spontaneous opinion on
human conduct.  With enthusiasm and dramatic force, this instructor
exhibited the career of Nero,--showed his list of crimes natural and
unnatural, personal and political; his indecency, and cruelty, demanding
what should be said of the monster.  The student, spurred by questions,
some-what fretfully responded, "He never did anything to me!"

Consciousness is of varying range.  We know its gradual development, its
narrow field in childhood, its permanent restriction in idiocy.  We know
how it may be developed, even in animals, how we have added to the dog's
field of consciousness a deep and passionate interest in his master's
life; how a well-befriended cat becomes desperately uneasy, when the
family begins to pack for a journey.  We know personally the difference
between our range of thought at one age, and at another; how one's
consciousness may include wider and wider fields of knowledge, longer
ranges of time, deeper causal relations; and how the same object, viewed
by different minds, may arouse in one as it were, a square inch, and in
the other a square mile of consciousness.  Those of us, who have the
larger area under cultivation,--who are accustomed to think of human
life as age-long, world-wide, and in motion, learn to see human conduct,
not as something in neat detachable strata, like a pile of plates, but
as having long roots and longer branches, and requiring careful handling
to alter.

To these, studying the world's affairs, clear lines of causal sequence
present themselves.  Is it a thousand cases of typhoid?  They trace the
fever to its lair as one would hunt a tiger; they point out every step
of its course; they call on the citizens to rise and fight the enemy, to
save their lives.  Do the citizens do it?  Not they.  Individually they
suffer and die.  Individually they grieve and mourn, bury,their dead
(when they should cremate them), and pay the doctor and the undertaker.
Hundreds of dollars they pay as individuals to nurses, doctors,
graveyard men, and monument makers.  If, collectively they would put up
a tenth of the sum to ensure a pure water and milk supply, they would
save not only hundreds for themselves, but thousands and millions for
those after them.--to say nothing of grief!

But they look at life through a knot-hole.  They see their own personal
affairs as things of sky-shadowing importance, and those same affairs,
taken collectively, become as remote and uninteresting as the Milky Way.

Now in the mere labor of intellectual comprehension our average citizen
of common-school education is able to see that where so much tuberculous
milk is fed into so many babies, that such a proportion will surely die.
 He sees, but it does interest him.  Show him tubercular bacilli from
the autopsy of his dead baby, show him the same in the bottle of milk
reposing in his refrigerator, and show him the man who put them
there--and you may get results.

He could see the larger facts, but only feel the smaller ones.  It is a
limitation of consciousness.

All workers for human advance know this.  Whatever the cause upheld,
those who work for it find everywhere the same difficulty; they have to
stretch the minds, to stimulate the consciousness, to arouse the
interest of their hearers, so that they will take action for the common
good.

In one field it is easy, that of public danger from war.  The reason is
clear.  Wars are carried on by men, and men have reacted to conflict
stimuli collectively, for so many ages, that it is a race habit with
them.  Only in the last extreme of terror is this habit broken, and the
battle turns to rout, with every man for himself.  Then comes the
officer and strives to rekindle that common consciousness without which
is no human victory.

In the economic world our habits of organization are not so old.  We
have fought in company since we fought at all, as humans; but we have
worked, for the most part alone.  The comradeship of shop and factory is
of yesterday, compared to the solitary spindle, loom and forge of
earlier centuries.  Yet in that comradeship wherever found, comes the
new consciousness, that recognizes common danger or common gain, and
substitutes the army for the mob, the victory for the rout.

This effect is so strong, so clear, so quick in appearance, that even
with one poor century or two of economic combination, we ought to find
much better results than we do.  Where the common interest is as clear
as day, where the common strength is so irresistible, where the loss and
the danger lie so wholly in isolation, one wonders over and over at the
lack of comprehension which keeps us so helplessly apart.

We can see the immense activities of the nation, the multiplication of
national wealth, power, and progress,--the saving of life, the
elimination of disease, the development of art and science, of beauty
and of health and glorious living that we might have, but we cannot feel
these things.  Therefore we do not act.

Can there be still among us some general cause, acting on everyone,
which mysteriously checks out progress, which makes us "penny-wise and
pound-foolish," makes us "save at the spigot and spend at the
bung-hole," which continually intensifies our consciousness of personal
interest and continually prevents the recognition of social interests?

It may seem  almost grotesque to make so heavy a complaint as this, and
then to put forward as chief offender our old companion the kitchen.

Briefly the charge is this: that in the private kitchen, we maintain in
our civilization an economic institution as old as house-building,
almost as old as the use of fire.  The results of this surviving
rudiment of a remote past are many.  The one presented here is the
effect of the kitchen on the mind.

The condition is practically universal.  For each house a kitchen.  Be
it the merest hut, the smallest tenement, one room; wherever the family
is found, there is the kitchen.  For each man there is a cook.  In the
great majority of cases the man's wife is his cook, and as she must
spend most of her time in the kitchen, there must be her little ones
also.  In fifteen-sixteenths of American families, the children are thus
reared,--by cooks in kitchens.

We, in our fatuous acceptance of race habits, have ceaselessly
perpetuated this kitchen-bred population, and even defended it as an
educational influence of no mean importance.  "Children brought up by
their mothers in the kitchen," we say, "early acquire knowledge and
skill in various occupations; they see things done, and learn how to do
them themselves."

This seems to the superficial listener like good sense.  He never looks
below the allegation for the evidence.  He sees that daily observation,
and practice should develop knowledge and skill, and fails to inquire
further to see if it does.

Surely if all children were brought up in blacksmith shops, it would
make them good blacksmiths; if they were brought up in dental parlors
they would become good dentists!

Waiving the desirability of a form of training calculated to turn out an
unvarying population of cooks, let us see if this daily association with
the maternal house-servant in her workshop does educate as stated.  On
this point one clear comment has been made: "If kitchen life is such
good training to mind and hand, why is it that so few of us are willing
to follow the kitchen trades when we are grown? and why is it that
competence in the kitchen is so rare?"  This is a most practical
observation.  If fifteen-sixteenths of our women followed incessantly
the occupation of shoemaking, and brought up their children in the shoe
shop, we should hardly claim great educational advantages for that
arrangement.  If we did, would it not be disappointing to find that the
trade of shoemaking was universally disliked and despised, and that good
shoemakers were hard to find at any price?

Yet this is precisely the case in hand.  Our kitchen-bred children, boy
and girl alike, prefer almost any other trade, and when we wish to
secure competent workers in the kitchen we find them extremely scarce.

Moreover, in its own special activities, the private kitchen makes no
advance.  Advance comes to it from outside; from the wider and more
progressive professionalism of its various industries; specialized and
socialized one by one.  But, left to itself, domestic cook hands down to
domestic cook the recipes of female ancestors, occasionally added to by
obliging friends.  It is endless repetition, but not progress.

The purpose of this discussion, however, is not to show the inefficacy
of this ancient workshop, as a means of carrying on that great art,
science, handicraft, and business--the preparation of food; but to point
out the effect of the kitchen on the human mind.

The one dominant note of kitchen work is personality.  Its products are
all prepared for home consumption only.  Its provisions are all secured
and its processes directed with a view to pleasing a small group.  It
does not and cannot consider the general questions of hygiene, of
nutrition, of the chemistry of improved processes of preparation, and
the immense and pressing problems of pure food.

The kitchen mind, focussed continually upon close personal concerns,
limited in time, in means, in capacity, and in mechanical convenience,
can consider only; a, what the family likes; b, what the family can
afford; and, c, what the cook can accomplish.

The most perfect type of organization we have is the military.  Military
success depends most absolutely on the commissary and sanitary
departments.  "An army travels on its belly," is the famous dictum.

Is there any difference in this respect between soldiers and other
people?  Are we not all gasteropods whether singly or in regiments?  Is
not the health and strength of the productive workers of the world, at
least as valuable as that of the cumbrous forces of destruction?

In our last little war, and in the big one before that, disease killed
more than sword and steel.  We lament this--in armies.  We prefer to
keep our soldiers healthy that they may fight more strongly, and die
more efficaciously, and this sick list is pure waste.

Is it any less waste in private life?  Can we easily afford the loss in
money--annual billions; the loss in strength, the loss in intellect, the
loss in love, that falls on us so heavily from year to year?  Study the
record of man's fight with disease.  See how the specialists devoting
not only lifetimes, but the accumulating succession of lifetimes to the
study of causes, cures and preventions, announce to us at last, "thus
and thus are you made sick.  Thus may you be cured, and thus may you so
live as to be well."

See then the sanitary work of an aroused public; a truth is discovered;
a truth is announced; a law is made; the law is enforced--a disease is
conquered.

This is vividly shown in the work of our Government against
pleuro-pneumonia--in cattle.  The Federal Government, furnishing
information and funds, and cooperating with the various States, attacked
that disease, and stamped it out completely.

There is an effort now to rouse our government to fight the White
Plague, in people as well as in cattle.  And, as always, the difficulty
is to stir and stretch and rouse our kitchen minds, to make us see
things in common instead of individually.  The men whose cattle had
pleuro-pneumonia, kept them in herds, and lost them in herds, losing
much money thereby.  Many men were so afflicted.  Therefore these many
men got together, and, using the machinery of the State, they together
destroyed their enemy.  Cattle-raising is a business, a social industry.

But child-raising, husband-feeding, the care of the lives and health of
all our families, is a domestic industry, in the management of the
kitchen mind.

it has been shown recently that 72 per cent. of the cattle in New York
State are tuberculous.  This does not kill them quickly like
pleuro-pneumonia.  They live and may be sold.  They live and may give
milk.  It has been shown recently (as stated in our unimpeachable daily
press), that in some of the milk sold in New York City, there were more
germs to the cubic millimeter, than in the same amount of sewage!

This milk, and most of the milk in all our cities, goes into the
kitchen; the blind, brainless, family-feeding kitchen, and from there is
given us to drink.

What protest rises from the kitchens of New York, or Chicago, or any
city?  What mass-meeting of angry women, presenting to their legislators
the horrible facts of strong men poisoned and babies slain by this or
any other abomination in the food supply?

A young man writes a novel exhibiting the badness of our meat supply.
Men become excited.  Men take action.  Men legislate.  The great meat
industries stagger under the shock, recover, and go on smiling.  Before
this meanwhile, and afterwards, the meat went into out kitchens and we
ate it.

Being kitchen-minded we cannot see that health is a public concern; that
the feeding of our people is one of the most vital factors in their
health, and that the private kitchen with its private cook is not able
to keep the public well.

Ask the physician, the sanitary expert.  He will tell you that the great
advance in sanitary science is in its battle with the filth diseases;
and that we die worse than ever from food diseases.

In fighting the filth diseases we have the public forces to work with;
compulsory systems of sewage and drainage, quarantine, isolation
hospitals, and all the other maneuvers by which an enlightened public
protects itself.

But who shall say what a child shall eat, or a man or woman?  Is it not
wholly their own affair?

We cry out upon our women for the falling birth rate;--why not say
something about the death rate of their babies?  The average family must
have four, merely to maintain a stationary population, said Grant Allen;
"two to replace themselves and two to die."  The doctor will tell you
that they die mostly of what are called "preventable diseases" and that
those diseases are mainly of the alimentary canal.

Kitchen-fed are we all, and those of us who survive it, who become
immune to it, cry loudly of its excellence!  If we could once see
outside of these ancient limits, once figure to ourselves the vision of
a healthy world, and the noble duty of making it,--then we should no
longer be kitchen-minded.

Our narrowness of vision, our petty self-interest, does not end its
injuries with our bodily health.  Its leaden limitation is felt in all
the economic field.

Not a business have we in the world but needs to be considered as a
matter of public service; needs to be studied, helped, restricted,
generally managed for the public good.  Not a business in the world but
is crippled and distorted by the childish self-interest of its
promoters.  Kitchen-bred men born of kitchen-bred mothers are we, and
inevitably must we consider the main duty of life to be the service of
our own body.  What else does the child see his mother do, but work,
work, work to cover the family table with food three times a day, and
clear up afterward?  What else can he grow up to do but work, work,
work, to provide the wherewithal for another woman to do the same?

A million women are making bread as their mothers made it.  How many
women are trying to lift the standard of bread-making for their country?
 How many even know the difference in nutriment and digestibility
between one bread and another?

They do not think "bread," but only "my bread."  Their view of the staff
of life is kitchen-minded.  When our kitchen trades become world trades,
when we are fed, not by the most ignorant, but by the wisest; when
personal whims and painfully acquired habits give place to the light of
science, and the fruit of wide experience; when, instead of dragging
duty or sordid compulsion, we have wisdom and art to feed us; the change
will be far greater than that of improved health.  It will be a great
and valuable advance even there.  We shall become healthy, clean-fleshed
people, intelligent eaters, each generation improving in strength and
beauty, but we shall be helped in wider ways than that.  We shall have
the enlarged mental capacity that comes of a wider area of work and
responsibility.  We shall have in each man and woman the habitual power
of organization, the daily recognition of mutual service and world-duty.

When the world comes out of the kitchen for good and all, and for that
primitive little shop is substituted the cool glittering laboratory,
wherein the needs of bodily replenishment are fully and beautifully met,
it will give to the growing child a different background for his thought
processes.  At last we shall mark the great division between production,
which is the social function, and consumption which is personal.

As we now emerge from the warm and greasy confines of our ancient
cookshop, we begin to see with new eyes its true place as an economic
factor.  We are learning the unbridled waste of it; how it costs
struggling humanity about forty-three per cent. of its productive labor,
and two-thirds of its living expenses; how it does not conserve the very
end for which we uphold it,--the health of the family; how it leaves us
helpless before the adulterators of food, the purveyors of impure milk,
diseased meat, and all unpleasantness.  We are beginning to see how,
most dangerous of all, it works against our economic progress, by
perpetuating a primitive selfishness.

Public interest grows in public service.  Self-interest is maintained by
self-service.  We can neither rightly estimate social gain, nor rightly
condemn social evil, because we are so soddenly habituated to consider
only personal gain, personal good and personal evil; because we are
kitchen-minded.



TWO STORKS


Two storks were nesting.

He was a young stork--and narrow-minded.  Before he married he had
consorted mainly with striplings of his own kind, and had given no
thought to the ladies, either maid or matron.

After he married his attention was concentrated upon his All-Satisfying
Wife; upon that Triumph of Art, Labor, and Love--their Nest, and upon
those Special Creations--their Children.  Deeply was he moved by the
marvellous instincts and processes of motherhood.  Love, reverence,
intense admiration, rose in his heart for Her of the Well-built Nest;
Her of the Gleaming Treasure of Smooth Eggs; Her of the Patient Brooding
Breast, the Warming Wings, the downy wide-mouthed Group of Little Ones.

Assiduously he labored to help her build the nest, to help her feed the
young; proud of his impassioned activity in her and their behalf;
devoutly he performed his share of the brooding, while she hunted in her
turn.  When he was o-wing he thought continually of Her as one with the
Brood--His Brood.  When he was on the nest he thought all the more of
Her, who sat there so long, so lovingly, to such noble ends.

The happy days flew by, fair Spring--sweet Summer--gentle Autumn.  The
young ones grew larger and larger; it was more and more work to keep
their lengthening, widening beaks shut in contentment.  Both parents
flew far afield to feed them.

Then the days grew shorter, the sky greyer, the wind colder; there was
less hunting and small success.  In his dreams he began to see sunshine,
broad, burning sunshine day after day; skies of limitless blue; dark,
deep, yet full of fire; and stretches of bright water, shallow, warm,
fringed with tall reeds and rushes, teeming with fat frogs.

They were in her dreams too, but he did not know that.

He stretched his wings and flew farther every day; but his wings were
not satisfied.  In his dreams came a sense of vast heights and boundless
spaces of the earth streaming away beneath him; black water and white
land, grey water and brown land, blue water and green land, all flowing
backward from day to day, while the cold lessened and the warmth grew.

He felt the empty sparkling nights, stars far above, quivering, burning;
stars far below, quivering more in the dark water; and felt his great
wings wide, strong, all sufficient, carrying him on and on!

This was in her dreams too, but he did not know that.

"It is time to Go!" he cried one day.  "They are coming!  It is upon us!
 Yes--I must Go!  Goodbye my wife!  Goodbye my children!"  For the
Passion of Wings was upon him.

She too was stirred to the heart.  "Yes!  It is time to Go!  To Go!" she
cried.  "I am ready!  Come!"

He was shocked; grieved; astonished.  "Why, my Dear!" he said.  "How
preposterous!  You cannot go on the Great Flight!  Your wings are for
brooding tender little ones!  Your body is for the Wonder of the
Gleaming Treasure!--not for days and nights of ceaseless soaring!  You
cannot go!"

She did not heed him.  She spread her wide wings and swept and circled
far and high above--as, in truth, she had been doing for many days,
though he had not noticed it.

She dropped to the ridge-pole beside him where he was still muttering
objections.  "Is it not glorious!" she cried.  "Come!  They are nearly
ready!"

"You unnatural Mother!" he burst forth.  "You have forgotten the Order
of Nature!  You have forgotten your Children!  Your lovely precious
tender helpless Little Ones!"  And he wept--for his highest ideals were
shattered.

But the Precious Little Ones stood in a row on the ridge-pole and
flapped their strong young wings in high derision.  They were as big as
he was, nearly; for as a matter of fact he was but a Young Stork
himself.

Then the air was beaten white with a thousand wings, it was like snow
and silver and seafoam, there was a flashing whirlwind, a hurricane of
wild joy and then the Army of the Sky spread wide in due array and
streamed Southward.

Full of remembered joy and more joyous hope, finding the high sunlight
better than her dreams, she swept away to the far summerland; and her
children, mad with the happiness of the First Flight, swept beside her.

"But you are a Mother!" he panted, as he caught up with them.

"Yes!" she cried, joyously, "but I was a Stork before I was A Mother!
and afterward!--and All the Time!"

And the Storks were Flying.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER IV.

A CRYING NEED


"Lovest thou me?" said the Fair Ladye;
 And the Lover he said, "Yea!"
"Then climb this tree--for my sake," said she,
 "And climb it every day!"
So from dawn till dark he abrazed the bark
 And wore his clothes away;
Till, "What has this tree to do with thee?"
 The Lover at last did say.


It was a poor dinner.  Cold in the first place, because Isabel would
wait to thoroughly wash her long artistic hands; and put on another
dress.  She hated the smell of cooking in her garments; hated it worse
on her white fingers; and now to look at the graceful erect figure, the
round throat with the silver necklace about it, the soft smooth hair,
silver-filletted, the negative beauty of the dove-colored gown,
specially designed for home evenings, one would never dream she had set
the table so well--and cooked the steak so abominably.


Isabel was never a cook.  In the many servantless gaps of domestic life
in Orchardina, there was always a strained atmosphere in the Porne
household.

"Dear," said Mr. Porne, "might I petition to have the steak less cooked?
 I know you don't like to do it, so why not shorten the process?"

"I'm sorry," she answered, "I always forget about the steak from one
time to the next."

"Yet we've had it three times this week, my dear."

"I thought you liked it better than anything," she with marked
gentleness.  "I'll get you other things--oftener."

"It's a shame you should have this to do, Isabel.  I never meant you
should cook for me.  Indeed I didn't dream you cared so little about
it."

"And I never dreamed you cared so much about it," she replied, still
with repression.  "I'm not complaining, am I?  I'm only sorry you should
be disappointed in me."

"It's not _you,_ dear girl!  You're all right!  It's just this
everlasting bother.  Can't you get _anybody_ that will stay?"

I can't seem to get anybody on any terms, so far.  I'm going again,
to-morrow.  Cheer up, dear--the baby keeps well--that's the main thing."

He sat on the rose-bowered porch and smoked while she cleared the table.
 At first he had tried to help her on these occasions, but their methods
were dissimilar and she frankly told him she preferred to do it alone.

So she slipped off the silk and put on the gingham again, washed the
dishes with the labored accuracy of a trained mind doing unfamiliar
work, made the bread, redressed at last, and joined him about nine
o'clock.

"It's too late to go anywhere, I suppose?" he ventured.

"Yes--and I'm too tired.  Besides--we can't leave Eddie alone."

"O yes--I forget.  Of course we can't."

His hand stole out to take hers.  "I _am_ sorry, dear.  It's awfully
rough on you women out here.  How do they all stand it?"

"Most of them stand it much better than I do, Ned.  You see they don't
want to be doing anything else."

"Yes.  That's the mischief of it!" he agreed; and she looked at him in
the clear moonlight, wondering exactly what he thought the mischief was.

"Shall we go in and read a bit?" he offered; but she thought not.

"I'm too tired, I'm afraid.  And Eddie'll wake up as soon as we begin."

So they sat awhile enjoying the soft silence, and the rich flower scents
about them, till Eddie did wake presently, and Isabel went upstairs.

She slept little that night, lying quite still, listening to her
husband's regular breathing so near her, and the lighter sound from the
crib.  "I am a very happy woman," she told herself resolutely; but there
was no outpouring sense of love and joy.  She knew she was happy, but by
no means felt it.  So she stared at the moon shadows and thought it
over.

She had planned the little house herself, with such love, such hope,
such tender happy care!  Not her first work, which won high praise in
the school in Paris, not the prize-winning plan for the library, now
gracing Orchardina's prettiest square, was as dear to her as this most
womanly task--the making of a home.

It was the library success which brought her here, fresh from her
foreign studies, and Orchardina accepted with western cordiality the
youth and beauty of the young architect, though a bit surprised at first
that "I. H. Wright" was an Isabel.  In her further work of overseeing
the construction of that library, she had met Edgar Porne, one of the
numerous eager young real estate men of that region, who showed a
liberal enthusiasm for the general capacity of women in the professions,
and a much warmer feeling for the personal attractions of this one.

Together they chose the lot on pepper-shaded Inez Avenue; together they
watched the rising of the concrete walls and planned the garden walks
and seats, and the tiny precious pool in the far corner.  He was so
sympathetic! so admiring!  He took as much pride in the big "drawing
room" on the third floor as she did herself.  "Architecture is such fine
work to do at home!" they had both agreed.  "Here you have your north
light--your big table--plenty of room for work!  You will grow famouser
and famouser," he had lovingly insisted.  And she had answered, "I fear
I shall be too contented, dear, to want to be famous."

That was only some year and a-half ago,--but Isabel, lying there by her
sleeping husband and sleeping child, was stark awake and only by
assertion happy.  She was thinking, persistently, of dust.  She loved a
delicate cleanliness.  Her art was a precise one, her studio a workshop
of white paper and fine pointed hard pencils, her painting the
mechanical perfection of an even wash of color.  And she saw, through
the floors and walls and the darkness, the dust in the little shaded
parlor--two days' dust at least, and Orchardina is very dusty!--dust in
the dining-room gathered since yesterday--the dust in the kitchen--she
would not count time there, and the dust--here she counted it
inexorably--the dust of eight days in her great, light workroom
upstairs.  Eight days since she had found time to go up there.

Lying there, wide-eyed and motionless, she stood outside in thought and
looked at the house--as she used to look at it with him, before they
were married.  Then, it had roused every blessed hope and dream of
wedded joy--it seemed a casket of uncounted treasures.  Now, in this
dreary mood, it seemed not only a mere workshop, but one of alien tasks,
continuous, impossible, like those set for the Imprisoned Princess by
bad fairies in the old tales.  In thought she entered the
well-proportioned door--the Gate of Happiness--and a musty smell greeted
her--she had forgotten to throw out those flowers!  She turned to the
parlor--no, the piano keys were gritty, one had to clean them twice a
day to keep that room as she liked it.

From room to room she flitted, in her mind, trying to recall the
exquisite things they meant to her when she had planned them; and each
one now opened glaring and blank, as a place to work in--and the work
undone.

"If I were an abler woman!" she breathed.  And then her common sense and
common honesty made her reply to herself: "I am able enough--in my own
work!  Nobody can do everything.  I don't believe Edgar'd do it any
better than I do.--He don't have to!--and then such a wave of bitterness
rushed over her that she was afraid, and reached out one hand to touch
the crib--the other to her husband.

He awakened instantly.  "What is it, Dear?" he asked.  "Too tired to
sleep, you poor darling?  But you do love me a little, don't you?"

"O _yes_!" she answered.  "I do.  Of _course_ I do!  I'm just tired, I
guess.  Goodnight, Sweetheart."


She was late in getting to sleep and late in waking.

When he finally sat down to the hurriedly spread breakfast-table, Mr.
Porne, long coffeeless, found it a bit difficult to keep his temper.
Isabel was a little stiff, bringing in dishes and cups, and paying no
attention to the sounds of wailing from above.

"Well if you won't I will!" burst forth the father at last, and ran
upstairs, returning presently with a fine boy of some eleven months, who
ceased to bawl in these familiar arms, and contented himself, for the
moment, with a teaspoon.

"Aren't you going to feed him?" asked Mr. Porne, with forced patience.

"It isn't time yet," she announced wearily.  "He has to have his bath
first."

"Well," with a patience evidently forced farther, "isn't it time to feed
me?"

"I'm very sorry," she said.  "The oatmeal is burned again.  You'll have
to eat cornflakes.  And--the cream is sour--the ice didn't come--or at
least, perhaps I was out when it came--and then I forgot it. . . . . I
had to go to the employment agency in the morning! . . . . I'm sorry I'm
so--so incompetent."

"So am I," he commented drily.  "Are there any crackers for instance?
And how about coffee?"

She brought the coffee, such as it was, and a can of condensed milk.
Also crackers, and fruit.  She took the baby and sat silent.

"Shall I come home to lunch?" he asked.

"Perhaps you'd better not," she replied coldly.

"Is there to be any dinner?"

"Dinner will be ready at six-thirty, if I have to get it myself."

"If you have to get it yourself I'll allow for seven-thirty," said he,
trying to be cheerful, though she seemed little pleased by it.  "Now
don't take it so hard, Ellie.  You are a first-class architect,
anyhow--one can't be everything.  We'll get another girl in time.  This
is just the common lot out here.  All the women have the same trouble."

"Most women seem better able to meet it!" she burst forth.  "It's not my
trade!  I'm willing to work, I like to work, but I can't _bear_
housework!  I can't seem to learn it at all!  And the servants will not
do it properly!"

"Perhaps they know your limitations, and take advantage of them!  But
cheer up, dear.  It's no killing matter.  Order by phone, don't forget
the ice, and I'll try to get home early and help.  Don't cry, dear girl,
I love you, even if you aren't a good cook!  And you love me, don't
you?"

He kissed her till she had to smile back at him and give him a loving
hug; but after he had gone, the gloom settled upon her spirits once
more.  She bathed the baby, fed him, put him to sleep; and came back to
the table.  The screen door had been left ajar and the house was buzzing
with flies, hot, with a week's accumulating disorder.  The bread she
made last night in fear and trembling, was hanging fatly over the pans;
perhaps sour already.  She clapped it into the oven and turned on the
heat.

Then she stood, undetermined, looking about that messy kitchen while the
big flies bumped and buzzed on the windows, settled on every dish, and
swung in giddy circles in the middle of the room.  Turning  swiftly she
shut the door on them.  The dining-room was nearly as bad.  She began to
put the cups and plates together for removal; but set her tray down
suddenly and went into the comparative coolness of the parlor, closing
the dining-room door behind her.

She was quite tired enough to cry after several nights of broken rest
and days of constant discomfort and irritation; but a sense of rising
anger kept the tears back.

"Of course I love him!" she said to herself aloud but softly,
remembering the baby,  "And no doubt he loves me!  I'm glad to be his
wife!  I'm glad to be a mother to his child!  I'm glad I married him!
But--_this_ is not what he offered!  And it's not what I undertook!  He
hasn't had to change his business!"

She marched up and down the scant space, and then stopped short and
laughed drily, continuing her smothered soliloquy.

"'Do you love me?' they ask, and, 'I will make you happy!' they say; and
you get married--and after that it's Housework!"

"They don't say, 'Will you be my Cook?'  'Will you be my Chamber maid?'
'Will you give up a good clean well-paid business that you love--that
has big hope and power and beauty in it--and come and keep house for
me?'"

"Love him?  I'd be in Paris this minute if I didn't!  What has 'love' to
do with dust and grease and flies!"

Then she did drop on the small sofa and cry tempestuously for a little
while; but soon arose, fiercely ashamed of her weakness, and faced the
day; thinking of the old lady who had so much to do she couldn't think
what to first--so she sat down and made a pincushion.

Then--where to begin!

"Eddie will sleep till half-past ten--if I'm lucky.  It's now nearly
half-past nine," she meditated aloud.  "If I do the upstairs work I
might wake him.  I mustn't forget the bread, the dishes, the parlor--O
those flies!  Well--I'll clear the table first!"

Stepping softly, and handling the dishes with slow care, she cleaned the
breakfast table and darkened the dining-room, flapping out some of the
flies with a towel.  Then she essayed the parlor, dusting and arranging
with undecided steps.  "It _ought_ to be swept," she admitted to
herself; "I can't do it--there isn't time.  I'll make it dark--"

"I'd rather plan a dozen houses!" she fiercely muttered, as she fussed
about.  "Yes--I'd rather build 'em--than to keep one clean!"

Then were her hopes dashed by a rising wail from above.  She sat quite
still awhile, hoping against hope that he would sleep again; but he
wouldn't.  So she brought him down in full cry.

In her low chair by the window she held him and produced bright and
jingling objects from the tall workbasket that stood near by, sighing
again as she glanced at its accumulated mending.

Master Eddy grew calm and happy in her arms, but showed a growing
interest in the pleasing materials produced for his amusement, and a
desire for closer acquaintance.  Then a penetrating odor filled the air,
and with a sudden "O dear!" she rose, put the baby on the sofa, and
started toward the kitchen.

At this moment the doorbell rang.

Mrs. Porne stopped in her tracks and looked at the door.  It remained
opaque and immovable.  She looked at the baby--who jiggled his spools
and crowed.  Then she flew to the oven and dragged forth the bread, not
much burned after all.  Then she opened the door.

A nice looking young woman stood before her, in a plain travelling suit,
holding a cheap dress-suit case in one hand and a denim "roll-bag" in
the other, who met her with a cheerful inquiring smile.

"Are you Mrs. Edgar Porne?" she asked.

"I am," answered that lady, somewhat shortly, her hand on the doorknob,
her ear on the baby, her nose still remorsefully in the kitchen, her
eyes fixed sternly on her visitor the while; as she wondered whether it
was literature, cosmetics, or medicine.

She was about to add that she didn't want anything, when the young lady
produced a card from the Rev. Benjamin A. Miner, Mrs. Porne's
particularly revered minister, and stated that she had heard there was a
vacancy in her kitchen and she would like the place.

"Introducing Mrs. D. Bell, well known to friends of mine."

"I don't know--" said Mrs. Porne, reading the card without in the least
grasping what it said.  "I--"

Just then there was a dull falling sound followed by a sharp rising one,
and she rushed into the parlor without more words.

When she could hear and be heard again, she found Mrs. Bell seated in
the shadowy little hall, serene and cool.  "I called on Mr. Miner
yesterday when I arrived," said she, "with letters of introduction from
my former minister, told him what I wanted to do, and asked him if he
could suggest anyone in immediate need of help in this line.  He said he
had called here recently, and believed you were looking for someone.
Here is the letter I showed him," and she handed Mrs. Porne a most
friendly and appreciative recommendation of Miss D. Bell by a minister
in Jopalez, Inca Co., stating that the bearer was fully qualified to do
all kinds of housework, experienced, honest, kind, had worked seven
years in one place, and only left it hoping to do better in Southern
California.

Backed by her own pastor's approval this seemed to Mrs. Porne fully
sufficient.  The look of the girl pleased her, though suspiciously above
her station in manner; service of any sort was scarce and high in
Orchardina, and she had been an agelong week without any.  "When can you
come?" she asked.

"I can stop now if you like," said the stranger.  "This is my baggage.
But we must arrange terms first.  If you like to try me I will come this
week from noon to-day to noon next Friday, for seven dollars, and then
if you are satisfied with my work we can make further arrangements.  I
do not do laundry work, of course, and don't undertake to have any care
of the baby."

"I take care of my baby myself!" said Mrs. Porne, thinking the new girl
was presuming, though her manner was most gently respectful.  But a week
was not long, she was well recommended, and the immediate pressure in
that kitchen where the harvest was so ripe and the laborers so
few--"Well--you may try the week," she said.  "I'll show you your room.
And what is your name?"

"Miss Bell."



LITTLE LEAFY BROTHERS


Little, leafy brothers!  You can feel
  Warmth o' the sun,
  Cool sap-streams run,
 The slow, soft, nuzzling creep
 Of roots sent deep,
  And a close-anchored flowing
  In winds smooth-blowing.
 And in the Spring! the Spring!
 When the stars sing--
  The world's love in you grows
  Into the rose!

Little hairy brothers!  You can feel
 The kind sun too;
 Winds play with you,
  Water is live delight;
  In your swift flight
 Of wings or leaping feet
 Life rushes sweet--
  And in the Spring! the Spring!
  When the stars sing--
 The world's love stirs you first
 To wild, sweet thirst,
  Mad combat glorious, and so
  To what you know
 Of love in living.  Yes, to you first came
 The joy past name
  Of interchange--the small mouth pressed
  To the warm, willing breast.

But O! the human brothers!  We can feel
 All, all below
 These small ones know;
  Earth fair and good,
  The bubbling flood
 Of life a-growing--in us multiplied
 As man spreads wide;
  Not into leaves alone,
  Nor flesh and bone,
 But roof and wall and wheel
 Of stone and steel;
  Soft foliage and gorgeous bloom
  Of humming loom;
 And fruit of joy o'er-burdened heart
 Poured forth in Art!
  We can not only leap in the sun,
  Wrestle and run,
 But know the music-measured beat
 Of dancing feet,
  The interplay of hands--we hold
  Delight of doing, myriad-fold.
 Joy of the rose, we know--
 To bloom--to grow!--
  Joy of the beast we prove--
  To strive--to move!
 And in the Spring! the Spring!
 When the stars sing,
  Wide gladness of all living men
  Comes back again,
 A conscious universe at rest
 In one's own breast!
  The world's love!  Wholly ours;
  Through breathing flowers,
 Through all the living tumult of the wood,
 In us made good;
  Through centuries that rise and fall--
  We hold it all!
 The world's love!  Given music, fit
 To carry it.
  The world's love!  Given words at last, to speak,
  Though yet so weak.
 The world's love!  Given hands that hold so much,
 Lips that may touch!
  The worlds's love!  Sweet!--it lies
  In your dear eyes!



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


IV.

MEN AND ART.


Among the many counts in which women have been proven inferior to men in
human development is the oft-heard charge that there are no great women
artists.  Where one or two are proudly exhibited in evidence, they are
either pooh-poohed as not very great, or held to be the trifling
exceptions which do but prove the rule.

Defenders of women generally make the mistake of over-estimating their
performances, instead of accepting, and explaining, the visible facts.
What are the facts as to the relation of men and women to art?  And
what, in especial, has been the effect upon art of a solely masculine
expression?

When we look for the beginnings of art, we find ourselves in a period of
crude decoration of the person and of personal belongings.  Tattooing,
for instance, is an early form of decorative art, still in practice
among certain classes, even in advanced people.  Most boys, if they are
in contact with this early art, admire it, and wish to adorn themselves
therewith; some do so--to later mortification.  Early personal
decoration consisted largely in direct mutilation of the body, and the
hanging upon it, or fastening to it, of decorative objects.  This we see
among savages still, in its gross and primitive forms monopolized by
men, then shared by women, and, in our time, left almost wholly to them.
 In personal decoration today, women are still near the savage.  The
"artists" developed in this field of art are the tonsorial, the
sartorial, and all those specialized adorners of the body commonly known
as "beauty doctors."

Here, as in other cases, the greatest artists are men.  The greatest
milliners, the greatest dressmakers and tailors, the greatest
hairdressers, and the masters and designers in all our decorative
toilettes and accessories, are men.  Women, in this as in so many other
lines, consume rather than produce.  They carry the major part of
personal decoration today; but the decorator is the man.  In the
decoration of objects, woman, as the originator of primitive industry,
originated also the primitive arts; and in the pottery, basketry,
leatherwork, needlework, weaving, with all beadwork, dyeing and
embroideries of ancient peoples we see the work of the woman decorator.
Much of this is strong and beautiful, but its time is long past.  The
art which is part of industry, natural, simple, spontaneous, making
beauty in every object of use, adding pleasure to labor and to life, is
not Art with a large A, the Art which requires Artists, among whom are
so few women of note.

Art as a profession, and the Artist as a professional, came later; and
by that time women had left the freedom and power of the matriarchate
and become slaves in varying degree.  The women who were idle pets in
harems, or the women who worked hard as servants, were alike cut off
from the joy of making things.  Where constructive work remained to
them, art remained, in its early decorative form.  Men, in the
proprietary family, restricting the natural industry of women to
personal service, cut off their art with their industry, and by so much
impoverished the world.

There is no more conspicuously pathetic proof of the aborted development
of women than this commonplace--their lack of a civilized art sense.
Not only in the childish and savage display upon their bodies, but in
the pitiful products they hang upon the walls of the home, is seen the
arrest in normal growth.

After ages of culture, in which men have developed Architecture,
Sculpture, Painting, Music and the Drama, we find women in their
primitive environment making flowers of wax, and hair, and worsted;
doing mottoes of perforated cardboard, making crazy quilts and mats and
"tidies"--as if they lived in a long past age, or belonged to a lower
race.

This, as part of the general injury to women dating from the beginning
of our androcentric culture, reacts heavily upon the world at large.
Men, specializing, giving their lives to the continuous pursuit of one
line of service, have lifted our standard in aesthetic culture, as they
have in other matters; but by refusing the same growth to women, they
have not only weakened and reduced the output, but ruined the market as
it were, hopelessly and permanently kept down the level of taste.

Among the many sides of this great question, some so terrible, some so
pathetic, some so utterly absurd, this particular phase of life is
especially easy to study and understand, and has its own elements of
amusement.  Men, holding women at the level of domestic service, going
on themselves to lonely heights of achievement, have found their efforts
hampered and their attainments rendered barren and unsatisfactory by the
amazing indifference of the world at large.  As the world at large
consists half of women, and wholly of their children, it would seem
patent to the meanest understanding that the women must be allowed to
rise in order to lift the world.  But such has not been the
method--heretofore.

We have spoken so far in this chapter of the effect of men on art
through their interference with the art of women.  There are other sides
to the question.  Let us consider once more the essential
characteristics of maleness, and see how they have affected art, keeping
always in mind the triune distinction between masculine, feminine and
human.  Perhaps we shall best see this difference by considering what
the development of art might have been on purely human terms.

The human creature, as such, naturally delights in construction, and
adds decoration to construction as naturally.  The cook, making little
regular patterns around the edge of the pie, does so from a purely human
instinct, the innate eye-pleasure in regularity, symmetry, repetition,
and alternation.  Had this natural social instinct grown unchecked in
us, it would have manifested itself in a certain proportion of
specialists--artists of all sorts--and an accompanying development of
appreciation on the part of the rest of us.  Such is the case in
primitive art; the maker of beauty is upheld and rewarded by a popular
appreciation of her work--or his.

Had this condition remained, we should find a general level of artistic
expression and appreciation far higher than we see now.  Take the one
field of textile art, for instance: that wide and fluent medium of
expression, the making of varied fabrics, the fashioning of garments and
the decoration of them--all this is human work and human pleasure.  It
should have led us to a condition where every human being was a pleasure
to the eye, appropriately and beautifully clothed.

Our real condition in this field is too patent to need emphasis; the
stiff, black ugliness of our men's attire; the irritating variegated
folly of our women's; the way in which we spoil the beauty and shame the
dignity of childhood by modes of dress.

In normal human growth, our houses would be a pleasure to the eye; our
furniture and utensils, all our social products, would blossom into
beauty as naturally as they still do in those low stages of social
evolution where our major errors have not yet borne full fruit.

Applied art in all its forms is a human function, common to every one to
some degree, either in production or appreciation, or both.  "Pure art,"
as an ideal, is also human; and the single-hearted devotion of the true
artist to this ideal is one of the highest forms of the social
sacrifice.  Of all the thousand ways by which humanity is specialized
for inter-service, none is more exquisite than this; the evolution of
the social Eye, or Ear, or Voice, the development of those whose work is
wholly for others, and to whom the appreciation of others is as the
bread of life.  This we should have in a properly developed community;
the pleasure of applied art in the making and using of everything we
have; and then the high joy of the Great Artist, and the noble work
thereof, spread far and wide.

What do we find?

Applied art at a very low level; small joy either for the maker or the
user.  Pure art, a fine-spun specialty, a process carried on by an elect
few who openly despise the unappreciative many.  Art has become an
occult profession requiring a long special education even to enjoy, and
evolving a jargon of criticism which becomes more esoteric yearly.

Let us now see what part in this undesirable outcome is due to our
Androcentric Culture.

As soon as the male of our species assumed the exclusive right to
perform all social functions, he necessarily brought to that performance
the advantages--and disadvantages--of maleness, of those dominant
characteristics, desire, combat, self-expression.

Desire has overweighted art in many visible forms; it is prominent in
painting and music, almost monopolizes fiction, and has pitifully
degraded dancing.

Combat is not so easily expressed in art, where even competition is on a
high plane; but the last element is the main evil, self-expression.
This impulse is inherently and ineradicably masculine.  It rests on that
most basic of distinctions between the sexes, the centripetal and
centrifugal forces of the universe.  In the very nature of the
sperm-cell and the germ-cell we find this difference: the one attracts,
gathers, draws in; the other repels, scatters, pushes out.  That
projective impulse is seen in the male nature everywhere; the constant
urge toward expression, to all boasting and display.  This spirit, like
all things masculine, is perfectly right and admirable in its place.

It is the duty of the male, as a male, to vary; bursting forth in a
thousand changing modifications--the female, selecting, may so
incorporate beneficial changes in the race.  It is his duty to thus
express himself--an essentially masculine duty; but masculinity is one
thing, and art is another.  Neither the masculine nor the feminine has
any place in art--Art is Human.

It is not in any faintest degree allied to the personal processes of
reproduction; but is a social process, a most distinctive social
process, quite above the plane of sex.  The true artist transcends his
sex, or her sex.  If this is not the case, the art suffers.

Dancing is an early, and a beautiful art; direct expression of emotion
through the body; beginning in subhuman type, among male birds, as the
bower-bird of New Guinea, and the dancing crane, who swing and caper
before their mates.  Among early peoples we find it a common form of
social expression in tribal dances of all sorts, religious, military,
and other.  Later it becomes a more explicit form of celebration, as
among the Greeks; in whose exquisite personal culture dancing and music
held high place.

But under the progressive effects of purely masculine dominance we find
the broader human elements of dancing left out, and the sex-element more
and more emphasized.  As practiced by men alone dancing has become a
mere display of physical agility, a form of exhibition common to all
males.  As practiced by men and women together we have our social
dances, so lacking in all the varied beauty of posture and expression,
so steadily becoming a pleasant form of dalliance.

As practiced by women alone we have one of the clearest proofs of the
degrading effect of masculine dominance:--the dancing girl.  In the
frank sensualism of the Orient, this personage is admired and enjoyed on
her merits.  We, more sophisticated in this matter, joke shamefacedly
about "the bald-headed row," and occasionally burst forth in shrill
scandal over some dinner party where ladies clad in a veil and a
bracelet dance on the table.  Nowhere else in the whole range of life on
earth, is this degradation found--the female capering and prancing
before the male.  It is absolutely and essentially his function, not
hers.  That we, as a race, present this pitiful spectacle, a natural art
wrested to unnatural ends, a noble art degraded to ignoble ends, has one
clear cause.

Architecture, in its own nature, is least affected by that same cause.
The human needs secured by it, are so human, so unescapably human, that
we find less trace of excessive masculinity than in other arts.  It
meets our social demands, it expresses in lasting form our social
feeling, up to the highest; and it has been injured not so much by an
excess of masculinity as by a lack of femininity.

The most universal architectural expression is in the home; the home is
essentially a place for the woman and the child; yet the needs of woman
and child are not expressed in our domestic architecture.  The home is
built on lines of ancient precedent, mainly as an industrial form; the
kitchen is its working centre rather than the nursery.

Each man wishes his home to preserve and seclude his woman, his little
harem of one; and in it she is to labor for his comfort or to manifest
his ability to maintain her in idleness.  The house is the physical
expression of the limitations of women; and as such it fills the world
with a small drab ugliness.  A dwelling house is rarely a beautiful
object.  In order to be such, it should truly express simple and natural
relations; or grow in larger beauty as our lives develop.

The deadlock for architectural progress, the low level of our general
taste, the everlasting predominance of the commonplace in buildings, is
the natural result of the proprietary family and its expression in this
form.

In sculpture we have a noble art forcing itself into some service
through many limitations.  Its check, as far as it comes under this line
of study, has been indicated in our last chapter; the degradation of the
human body, the vicious standards of sex-consciousness enforced under
the name of modesty, the covered ugliness, which we do not recognize,
all this is a deadly injury to free high work in sculpture.

With a nobly equal womanhood, stalwart and athletic; with the high
standards of beauty and of decorum which we can never have without free
womanhood; we should show a different product in this great art.

An interesting note in passing is this: when we seek to express socially
our noblest, ideas, Truth; Justice; Liberty; we use the woman's body as
the highest human type.  But in doing this, the artist, true to humanity
and not biassed by sex, gives us a strong, grand figure, beautiful
indeed, but never _decorated_.  Fancy Liberty in ruffles and frills,
with rings in her ears--or nose.

Music is injured by a one-sided handling, partly in the excess of the
one dominant masculine passion, partly by the general presence of
egoism; that tendency to self-expression instead of social expression,
which so disfigures our art; and this is true also of poetry.

Miles and miles of poetry consist of the ceaseless outcry of the male
for the female, which is by no means so overwhelming as a feature of
human life as he imagines it; and other miles express his other
feelings, with that ingenuous lack of reticence which is at its base
essentially masculine.  Having a pain, the poet must needs pour it
forth, that his woe be shared and sympathized with.

As more and more women writers flock into the field there is room for
fine historic study of the difference in sex feeling, and the gradual
emergence of the human note.

Literature, and in especial the art of fiction, is so large a field for
this study that it will have a chapter to itself; this one but touching
on these various forms; and indicating lines of observation.

That best known form of art which to my mind needs no qualifying
description--painting--is also a wide field; and cannot be done full
justice to within these limits.  The effect upon it of too much
masculinity is not so much in choice of subject as in method and spirit.
 The artist sees beauty of form and color where the ordinary observer
does not; and paints the old and ugly with as much enthusiasm as the
young and beautiful--sometimes.  If there is in some an over-emphasis of
feminine attractions it is counterbalanced in others by a far broader
line of work.

But the main evils of a too masculine art lie in the emphasis laid on
self-expression.  The artist, passionately conscious of how he feels,
strives to make other people aware of these sensations.  This is now so
generally accepted by critics, so seriously advanced by painters, that
what is called "the art world" accepts it as established.

If a man paints the sea, it is not to make you see and feel as a sight
of that same ocean would, but to make you see and feel how he,
personally, was affected by it; a matter surely of the narrowest
importance.  The ultra-masculine artist, extremely sensitive,
necessarily, and full of the natural urge to expression of the sex, uses
the medium of art as ingenuously as the partridge-cock uses his wings in
drumming on the log; or the bull moose stamps and bellows; not narrowly
as a mate call, but as a form of expression of his personal sensations.

The higher the artist the more human he is, the broader his vision, the
more he sees for humanity, and expresses for humanity, and the less
personal, the less ultra-masculine, is his expression.



COMMENT AND REVIEW


The literary output of the ancient Hebrews must have been great, since
we are told by their critical philosopher, "Of the making of many books
there is no end."

There must have been some limit, however, because their books were hand
made, and not everyone could do it.  Since the printing press relieved
this mechanical restriction, and educational facilities made reading and
writing come, if not by nature, at least with general compulsion, the
making of books has increased to the present output--which would have
made the ancient philosopher blush for his premature complaint.

In this, as in all social functions, we have the normal and the abnormal
growth before us; but so far we have not learned to divide them.  There
is no harm at all in having anybody and everybody write books if they
choose, any more than in having anybody and everybody talk if they
choose.  Literature is only preserved speech.

Freedom of speech is dear to our hearts; it is an easy privilege, and
costs little--to the speaker.  People are free to talk, privately and
publicly, and free to write, privately and publicly.

The harm comes, in this as in other processes, by the door of economic
interest.  It is not the desire to write which crowds our market so
disadvantageously; it is the desire to sell.

Though a fair capacity in the art of literature were even more general
than to-day, if our social conditions were normal only a certain
proportion of us would naturally prefer that form of expression.  Our
literary output is abnormally increased by two influences; the
hereditary and inculcated idea of superiority in this profession, and
the emoluments thereof.  These last are greatly over-estimated, as, in
truth, is the first also.

There is nothing essentially more worthy in the art of saying things
than in the art of doing things.  The basic merit in literature, as in
speech, lies in the thing said.  This the makers of many books have
utterly forgotten.  "She's a beautiful talker!" we might say of someone.
 "It's perfectly lovely!  Such language!  Such expression!  It's a joy
to hear her!"

Then an unenthusiastic person might rudely inquire, "Yes--but what does
she say?"

Talking is not fancy-work.  It is not an exhibition of skill in the use
of the vocal chords, in knowledge of grammar and rhetoric.  Speech is
developed in our race as a medium of transmission of thought and
feelings.  The greater or less ease and proficiency with which we
elaborate the function should always be held subordinate to the real
use.  Literature is to be similarly judged by its initial purpose, the
preservation and transmission of ideas and feelings.  Even the
picture-work of fiction must carry a certain content of ideas, else it
cannot be read; it does not, as the children say, "make sense."

Now take up your current magazine--the largest medium of literary
expression to-day--and consider it from this point of view.

The modern magazine is a distinctly new product.  When the slow, thick
stream of book-making first began to spread and filter out through the
new channels of periodic publication, a magazine was a serious literary
production.  The word "magazine" implies an armory, a storehouse, a
collection of valuable pieces of literature.  Now we need a new word for
the thing.  It has become a more and more fluent and varied mouthpiece
of popular expression.  It is a halfway-house between the newspaper and
the book.  The older, higher-priced, more impressive of them, keep up,
or try to keep up, the standards of the past; but the world of to-day is
by no means so much interested in "beautiful letters" as in the fresh
current of knowledge and feeling belonging to our times.

Articles about flying machines may or may not be "literature" but they
are small doses of information highly desirable to persons who have not
time enough, nor money enough, to read books.

If you have time, you can go to the libraries.  If you have money, you
can order from your dealer.

If you have only ten cents--no, fifteen, it takes in these days of
prosperity--you can with that purchase a deal of valuable and
interesting matter, coming on fresh every month--or week.

Sweeping aside all the "instructive" articles as hopelessly without the
lofty pale of literature, we have left an overwhelming mass of fiction.
This, too, is ruthlessly condemned by the austere upholder of high
standards.  This, too, is not literature.

What is literature?

Literature, in the esoteric sense of lofty criticism, is a form of
writing which, like the higher mathematics, must be free from any taint
of utility.  Pure literature must perforce be a form of expression, but
must not condescend to express anything.

To write with the narrow and vulgar purpose of saying something, is to
be cut off hopelessly from the elect few who produce literature.  This
attitude of sublime superiority as an art is responsible for our general
scorn of what we call,

"The Novel With a Purpose."

Have any of us fairly faced the alternative?  Are we content to accept
delightedly the "Novel Without a Purpose"?

Do you remember the Peterkin Papers?  How Solomon John, the second son,
thought he would like to write a book?  How Agammemnon, the oldest son,
and Elizabeth Eliza, the sister, and the Little Boys, in their beloved
rubber boots, as also the parents, were all mightily impressed with the
ambition of Solomon John?  How a table was secured, and placed in the
proper light?  How a chair was brought, paper was procured, and pens and
ink?  How finally all was ready, and the entire family stood about in
rapt admiration to see Solomon John begin?

He drew the paper before him; he selected a pen; he dipped it in the ink
and poised it before him.

Then he looked from one to another, and an expression of pained surprise
spread over his features.

"Why," said Solomon John, "I have nothing to say!"

(I quote from memory, not having the classics at hand.)

There was great disappointment in the Peterkin family, and the project
was given up.  But why so?  Solomon John need not have been so easily
discouraged.  He was in the exact position to produce literature--pure,
high, legitimate literature--the Novel Without a Purpose.

In the effort to preserve the purity of the Pierian Springs, those
guardians of this noble art, who arbitrate in the "standard magazines,"
condemn and exclude what they define as "controversial literature."

Suppose someone comes along with a story advocating euthanasia, showing
with all the force of the art of fiction the slow, hideous suffering of
some helpless cancer patient or the like, the blessed release that might
be humanly given; showing it so as to make an indelible impression--this
story is refused as "controversial," as being written with a purpose.

Yet the same magazine will print a story no better written, showing the
magnificent heroism of the man who slowly dies in year-long torment,
helpless himself and steady drain on everyone about him, virtuously
refusing to shorten his torments--and theirs.

What is a controversy?  A discussion, surely.  It has two sides.

Why isn't a story upholding one side of a controversy as controversial
as a story upholding the other side?

Is it only a coincidence that magazines of large circulation and
established reputation so consistently maintain that side of the
controversy already popularly held as right?

Time passes.  Minds develop.  New knowledge comes.  People's ideas and
feelings change--some people's.  These new ideas and feelings seek
expression ion the natural forms--speech and literature, as is
legitimate and right.

But the canons of taste and judgement say No.

The ideas and feelings of the peoples of past times found expression in
this way, and are preserved in literature.  But our ideas and feelings,
so seeking expression, do not make literature.

It is not the first time that the canons were wrong.  Straight down the
road of historic progress, from the dim old days we can hardly see, into
the increasing glare of the calcium-lighted present, there have always
stood the Priesthood of the Past, making human progress into an obstacle
race.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


QUERY: "I am a woman of about forty; my children are pretty well grown
up; my home does not take all my time.  I could do some work in the
world, but I do not know what to do.  Can you advise me?"

QUERY: "I appreciate the need of women's working, and am free to do so,
but cannot make up my mind what work to undertake.  It is very easy for
you people with 'a mission' and talents, but what is an ordinary woman
to do?"

ANSWER: These two questions belong together, and may be answered
together.  Neither of the questioners seem to be driven by necessity,
which simplifies matters a good deal.

Work has to be done for two real reasons.  One is the service of
humanity, of society, which cannot exist without our functional
activity.  Work is social service.

The other is personal development.  One cannot be fully human without
this functional social activity.

In choosing work, there are two governing factors always, and generally
the third one of pressing necessity.  Of the two, one is personal
fitness--the instinctive choice of those who are highly specialized in
some one line.  This makes decision easy, but does not always make it
easy to get the work.  You may be divinely ordained to fiddle--but if no
one wants to hear you, you are badly off.  The other is far more
general; it is the social demand--the call of the work that _needs
doing._

If you are able to work, free to work, and not hampered by a rigid
personal bent, just look about and see what other people need.  Study
your country, town, village, your environment, near or distant; and take
hold of some social need, whether it is a better school board or the
preservation of our forests.  So long as the earth or the people on it
need service, there is work for all of us.



PLAY-TIME


A WALK WALK WALK

I.

I once went out for a walk, walk, walk,
 For a walk beside the sea;
And all I carried for to eat, eat, eat,
Was a jar of ginger snaps so sweet,
 And a jug of ginger tea.

For I am fond of cinnamon pie,
 And peppermint pudding, too;
And I dearly love to bake, bake, bake,
A mighty mass of mustard cake,
 And nutmeg beer to brew.


II.

And all I carried for drink, drink, drink,
 That long and weary way,
Was a dozen little glasses
Of boiled molasses
 On a Cochin China tray.

For I am fond of the sugar of the grape,
 And the sugar of the maple tree;
But I always eat
The sugar of the beet
 When I'm in company.


III.

And all I carried for to read, read, read,
 For a half an hour or so,
Was Milman's Rome, and Grote on Greece,
And the works of Dumas, pere et fils,
 And the poems of Longfellow.

For I am fond of the Hunting of the Snark,
And the Romaunt of the Rose;
And I never go to bed
Without Webster at my head
And Worcester at my toes.



ODE TO A FOOL


"Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his
folly."--Prov. 17th, 12th.


Singular insect!  Here I watch thee spin
 Upon my pin;
And know that thou hast not the least idea
 I have thee here.
Strange is thy nature!  For thou mayst be slain
 Once and again;
Dismembered, tortured, torn with tortures hot--
 Yet know it not!
As well pour hate and scorn upon the dead
 As on thy head.
While I discuss thee here I plainly see
 Thee sneer at me.

Marvellous creature!  What mysterious power
 In idle hour
Arranged the mighty elements whence came
 Thy iron frame!
In every item of thy outward plan
 So like a man!
But men are mortal, dying every day,
 And thou dost stay.
The nations rise and die with passing rule,
 But thou, O Fool!
Livedst when drunken Noah asleeping lay,
 Livest to-day.

Invulnerable Fool!  Thy mind
 Is deaf and blind;
Impervious to sense of taste and smell
 And touch as well.
Thought from without may vainly seek to press
 Thy consciousness;
Man's hard-won knowledge which the ages pile
 But makes thee smile;
Thy vast sagacity and blatant din
 Come from within;
Thy voice doth fill the world from year to year,
 Helpless we hear.

Wisdom and wit 'gainst thee have no avail;
 O Fool--All Hail!





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 5
MARCH, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

How many a useless stone we find
Swallowed in that capacious, blind,
Faith-swollen gullet, our ancestral mind!




THE SANDS


 It runs--it runs--the hourglass turning;
 Dark sands glooming, bright sands burning;
I turn--and turn--with heavy or hopeful hands;
So must I turn as long as the Voice commands;
But I lose all count of the hours for watching the sliding sands.

 Or fast--or slow--it ceases turning;
 Ceases the flow, or bright or burning--
"What have you done with the hours?" the Voice demands.
What can I say of eager or careless hands?--
I had forgotten the hours in watching the sliding sands.



A MIDDLE-SIZED ARTIST


When Rosamond's brown eyes seemed almost too big for her brilliant
little face, and her brown curls danced on her shoulders, she had a
passionate enthusiasm for picture books.  She loved "the reading," but
when the picture made what her young mind was trying to grasp suddenly
real before her, the stimulus reaching the brain from two directions at
once, she used to laugh with delight and hug the book.

The vague new words describing things she never saw suggested "castle,"
a thing of gloom and beauty; and then upon the page came The Castle
itself, looming dim and huge before her, with drooping heavy banners
against the sunset calm.

How she had regretted it, scarce knowing why, when the pictures were
less real than the description; when the princess, whose beauty made her
the Rose of the World (her name was Rosamond, too!), appeared in visible
form no prettier, no, not as pretty, as The Fair One with The Golden
Locks in the other book!  And what an outcry she made to her indifferent
family when first confronted by the unbelievable blasphemy of an
illustration that differed from the text!

"But, Mother--see!" she cried.  "It says, 'Her beauty was crowned by
rich braids of golden hair, wound thrice around her shapely head,' and
this girl has black hair--in curls!  Did the man forget what he just
said?"

Her mother didn't seem to care at all.  "They often get them wrong," she
said.  "Perhaps it was an old plate.  Run away, dear, Mama is very
busy."

But Rosamond cared.

She asked her father more particularly about this mysterious "old
plate," and he, being a publisher, was able to give her much information
thereanent.  She learned that these wonderful reinforcements of her
adored stories did not emanate direct from the brain of the beneficent
author, but were a supplementary product by some draughtsman, who cared
far less for what was in the author's mind than for what was in his own;
who was sometimes lazy, sometimes arrogant, sometimes incompetent;
sometimes all three.  That to find a real artist, who could make
pictures and was willing to make them like the picture the author saw,
was very unusual.

"You see, little girl," said Papa, "the big artists are too big to do
it--they'd rather make their own pictures; and the little artists are
too little--they can't make real ones of their own ideas, nor yet of
another's."

"Aren't there any middle-sized artists?" asked the child.

"Sometimes," said her father; and then he showed her some of the perfect
illustrations which leave nothing to be desired, as the familiar ones by
Teniel and Henry Holiday, which make Alice's Adventures and the Hunting
of the Snark so doubly dear, Dore and Retsch and Tony Johannot and
others.

"When I grow up," said Rosamond decidedly, "I'm going to be a
middle-sized artist!"

Fortunately for her aspirations the line of study required was in no way
different at first from that of general education.  Her parents
explained that a good illustrator ought to know pretty much everything.
So she obediently went through school and college, and when the time
came for real work at her drawing there was no objection to that.

"It is pretty work," said her mother, "a beautiful accomplishment.  It
will always be a resource for her."

"A girl is better off to have an interest," said her father, "and not
marry the first fool that asks her.  When she does fall in love this
won't stand in the way; it never does; with a woman.  Besides--she may
need it sometime."

So her father helped and her mother did not hinder, and when the brown
eyes were less disproportionate and the brown curls wreathed high upon
her small fine head, she found herself at twenty-one more determined to
be a middle-sized artist than she was at ten.

Then love came; in the person of one of her father's readers; a
strenuous new-fledged college graduate; big, handsome, domineering,
opinionative; who was accepting a salary of four dollars a week for the
privilege of working in a publishing house, because he loved books and
meant to write them some day.

They saw a good deal of each other, and were pleasantly congenial.  She
sympathized with his criticisms of modem fiction; he sympathized with
her criticisms of modern illustration; and her young imagination began
to stir with sweet memories of poetry and romance; and sweet hopes of
beautiful reality.

There are cases where the longest way round is the shortest way home;
but Mr. Allen G. Goddard chose differently.  He had read much about
women and about love, beginning with a full foundation from the
ancients; but lacked an understanding of the modern woman, such as he
had to deal with.

Therefore, finding her evidently favorable, his theories and
inclinations suiting, he made hot love to her, breathing, "My Wife!"
into her ear before she had scarce dared to think "my darling!" and
suddenly wrapping her in his arms with hot kisses, while she was still
musing on "The Hugenot Lovers" and the kisses she dared dream of came in
slow gradation as in the Sonnets From the Portuguese.

He was in desperate earnest.  "O you are so beautiful!" he cried.  "So
unbelievably beautiful!  Come to me, my Sweet!" for she had sprung away
and stood panting and looking at him, half reproachful, half angry.

"You love me, Dearest!  You cannot deny it!" he cried.  "And I love
you--Ah!  You shall know!"

He was single-hearted, sincere; stirred by a very genuine overwhelming
emotion.  She on the contrary was moved by many emotions at once;--a
pleasure she was half ashamed of; a disappointment she could not clearly
define; as if some one had told her the whole plot of a promising new
novel; a sense of fear of the new hopes she had been holding, and of
startled loyalty to her long-held purposes.

"Stop!" she said--for he evidently mistook her agitation, and thought
her silence was consent.  "I suppose I do--love you--a little; but
you've no right to kiss me like that!"

His eyes shone.  "You Darling!  _My_ Darling!" he said.  "You will give
me the right, won't you?  Now, Dearest--see! I am waiting!"  And he held
out his arms to her.

But Rosamond was more and more displeased.  "You will have to wait.  I'm
sorry; but I'm not ready to be engaged, yet!  You know my plans.  Why
I'm going to Paris this year!  I'm going to work!  It will be ever so
long before I'm ready to--to settle down."

"As to that," he said more calmly, "I cannot of course offer immediate
marriage, but we can wait for that--together!  You surely will not leave
me--if you love me!"

"I think I love you," she said conscientiously, "at least I did think
so.  You've upset it all, somehow--you hurry me so!--no--I can't bind
myself yet."

"Do you tell me to wait for you?" he asked; his deep voice still strong
to touch her heart.  "How long, Dearest?"

"I'm not asking you to wait for me--I don't want to promise
anything--nor to have you.  But when I have made a place--am really
doing something--perhaps then--"

He laughed harshly.  "Do not deceive yourself, child, nor me!  If you
loved me there would be none of this poor wish for freedom--for a
career.  You don't love me--that's all!"

He waited for her to deny this.  She said nothing.  He did not know how
hard it was for her to keep from crying--and from running to his arms.

"Very well," said he.  "Goodby!"--And he was gone.

All that happened three years ago.

Allen Goddard took it very hard; and added to his earlier ideas about
women another, that "the new woman" was a selfish heartless creature,
indifferent to her own true nature.

He had to stay where he was and work, owing to the pressure of
circumstances, which made it harder; so he became something of a
mysogynyst; which is not a bad thing when a young man has to live on
very little and build a place for himself.

In spite of this cynicism he could not remove from his mind those softly
brilliant dark eyes; the earnest thoughtful lines of the pure young
face; and the changing lights and shadows in that silky hair.  Also, in
the course of his work, he was continually reminded of her; for her
characteristic drawings appeared more and frequently in the magazines,
and grew better, stronger, more convincing from year to year.

Stories of adventure she illustrated admirably; children's stories to
perfection; fairy stories--she was the delight of thousands of children,
who never once thought that the tiny quaint rose in a circle that was to
be found in all those charming pictures meant a name.  But he noticed
that she never illustrated love stories; and smiled bitterly, to
himself.

And Rosamond?

There were moments when she was inclined to forfeit her passage money
and throw herself unreservedly into those strong arms which had held her
so tightly for a little while.  But a bud picked open does not bloom
naturally; and her tumultuous feelings were thoroughly dissipated by a
long strong attack of _mal de mer._  She derived two advantages from her
experience: one a period of safe indifference to all advances from eager
fellow students and more cautious older admirers; the other a facility
she had not before aspired to in the making of pictures of love and
lovers.

She made pictures of him from memory--so good, so moving, that she put
them religiously away in a portfolio by themselves; and only took them
out--sometimes.  She illustrated, solely for her own enjoyment some of
her girlhood's best loved poems and stories.  "The Rhyme of the Duchess
May," "The Letter L," "In a Balcony," "In a Gondola."  And hid them from
herself even--they rather frightened her.

After three years of work abroad she came home with an established
reputation, plenty of orders, and an interest that would not be stifled
in the present state of mind of Mr. Allen Goddard.

She found him still at work, promoted to fifteen dollars a week by this
time, and adding to his income by writing political and statistical
articles for the magazines.  He talked, when they met, of this work,
with little enthusiasm, and asked her politely about hers.

"Anybody can see mine!" she told him lightly.  "And judge it easily."

"Mine too," he answered.  "It to-day is--and to-morrow is cast into the
waste-basket.  He who runs may read--if he runs fast enough."

He told himself he was glad he was not bound to this hard, bright
creature, so unnaturally self-sufficient, and successful.

She told herself that he had never cared for her, really, that was
evident.

Then an English publisher who liked her work sent her a new novel by a
new writer, "A. Gage."  "I know this is out of your usual line," he
said, "but I want a woman to do it, and I want you to be the woman, if
possible.  Read it and see what you think.  Any terms you like."

The novel was called "Two and One;" and she began it with languid
interest, because she liked that publisher and wished to give full
reasons for refusing.  It opened with two young people who were much in
love with one another; the girl a talented young sculptor with a vivid
desire for fame; and another girl, a cousin of the man, ordinary enough,
but pretty and sweet, and with no desires save those of romance and
domesticity.  The first couple broke off a happy engagement because she
insisted on studying in Paris, and her lover, who could neither go with
her, nor immediately marry her, naturally objected.

Rosamond sat up in bed; pulled a shawl round her, swung the electric
light nearer, and went on.

The man was broken-hearted; he suffered tortures of loneliness,
disappointment, doubt, self-depreciation.  He waited, held at his work
by a dependent widowed mother; hoping against hope that his lost one
would come back.  The girl meanwhile made good in her art work; she was
not a great sculptor but a popular portraitist and maker of little genre
groups.  She had other offers, but refused them, being hardened in her
ambitions, and, possibly, still withheld by her early love.

The man after two or three years of empty misery and hard grinding work,
falls desperately ill; the pretty cousin helps the mother nurse him, and
shows her own affection.  He offers the broken remnants of his heart,
which she eagerly undertakes to patch up; and they become tolerably
happy, at least she is.

But the young sculptor in Paris!  Rosamond hurried through the pages to
the last chapter.  There was the haughty and triumphant heroine in her
studio.  She had been given a medal--she had plenty of orders--she had
just refused a Count.  Everyone had gone, and she sat alone in her fine
studio, self-satisfied and triumphant.

Then she picks up an old American paper which was lying about; reads it
idly as she smokes her cigarette--and then both paper and cigarette drop
to the floor, and she sits staring.

Then she starts up--her arms out--vainly.  "Wait!  O Wait!" she
cries--"I was coining back,"--and drops into her chair again.  The fire
is out.  She is alone.

Rosamond shut the book and leaned back upon her pillow.  Her eyes were
shut tight; but a little gleaming line showed on either cheek under the
near light.  She put the light out and lay quite still.

*

Allen G. Goddard, in his capacity as "reader" was looking over some
popular English novels which his firm wished to arrange about publishing
in America.  He left "Two and One" to the last.  It was the second
edition, the illustrated one which he had not seen yet; the first he had
read before.  He regarded it from time to time with a peculiar
expression.

"Well," he said to himself, "I suppose I can stand it if the others do."
 And he opened the book.

The drawing was strong work certainly, in a style he did not know.  They
were striking pictures, vivid, real, carrying out in last detail the
descriptions given, and the very spirit of the book, showing it more
perfectly than the words.  There was the tender happiness of the lovers,
the courage, the firmness, the fixed purpose in the young sculptor
insisting on her freedom, and the gay pride of the successful artist in
her work.

There was beauty and charm in this character, yet the face was always
turned away, and there was a haunting suggestion of familiarity in the
figure.  The other girl was beautiful, and docile in expression;
well-dressed and graceful; yet somehow unattractive, even at her best,
as nurse; and the man was extremely well drawn, both in his happy ardor
as a lover, and his grinding misery when rejected.  He was very
good-looking; and here too was this strong sense of resemblance.

"Why he looks like _me_!" suddenly cried the reader--springing to his
feet.  "Confound his impudence!" he cried.  "How in thunder!"  Then he
looked at the picture again, more carefully, a growing suspicion in his
face; and turned hurriedly to the title page,--seeing a name unknown to
him.

This subtle, powerful convincing work; this man who undeniably suggested
him; this girl whose eyes he could not see; he turned from one to
another and hurried to the back of the book.

"The fire was out--she was alone."  And there, in the remorseless light
of a big lamp before her fireless hearth, the crumpled newspaper beside
her, and all hope gone from a limp, crouching little figure, sat--why,
he would know her among a thousand--even if her face was buried in her
hands, and sunk on the arm of the chair--it was Rosamond!

*

She was in her little downtown room and hard at work when he entered;
but she had time to conceal a new book quickly.

He came straight to her; he had a book in his hand, open--he held it
out.

"Did you do this?" he demanded.  "Tell me--tell me!"  His voice was very
unreliable.

She lifted her eyes slowly to his; large, soft, full of dancing lights,
and the rich color swept to the gold-lighted borders of her hair.

"Did you?" she asked.

He was taken aback.  "I!" said he.  "Why it's by--" he showed her the
title-page.  "By A. Gage," he read.

"Yes," said she, "Go on," and he went on, 'Illustrated by A. N. Other.'"

"It's a splendid novel," she said seriously.  "Real work--great work.  I
always knew you'd do it, Allen.  I'm so proud of you!"  And she held out
her hand in the sincere intelligent appreciation of a fellow craftsman.

He took it, still bewildered.

"Thank you," he said.  "I value your opinion--honestly I do!  And--with
a sudden sweep of recognition.  "And yours is great work!  Superb!  Why
you've put more into that story than I knew was there!  You make the
thing live and breathe!  You've put a shadow of remorse in that lonely
ruffian there that I was too proud to admit!  And you've shown
the--unconvincingness of that Other Girl; marvellously.  But see
here--no more fooling!"

He took her face between his hands, hands that quivered strongly, and
forced her to look at him.  "Tell me about that last picture!  Is
it--true?"

Her eyes met his, with the look he longed for.  "It is true," she said.

*

After some time, really it was a long time, but they had not noticed it,
he suddenly burst forth.  "But how did you _know_?"

She lifted a flushed and smiling face: and pointed to the title page
again.

"'A. Gage.'--You threw it down."

"And you--" He threw back his head and laughed delightedly.  "You threw
down A-N-Other!  O you witch!  You immeasurably clever darling!  How
well our work fits.  By Jove!  What good times we'll have!"

And they did.



THE MINOR BIRDS


Shall no bird sing except the nightingale?
 Must all the lesser voices cease?
 Lark, thrush and blackbird hold their peace?
  The woods wait dumb
  Until he come?

Must we forego the voices of the field?
 The hedgebird's twitter and the soft dove's cooing,
 All the small songs of nesting, pairing, wooing,
  Where each reveals
  What joy he feels?

Should we know how to praise the nightingale,
 Master of music, ecstacy and pain,
 If he alone sang in the springtime rain?
  If no one heard
  A minor bird?



PARLOR-MINDEDNESS


"Won't you step in?"

You step in.

"She will be down in a moment.  Won't you sit down?"

You sit down.  You wait.  You are in the parlor.

What is this room?  What is it for?

It is not to sleep in, the first need of the home.  Not to eat in, the
second.  Not to shelter young in, the third.  Not to cook and wash in,
to sew and mend in, to nurse and tend in; not for any of the trades
which we still practice in the home.

It is a place for social intercourse.  If the family is sufficiently
intelligent they use it for this purpose, gathering there in peace and
decorum, for rest and pleasure.  Whether the family is of that order or
not, they use the parlor, if they have one, for the entertainment of
visitors.  Our ancient Webster gives first: "The apartment in monastery
or nunnery where the inmates are permitted to meet and converse with
each other, or with visitors and friends from without," and second, "A
room in a house which the family usually occupy for society and
conversation; the reception room for visitors."  It is, as the
derivation declares, "a talking room."

While you wait in the parlor you study it.

It is the best room.  It has the best carpet, the best furniture, the
pictures and decorations considered most worthy.  It is adorned as a
shrine for the service of what we feel rather than think to be a noble
purpose--to promote social intercourse.

In the interchange of thought and feeling that form so large and
essential a part of human life, these parlors are the vehicles provided.
 Are they all the vehicles provided?  Is it in parlors that the sea of
human thought ebbs and flows most freely?  That mind meets mind, ideas
are interchanged, and the soul grows by contact with its kind?  Is it in
parlors that art is talked? politics? business? affairs of state? new
lights in science? the moving thoughts of the world?

If you could hide in a thousand parlors and listen to the talk therein
what would you hear?  When "she" has come down, greeted her friend with
effusion or her caller with ample cordiality, and the talk begins, the
interchange of thought, what does the parlor bring forth?

Alas and alas!  It brings forth the kitchen, the nursery, and the
dressmaker's shop.  It furnishes shop-talk mostly, gossip of the daily
concerns of the speakers.

Are there no men then in the parlors?  Yes, frequently.  The man of the
house is there with his family in the evening; other men call with their
wives; young men call on young women to court them; but in all these
cases the men, talking to the women, must needs confine the conversation
to their lines of work and thought.  When men talk with men it is not in
parlors.  The women may be ignorant, knowing only household affairs; or
they may be "cultivated," more highly educated than the men, talking
glibly of books they have read, lectures they have heard, plays they
have seen; while the men can talk well only of the work they have done.

When men wish to talk with men of world-business of any sort, they do
not seek the parlor.  The street, the barroom, the postoffice, some
public place they want where they may meet freely on broader ground.
For the parlor is the women's meeting ground--has been for long their
only meeting ground except the church steps.

Its limits are sharp and clear.  Only suitable persons may enter the
parlor; only one's acquaintances and friends.  Thus the social
intercourse of women, for long years has been rigidly confined to parlor
limits; they have conversed only with their own class and kind, forever
rediscussing the same topics, the threadbare theme of their common
trade; and the men who come to their parlor, talk politely to them there
within prescribed lines.

It is interesting and pathetic to see the woman, when means allow,
enlarge the size of her parlor, the number of her guests, seeking
continually for that social intercourse for which the soul hungers, and
which the parlor so meagerly provides.  As we see the fakir;

"Eating with famished patience grain by grain,
A thousand grains of millet-seed a day,"--

So the woman talks incessantly with as many as she can--neither giving
nor getting what is needed.

When we find an institution so common as the parlor, exerting a constant
influence upon us from childhood up, carrying with it a code of manners,
a system of conduct, a scheme of decoration, a steady prohibitive
pressure upon progressive thought, we shall be wise to study that
institution and in especial its effect upon the mind.

First, we may observe as in the kitchen the dominant note of
personality.

In the parlor more than elsewhere are to be found the "traces of a
woman's hand."  It is her room, the Lady of the House and other Ladies
of other Houses, having each their own to exhibit, all politely praise
one another's display.

When a knowledge of art, a sense of beauty, grows in the world, and
slowly affects the decorators and furnishers, then does it through the
blandishments of the merchants filter slowly into a thousand parlors.
But as easily when there is neither art nor beauty in such furnishings,
are they foisted upon the purchasing housewife.  Such as it is, provided
through the limitations of the housewife's mind and the husband's purse,
this "best room" becomes a canon of taste to the growing child.

"The parlor set" he must needs see held up as beautiful; the "reception
chairs," the carefully shadowed carpet,--these and the "best dress" to
go with them and the "company manners" added, are unescapable aesthetic
influences.

Few children like the parlor, few children are wanted or allowed in the
parlor, yet it has a steady influence as a sort of social shrine.

Most rigidly it teaches the child exclusiveness, the narrow limits of
one's "social acquaintances."  As rigidly and most evilly it teaches him
falsehood.  Scarcely a child but hears the mother's fretful protest
against the visitor, followed by the lightning change to cordial
greeting.  The white lie, the smiling fib, the steady concealment of the
undesirable topic, the mutual steering off from all but a set allowance
of themes, the artificial dragging in of these and their insufferable
repetition--all this the silent, large-eyed child who has been allowed
to stay if quiet, hears and remembers.  See the little girl's "playing
house."  See the visitor arrive, the polite welcome, the inquiries after
health, the babbling discussion of babies and dress and cookery and
servants,--these they have well learned are proper subjects for parlor
talk.

The foolish and false ideas of beauty held up to them as "best," they
seek to perpetuate.  The arbitrary "best dress" system, develops into a
vast convention, a wearing of apparel not for beauty, and not for use,
not for warmth, protection nor modesty (often quite the opposite of all
these), but as a conventional symbol of respectability.

So interwoven with our inner consciousness are these purely arbitrary
codes of propriety in costume, that we have such extremes as Kipling
shows us in his remote Himalayan forests,--a white man thousands of
miles from his kind, who "dressed for dinner every night to preserve his
self-respect."  No doubt a perfectly sincere conviction, and one sunk
deep in the highbred British breast, but even so of a most shallow and
ephemeral nature, based on nothing whatever but a temporary caprice of
our parlor-mindedness.

Being reared in that state of mind, and half of us confined to it
professionally, we are inevitably affected thereby, and react upon
life--the real moving world-life, under its pitiful limitations.

If one's sense of beauty must be first, last and always personal, and
confined to one's parlor,--for of course we cannot dictate as to other
women's parlors,--then how is it to be expected that we should in any
way notice, feel or see the ugliness of our town or city, schoolhouse or
street-car?

See the woman who has had "an education," who has even "studied art,"
perhaps, and whose husband can pay for what she wants.  Her parlor may
become a drawing-room, or two, or more, but she does not grow to care
that a public school-room is decorated in white plaster trimmed with a
broad strip of blackboard.

The bald, cruel, wearing ugliness of the most of our schools, is worthy
of penal institutions, yet we with cheerful unconcern submit growing
children to such influences without ever giving it a thought.

"My parlor" must be beautiful, but "our school" is no business of mine.
Is there any real reason, by the way, why blackboards must be black?  A
deep dull red or somber green would be restful and pleasant to the eye,
and show chalk just as well.  As is being now slowly discovered.  There
are no blackboards in our parlors.  Our children leave home to go to
school, and their mother's thoughts do not.  In the small measure of
parlor decoration grows no sense of public art.

Great art must be largely conceived, largely executed.  For the temple
and palace and forum rose the columns and statues of the past; for the
church and castle the "frozen music" of mediaeval architecture; for
church and palace again, the blazing outburst of pictorial art in the
great re-birth.  Now the struggling artist must cater to the tastes of
parlor-bred patrons; must paint what suits the uses of that carpeted
sanctuary, portraits of young ladies most successful!  Or he must do for
public buildings, if by chance he gets the opportunity, what meets the
tastes of our universal parlor-mindedness.

With this parlor-mindedness, we repudiate and condemn in painting,
literature, music, drama and the dance, whatever does not conform to the
decorum of this shrine, whatsoever is not suitable to ladylike
conversation.  Be the book bad, it is unsuited to the parlor table.  Be
the book good--too good, or be it great, then it is equally unsuited.
Controversy has no place in parlors, hence no controversial literature.
Pleasant if possible, or sweetly sad, and not provocative of
argument--this is the demeanor of the parlor table, and to this the
editor conforms.  To the editorial dictum the "reader" must submit; to
the "readers" decisions the writer must submit; to the _menu_ furnished
by the magazines, the public must submit, and so grows up among us a
canon of literary judgment, best described as "parlor-minded."  This is
by no means so damaging as kitchen-mindedness, for those who escape the
influence of the parlor are many, and those who escape the influence of
the kitchen are few; but it is quite damaging enough.

One of the main elements of beauty in our lives is the human body.  Some
keep swans, some peacocks, and some deer, that they may delight their
eyes with the beauty thereof.  We ourselves are more beautiful than any
beast or bird, we are the inspiration of poet, painter, and sculptor;
yet we have deliberately foregone all this constant world of beauty and
substituted for it a fluctuating nightmare.

In what sordid or discordant colors do we move about!  What desolate
blurring of outline and action, by our dragging masses of cloth,
stiffened and padded like Chinese armor!  What strange figures,
conventionalized as a lotus pattern, instead of the moving glory of the
human form!

Why do we do it?  Having done it why do we bear it longer?  Why not fill
our streets with beauty, gladden our eyes and uplift our souls with the
loveliness that is ours by nature, plus the added loveliness of the
textile art?  We have pictures of our beauty, we have statues of our
beauty--why go without the real thing?  Suppose our swans could show us
in paint and marble the slow white grace of their plumed sailing, but in
person paddled about in a costume of stovepipes.  Suppose deer and
hound,--but wait!--this we have seen, this extreme of human folly forced
upon the helpless beast,--dogs dressed to suit the taste of their
parlor-minded owners!  Not men's dogs,--women's dogs.

To cover--at any cost, with anything, that is a major ideal of the
parlor.  There is an exception made, when, at any cost of health, beauty
and decency, we uncover--but this too, is to meet one of the parlor
purposes.  In it and its larger spread of drawing and assembly rooms, we
provide not only for "social intercourse"--but for that necessary
meeting of men and women that shall lead to marriage.

A right and wholesome purpose, but not a right and wholesome place.  Men
and women should meet and meet freely in the places where they live, but
they should not live in parlors.  They should meet and know one another
in their working clothes, in the actual character and habit of their
daily lives.

Marriages may be "made in heaven," but they are mainly--shall we say
"retailed"? in parlors.  What can the parlor-loved young woman know of
the parlor-bound young man?  Parlor manners only are produced, parlor
topics, parlor ideas.  He had better court her in the kitchen, if she is
one of the "fifteen sixteenths" of our families who keep no servants, to
know what he is going to live with.  She never knows what she is going
to live with; for the nature of man is not truly exhibited either in
kitchen or parlor.  A co-educational college does much, a studio or
business office or work-shop does more, to show men and women to each
other as they are.  Neither does enough, for the blurring shadow of our
parlor-mindedness still lies between.  It has so habituated us to the
soft wavelets and glassy shallows of polite conversation, that we refuse
to face and discuss the realities of life.  With gifts of roses and
bonbons, suppers and theatres that cost more than the cows of the Kaffir
lover, and ought to make the girl feel like a Kaffir bride, the man woos
the woman.  With elaborate toilettes and all the delicate trickery of
her unnatural craft, the woman woos the man.  And the trail of the
parlor is over it all.

Gaily to the gate of marriage they go, and through it--and never have
they asked or answered the questions on which the whole truth of their
union depends.  Our standards of decorum forbid,--parlor standards all.
We have woven and embroidered a veil over the facts of life; an
incense-clouded atmosphere blinds us; low music and murmured litanies
dull the mind, but not the senses.  We drift and dream.  In the girl's
mind floats a cloud of literary ideals.  He is like a "Greek god," a
"Galahad," a "Knight of old."  He is in some mystic way a Hero, a
Master, a Protector.  She pictures herself as fulfilling exquisite
ideals of wifely devotion, "all in all" to him, and he to her.

She does not once prefigure to herself the plain common facts of the
experience that lies before her.  She does not known them.  In parlors
such things are not discussed,--no naked truths can be admitted there.

We live a marvellous life at home.  Visibly we have the care and labor
of housekeeping, the strain and anxiety of childbearing as it is
practised, the elaborate convention of "receiving" and "entertaining."
Under these goes on life.  Our bodies are tired, overtaxed, ill-fed,
grossly ill-treated.  Our minds are hungry, unsatisfied, or drugged and
calm.  We live, we suffer and we die,--and never once do we face the
facts.  Birth and death are salient enough, one would think, but birth
and death we particularly cover and hide, concealing from our friends
with conventional phrases, lying about to our children.  Over the strong
ever-lasting life-processes, we spin veil on veil; drape and smother
them till they become sufficiently remote and symbolic for the parlor to
recognize.

In older nations than ours, we can see this web of convention thickened
and hardened till life runs low within.  Think what can be the state of
mind in India which allows child-marriage--the mother concurrent!  Think
of the slow torture of little girls in foot-bound China, the mother
concurrent!  Then turning quickly, think of our own state of mind, which
allows young girls to marry old reprobates,--the mother concurrent!

That mental attitude which maintains ancient conventions, which prefers
symbol to fact, which prescribes limits to our conversation, and draws
them narrowly down to what can be understood by anybody, and can
instruct, interest and inspire nobody, is parlor-mindedness.  It does
harm enough both in its low ideals of beauty and art, manners and
morals, to its placid inmates and its complaisant visitors; it does more
harm in its fallacious shallows as a promoter of marriage; it does most
in its failure to promote the one thing it is for--social intercourse.

To meet freely; to talk, discuss, exchange and compare ideas, is a
general human need.  Those who do not know they need it, need it most.

Each of us alone, taps the reservoir of world-force, in some degree, and
pours it forth in some expression.  Often the intake seems to fail, the
output is unsatisfying.  Then we need one another, now this one and now
that one, now several, now a crowd.  In combination we receive new
power.  The human soul calls for contact and exchange with its kind.
This contact should be fluent and free, spontaneous, natural; that we
may go as we are drawn to those who feed us best.

Men need men and women women; men and women need one another; it is a
general human condition.  From such natural meeting arises personal
relief, rest, pleasure, stimulus, and social gain beyond counting, in
the growth of thought.  The social battery is continually replenished by
contact and exchange.  Some friends draw out the best that is in us,
some, though perhaps near and dear to us, do not.

No matter how "happily married," or how unhappily unmarried, we need
social interchange.  To quench this thirst, to meet this need, wide as
the world and deep as life, we provide--the parlor.

Is it any wonder that our talk is mainly personality?  That we love
gossip, even when it bites and sours to scandal?  Is it any wonder that
women talk so much of their kitchen and nurseries, of their diseases,
and their clothes, yet learn so little about better feeding, better
dressing, better health and better child-culture?  Is it any wonder that
to our parlor-mindedness the daily press descends, gives us the pap we
are used to, and then artfully peppers our pap, insinuating some sparkle
of alcohol, some solace of insidious drug, that we may "get the habit"
more firmly?  Is it any wonder that we, parlor-bred and newspaper-fed,
continue to cry out fiercely against personal, primitive, parlor sins,
and remain calm and unshocked by world-sins that should rouse us to
horror, shame and action?

In these small shrines, adorned with what, in our doll-house taste, we
fondly imagine to be beautiful, we seek to keep ourselves, "unspotted
from the world," but by no saving grace of a thousand parlors, do we
succeed in keeping the world unspotted from ourselves!  We make the
world.  We are the world.  It might be a place of noble freedom, of
ever-growing beauty, of a fluent, truthful radiant art, of broadening
education, wide peace and culture, universal wealth and progress.  And
we miss even seeing this, living sedately, curtained, carpeted, well
content, in our ancestral parlor-mindedness.



NAUGHTY


The young brain was awake and hungry.  It was a vigorous young brain,
well-organized; eager, receiving impressions with keen joy and storing
them rapidly away in due relation.

Such a wonder world!

Sweetness and light were the first impressions--light which made his
eyes laugh; and Sweetness Incarnate--that great soft Presence which was
Food and Warmth and Rest and Comfort and something better still; for all
of which he had no name as yet except "Ma-ma!"

He was growing, growing fast.  He was satisfied with food.  He was
satisfied with sleep.  But his brain was not satisfied.  So the brain's
first servant went forth to minister to it; small, soft, uncertain,
searching for all knowledge--the little hand.

Something to hold!  Ancestral reflexes awoke as the fingers closed upon
it.  Something to pull!  The soft arm flexors tightened with a sense of
pleasure.  Sensations came flowing to the hungry brain--welcomed
eagerly.

Then suddenly, a new sensation--Pain!  He drew back his hand as a
touched anemone draws in its tentacles, scarce softer than those pink
fingers; but he did not know quite where the pain was--much less where
it came from, or what it meant.

"More!" said the hungry brain.  "More!" and the little hand went out
again.

It was sharply spatted.  "No, No!" said a strange voice--he had never
heard that kind of tone before.  "No! No! Naughty! Don't touch!"  He
lifted his face unbelievingly.  Yes--it was Food and Warmth and Comfort
who was doing this to him.

The small moist mouth quivered grievingly--a cry rose in him.

"Here!" said the Presence, and gave him a rattle.

He had had that before.  He knew all that it could do.  He dropped it.

Over and over again, day after day, the little servant of the brain ran
forth to minister, and met sharp pain; while the dim new concept
"'Naughty'--something you want to do and mustn't"--was registered
within.

The child grew and his brain grew faster.  He learned new words, an
behind the words, in the fresh untouched spaces, the swift brain placed
ideas--according to its lights.  He had learned that the Presence
varied.  It was not always Sweetness and Rest and Joy--sometimes it was
Discomfort--Hindrance--even Pain.  He had learned to look at it with
doubt--when about to do something--to see which way it would react upon
him.

"Isn't that baby cute?" said the Presence.  "He knows just as well!"

But his brain grew stronger, and his hand grew stronger, and about him
was a world of objects, rousing all manner of sensations which he fain
would learn.

"I have to watch that child every minute to keep him out of mischief!"
said the Presence.

She caught him sharply by the arm and drew him back.

"Don't touch that again!  If you do I'll whip you!"

He stared at her, large-eyed, revolving the language.  Language was so
interesting.  "Don't" he knew well, and "touch" and "that" and "again."
"If you do" was harder.  He was not at all sure about "if."  And
"whip"--that was quite new.  He puckered his soft mouth and made a
little whispering sound, trying to say it.

"Yes, Whip!" said the Presence.  "Now you be good!"  He knew "be good,"
too.  It meant not doing anything.  He couldn't be good very long--any
more than the Proverbial Indian.

In the course of his growing he soon learned "Whip."  It was very
unpleasant.  The busy brain, receiving, sorting, arranging,
re-arranging, stored up this fierce experience without delay.
"Whipping--Pain and Insult.  It happens when you break anything.  It is
a Consequence."

The brain was kept very busy re-arranging this Consequence.  "It happens
when you spill the milk--when you soil your dress--when you tear it
(dresses must be sacred!)--when you 'meddle'--when you run away--when
you get wet--when you take sugar--when"--(this was a great discovery),
"when Mama is Angry."  He was older now, and found that the Presence
varied a good deal.  So the brain built up its group of ethical
impressions.

And then--one memorable day--this neat arrangement of ethics, true,
received a great shock.

There was the sugar--in easy reach--and sugar is All Good to the young
body.  Remembered pleasure, strong immediate desire, the eye's guidance,
the hand's impulse--all urged to perform the natural act of eating.
Against it,--what?  The blurred remembrance of promiscuous pain, only by
main force to be associated with that coveted, visible pleasure; and the
dawning power of inhibition.  To check strong natural desire by no
better force than the memory of oral threat, or even of felt pain, is
not easy always for adults.

He ate the sugar, fearing yet joyous.  No one else was present.  No one
saw the act, nor learned it later.

He was not whipped.

Then rose the strong young brain to new occasion.  It observed, deduced,
even experimented, flushed with the pleasure of normal exercise.  It
established, before he was five years old, these conclusions:

"'Naughty' is a thing you're punished for doing--if you're not punished
it isn't naughty.

"Punishment is a thing that happens if you're found out--if you're not
found out you're not punished.

"Ergo--if you're not found out you're not naughty!"

And the child grew up to be a man.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER V.


When the fig growns on the thistle,
And the silk purse on the sow;
When one swallow brings the summer,
And blue moons on her brow--

Then we may look for strength and skill,
Experience, good health, good will,
Art and science well combined,
Honest soul and able mind,
Servants built upon this plan,
One to wait on every man,
Patiently from youth to age,--
For less than a street cleaner's wage!

When the parson's gay on Mondays,
When we meet a month of Sundays,
We may look for them and find them--
 But Not Now!


When young Mrs. Weatherstone swept her trailing crepe from the
automobile to her friend's door, it was opened by a quick, soft-footed
maid with a pleasant face, who showed her into a parlor, not only cool
and flower-lit, but having that fresh smell that tells of new-washed
floors.

Mrs. Porne came flying down to meet her, with such a look of rest and
comfort as roused instant notice.

"Why, Belle!  I haven't seen you look so bright in ever so long.  It
must be the new maid!"

"That's it--she's 'Bell' too--'Miss Bell' if you please!"

The visitor looked puzzled.  "Is she a--a friend?" she ventured, not
sure of her ground.

"I should say she was!  A friend in need!  Sit here by the window,
Viva--and I'll tell you all about it--as far as it goes."

She gaily recounted her climax of confusion and weariness, and the
sudden appearance of this ministering angel.  "She arrived at about
quarter of ten.  I engaged her inside of five minutes.  She was into a
gingham gown and at work by ten o'clock!"

"What promptness!  And I suppose there was plenty to do!"

Mrs. Porne laughed unblushingly.  "There was enough for ten women it
seemed to me!  Let's see--it's about five now--seven hours.  We have
nine rooms, besides the halls and stairs, and my shop.  She hasn't
touched that yet.  But the house is clean--_clean_!  Smell it!"

She took her guest out into the hall, through the library and
dining-room, upstairs where the pleasant bedrooms stretched open and
orderly.

"She said that if I didn't mind she'd give it a superficial general
cleaning today and be more thorough later!"

Mrs. Weatherstone looked about her with a rather languid interest.  "I'm
very glad for you, Belle, dear--but--what an endless nuisance it all
is--don't you think so?"

"Nuisance!  It's slow death! to me at least," Mrs. Porne answered.  "But
I don't see why you should mind.  I thought Madam Weatherstone ran
that--palace, of yours, and you didn't have any trouble at all."

"Oh yes, she runs it.  I couldn't get along with her at all if she
didn't.  That's her life.  It was my mother's too.  Always fussing and
fussing.  Their houses on their backs--like snails!"

"Don't see why, with ten (or is it fifteen?) servants."

"Its twenty, I think.  But my dear Belle, if you imagine that when you
have twenty servants you have neither work nor care--come and try it
awhile, that's all!"

"Not for a millionaire baby's ransom!" answered Isabel promptly.

"Give me my drawing tools and plans and I'm happy--but this
business"--she swept a white hand wearily about--"it's not my work,
that's all."

"But you _enjoy_ it, don't you--I mean having nice things?" asked her
friend.

"Of course I enjoy it, but so does Edgar.  Can't a woman enjoy her home,
just as a man does, without running the shop?  I enjoy ocean travel, but
I don't want to be either a captain or a common sailor!"

Mrs. Weatherstone smiled, a little sadly.  "You're lucky, you have other
interests," she said.  "How about our bungalow? have you got any
farther?"

Mrs. Porne flushed.  "I'm sorry, Viva.  You ought to have given it to
someone else.  I haven't gone into that workroom for eight solid days.
No help, and the baby, you know.  And I was always dog-tired."

"That's all right, dear, there's no very great rush.  You can get at it
now, can't you--with this other Belle to the fore?"

"She's not Belle, bless you--she's 'Miss Bell.'  It's her last name."

Mrs. Weatherstone smiled her faint smile.  "Well--why not?  Like a
seamstress, I suppose."

"Exactly.  That's what she said.  "If this labor was as important as
that of seamstress or governess why not the same courtesy--Oh she's a
most superior _and_ opinionated young person, I can see that."

"I like her looks," admitted Mrs. Weatherstone, "but can't we look over
those plans again; there's something I wanted to suggest."  And they
went up to the big room on the third floor.

In her shop and at her work Isabel Porne was a different woman.  She was
eager and yet calm; full of ideas and ideals, yet with a practical
knowledge of details that made her houses dear to the souls of women.

She pointed out in the new drawings the practical advantages of kitchen
and pantry; the simple but thorough ventilation, the deep closets, till
her friend fairly laughed at her.  "And you say you're not domestic!"

"I'm a domestic architect, if you like," said Isabel; "but not a
domestic servant.--I'll remember what you say about those windows--it's
a good idea," and she made a careful note of Mrs. Weatherstone's
suggestion.

That lady pushed the plans away from her, and went to the many cushioned
lounge in the wide west window, where she sat so long silent that Isabel
followed at last and took her hand.

"Did you love him so much?" she asked softly.

"Who?" was the surprising answer.

"Why--Mr. Weatherstone," said Mrs. Porne.

"No--not very much.  But he was something."

Isabel was puzzled.  "I knew you so well in school," she said, "and that
gay year in Paris.  You were always a dear, submissive quiet little
thing--but not like this.  What's happened Viva?"

"Nothing that anybody can help," said her friend.  "Nothing that
matters.  What does matter, anyway?  Fuss and fuss and fuss.  Dress and
entertain.  Travel till you're tired, and rest till you're crazy!
Then--when a real thing happens--there's all this!" and she lifted her
black draperies disdainfully.  "And mourning notepaper and cards and
servant's livery--and all the things you mustn't do!"

Isabel put an arm around her.  "Don't mind, dear--you'll get over
this--you are young enough yet--the world is full of things to do!"

But Mrs. Weatherstone only smiled her faint smile again.  "I loved
another man, first," she said.  "A real one.  He died.  He never cared
for me at all.  I cared for nothing else--nothing in life.  That's why I
married Martin Weatherstone--not for his old millions--but he really
cared--and I was sorry for him.  Now he's dead.  And I'm wearing
this--and still mourning for the other one."

Isabel held her hand, stroked it softly, laid it against her cheek.

"Oh, I'll feel differently in time, perhaps!" said her visitor.

"Maybe if you took hold of the house--if you ran things
yourself,"--ventured Mrs. Porne.

Mrs. Weatherstone laughed.  "And turn out the old lady?  You don't know
her.  Why she managed her son till he ran away from her--and after he
got so rich and imported her from Philadelphia to rule over Orchardina
in general and his household in particular, she managed that poor little
first wife of his into her grave, and that wretched boy--he's the only
person that manages her!  She's utterly spoiled him--that was his
father's constant grief.  No, no--let her run the house--she thinks she
owns it."

"She's fond of you, isn't she?" asked Mrs. Porne.

"O I guess so--if I let her have her own way.  And she certainly saves
me a great deal of trouble.  Speaking of trouble, there they are--she
said she'd stop for me."

At the gate puffed the big car, a person in livery rang the bell, and
Mrs. Weatherstone kissed her friend warmly, and passed like a heavy
shadow along the rose-bordered path.  In the tonneau sat a massive old
lady in sober silks, with a set impassive countenance, severely correct
in every feature, and young Mat Weatherstone, sulky because he had to
ride with his grandmother now and then.  He was not a nice young man.

*

Diantha found it hard to write her home letters, especially to Ross.
She could not tell them of all she meant to do; and she must tell them
of this part of it, at once, before they heard of it through others.

To leave home--to leave school-teaching, to leave love--and "go out to
service" did not seem a step up, that was certain.  But she set her red
lips tighter and wrote the letters; wrote them and mailed them that
evening, tired though she was.

Three letters came back quickly.

Her mother's answer was affectionate, patient, and trustful, though not
understanding.

Her sister's was as unpleasant as she had expected.

"The _idea!_" wrote Mrs. Susie.  "A girl with a good home to live in and
another to look forward to--and able to earn money _respectably!_ to go
out and work like a common Irish girl!  Why Gerald is so mortified he
can't face his friends--and I'm as ashamed as I can be!  My own sister!
You must be _crazy_--simply _crazy!_"

It was hard on them.  Diantha had faced her own difficulties bravely
enough; and sympathized keenly with her mother, and with Ross; but she
had not quite visualized the mortification of her relatives.  She found
tears in her eyes over her mother's letter.  Her sister's made her both
sorry and angry--a most disagreeable feeling--as when you step on the
cat on the stairs.  Ross's letter she held some time without opening.

She was in her little upstairs room in the evening.  She had swept,
scoured, scalded and carbolized it, and the hospitally smell was now
giving way to the soft richness of the outer air.  The "hoo! hoo!" of
the little mourning owl came to her ears through the whispering night,
and large moths beat noiselessly against the window screen.  She kissed
the letter again, held it tightly to her heart for a moment, and opened
it.

"Dearest: I have your letter with its--somewhat surprising--news.  It is
a comfort to know where you are, that you are settled and in no danger.

"I can readily imagine that this is but the preliminary to something
else, as you say so repeatedly; and I can understand also that you are
too wise to tell me all you mean to be beforehand.

"I will be perfectly frank with you, Dear.

"In the first place I love you.  I shall love you always, whatever you
do.  But I will not disguise from you that this whole business seems to
me unutterably foolish and wrong.

"I suppose you expect by some mysterious process to "develope" and
"elevate" this housework business; and to make money.  I should not love
you any better if you made a million--and I would not take money from
you--you know that, I hope.  If in the years we must wait before we can
marry, you are happier away from me--working in strange kitchens--or
offices--that is your affair.

"I shall not argue nor plead with you, Dear Girl; I know you think you
are doing right; and I have no right, nor power, to prevent you.  But if
my wish were right and power, you would be here to-night, under the
shadow of the acacia boughs--in my arms!

"Any time you feel like coming back you will be welcome, Dear.

"Yours, Ross."

Any time she felt like coming back?

Diantha slipped down in a little heap by the bed, her face on the
letter--her arms spread wide.  The letter grew wetter and wetter, and
her shoulders shook from time to time.

But the hands were tight-clenched, and if you had been near enough you
might have heard a dogged repetition, monotonous as a Tibetan prayer
mill: "It is right.  It is right.  It is right."  And then.  "Help
me--please!  I need it."  Diantha was not "gifted in prayer."


When Mr. Porne came home that night he found the wifely smile which is
supposed to greet all returning husbands quite genuinely in evidence.
"O Edgar!" cried she in a triumphant whisper, "I've got such a nice
girl!  She's just as neat and quick; you've no idea the work she's done
today--it looks like another place already.  But if things look queer at
dinner don't notice it--for I've just given her her head.  I was so
tired, and baby bothered so, and she said that perhaps she could manage
all by herself if I was willing to risk it, so I took baby for a
car-ride and have only just got back.  And I _think_ the dinner's going
to be lovely!"

It was lovely.  The dining-room was cool and flyless.  The table was set
with an assured touch.  A few of Orchardina's ever ready roses in a
glass bowl gave an air of intended beauty Mrs. Porne had had no time
for.

The food was well-cooked and well-served, and the attendance showed an
intelligent appreciation of when people want things and how they want
them.

Mrs. Porne quite glowed with exultation, but her husband gently
suggested that the newness of the broom was visibly uppermost, and that
such palpable perfections were probably accompanied by some drawbacks.
But he liked her looks, he admitted, and the cooking would cover a
multitude of sins.

On this they rested, while the week went by.  It was a full week, and a
short one.  Mrs. Porne, making hay while the sun shone, caught up a
little in her sewing and made some conscience-tormenting calls.

When Thursday night came around she was simply running over with
information to give her husband.

"Such a talk as I have had with Miss Bell!  She is so queer!  But she's
nice too, and it's all reasonable enough, what she says.  You know she's
studied this thing all out, and she knows about it--statistics and
things.  I was astonished till I found she used to teach school.  Just
think of it!  And to be willing to work out!  She certainly does her
work beautiful, but--it doesn't seem like having a servant at all.  I
feel as if I--boarded with her!"

"Why she seemed to me very modest and unpresuming," put in Mr. Porne.

"O yes, she never presumes.  But I mean the capable way she manages--I
don't have to tell her one thing, nor to oversee, nor criticize.  I
spoke of it and she said, 'If I didn't understand the business I should
have no right to undertake it."

"That's a new point of view, isn't it?" asked her husband.  "Don't they
usually make you teach them their trade and charge for the privilege?"

"Yes, of course they do.  But then she does have her disadvantages--as
you said."

"Does she?  What are they?"

"Why she's so--rigid.  I'll read you her--I don't know what to call it.
She's written out a definite proposition as to her staying with us, and
I want you to study it, it's the queerest thing I ever saw."

The document was somewhat novel.  A clear statement of the hours of
labor required in the position, the quality and amount of the different
kinds of work; the terms on which she was willing to undertake it, and
all prefaced by a few remarks on the status of household labor which
made Mr. Porne open his eyes.

Thus Miss Bell; "The ordinary rate for labor in this state, unskilled
labor of the ordinary sort, is $2.00 a day.  This is in return for the
simplest exertion of brute force, under constant supervision and
direction, and involving no serious risk to the employer."

"Household labor calls for the practice of several distinct crafts, and,
to be properly done, requires thorough training and experience.  Its
performer is not only in a position of confidence, as necessarily
entrusted with the care of the employer's goods and with knowledge of
the most intimate family relations; but the work itself, in maintaining
the life and health of the members of the household, is of most vital
importance.

"In consideration of existing economic conditions, however, I am willing
to undertake these intricate and responsible duties for a seven day week
at less wages than are given the street-digger, for $1.50 a day."

"Good gracious, my dear!" said Mr. Porne, laying down the paper, "This
young woman does appreciate her business!  And we're to be let off easy
at $45.00 a month, are we"

"And feel under obligations at that!" answered his wife.  "But you read
ahead.  It is most instructive.  We shall have to ask her to read a
paper for the Club!"

"'In further consideration of the conditions of the time, I am willing
to accept part payment in board and lodging instead of cash.  Such
accommodations as are usually offered with this position may be rated at
$17.00 a month."

"O come now, don't we board her any better than that?"

"That's what I thought, and I asked her about it, and she explained that
she could get a room as good for a dollar and a-half a week--she had
actually made inquiries in this very town!  And she could; really a
better room, better furnished, that is, and service with it.  You know
I've always meant to get the girl's room fixed more prettily, but
usually they don't seem to mind.  And as to food--you see she knows all
about the cost of things, and the materials she consumes are really not
more than two dollars and a half a week, if they are that.  She even
made some figures for me to prove it--see."

Mr. Porne had to laugh.

"Breakfast.  Coffee at thirty-five cents per pound, one cup, one cent.
Oatmeal at fourteen cents per package, one bowl, one cent.  Bread at
five cents per loaf, two slices, one-half cent.  Butter at forty cents
per pound, one piece, one and a-half cents.  Oranges at thirty cents per
dozen, one, three cents.  Milk at eight cents per quart, on oatmeal, one
cent.  Meat or fish or egg, average five cents.  Total--thirteen cents."

"There!  And she showed me dinner and lunch the same way.  I had no idea
food, just the material, cost so little.  It's the labor, she says that
makes it cost even in the cheapest restaurant."

"I see," said Mr. Porne.  "And in the case of the domestic servant we
furnish the materials and she furnishes the labor.  She cooks her own
food and waits on herself--naturally it wouldn't come high.  What does
she make it?"

'Food, average per day . . . $0.35
Room, $1.50 per w'k, ave. per day . . . .22
-----
 .57

Total, per month . . . $17.10

$1.50 per day, per month . . . $45.00

"'Remaining payable in cash, $28.00.'  Do I still live!  But my dear
Ellie, that's only what an ordinary first-class cook charges, out here,
without all this fuss!"

"I know it, Ned, but you know we think it's awful, and we're always
telling about their getting their board and lodging clear--as if we
gave'em that out of the goodness of our hearts!"

"Exactly, my dear.  And this amazing and arithmetical young woman makes
us feel as if we were giving her wampum instead of money--mere primitive
barter of ancient days in return for her twentieth century services!
How does she do her work--that's the main question."

"I never saw anyone do it better, or quicker, or easier.  That is, I
thought it was easy till she brought me this paper.  Just read about her
work, and you'll feel as if we ought to pay her all your salary."

Mr. Porne read:

"Labor performed, average ten hours a day, as follows: Preparation of
food materials, care of fires, cooking, table service, and cleaning of
dishes, utensils, towels, stove, etc., per meal--breakfast two hours,
dinner three hours, supper or lunch one hour--six hours per day for food
service.  Daily chamber work and dusting, etc., one and one-half hours
per day.  Weekly cleaning for house of nine rooms, with halls, stairs,
closets, porches, steps, walks, etc., sweeping, dusting, washing
windows, mopping, scouring, etc., averaging two hours per day.  Door
service, waiting on tradesmen, and extras one-half hour per day.  Total
ten hours per day."

"That sounds well.  Does it take that much time every day?"

"Yes, indeed!  It would take me twenty!" she answered.  "You know the
week I was here alone I never did half she does.  Of course I had Baby,
but then I didn't do the things.  I guess when it doesn't take so long
they just don't do what ought to be done.  For she is quick, awfully
quick about her work.  And she's thorough.  I suppose it ought to be
done that way--but I never had one before."

"She keeps mighty fresh and bright-looking after these herculean
labors."

"Yes, but then she rests!  Her ten hours are from six-thirty a.m., when
she goes into the kitchen as regularly as a cuckoo clock, to
eight-thirty p.m. when she is all through and her kitchen looks like
a--well it's as clean and orderly as if no one was ever in it."

"Ten hours--that's fourteen."

"I know it, but she takes out four.  She claims time to eat her meals."

"Preposterous!"

"Half an hour apiece, and half an hour in the morning to rest--and two
in the afternoon.  Anyway she is out, two hours every afternoon, riding
in the electric cars!"

"That don't look like a very hard job.  Her day laborer doesn't get two
hours off every afternoon to take excursions into the country!"

"No, I know that, but he doesn't begin so early, nor stop so late.  She
does her square ten hours work, and I suppose one has a right to time
off."

"You seem dubious about that, my dear."

"Yes, that's just where it's awkward.  I'm used to girls being in all
the time, excepting their day out.  You see I can't leave baby, nor
always take him--and it interferes with my freedom afternoons."

"Well--can't you arrange with her somehow?"

"See if you can.  She says she will only give ten hours of time for a
dollar and a half a day--tisn't but fifteen cents an hour--I have to pay
a woman twenty that comes in.  And if she is to give up her chance of
sunlight and fresh air she wants me to pay her extra--by the hour.  Or
she says, if I prefer, she would take four hours every other day--and so
be at home half the time.  I said it was difficult to arrange--with
baby, and she was very sympathetic and nice, but she won't alter her
plans."

"Let her go, and get a less exacting servant."

"But--she does her work so well!  And it saves a lot, really.  She knows
all about marketing and things, and plans the meals so as to have things
lap, and it's a comfort to have her in the house and feel so safe and
sure everything will be done right."

"Well, it's your province, my dear.  I don't profess to advise.  But I
assure you I appreciate the table, and the cleanness of everything, and
the rested look in your eyes, dear girl!"

She slipped her hand into his affectionately.  "It does make a
difference," she said.  "I _could_ get a girl for $20.00 and save nearly
$2.60 a week--but you know what they are!"

"I do indeed," he admitted fervently.  "It's worth the money to have
this thing done so well.  I think she's right about the wages.  Better
keep her."

"O--she'll only agree to stay six months even at this rate!"

"Well--keep her six months and be thankful.  I thought she was too good
to last!"

They looked over the offered contract again.  It closed with:

"This agreement to hold for six months from date if mutually
satisfactory.  In case of disagreement two weeks' notice is to be given
on either side, or two weeks' wages if preferred by the employer."  It
was dated, and signed "Miss D. C. Bell."

And with inward amusement and great display of penmanship they added
"Mrs. Isabel J. Porne," and the contract was made.



[Erratum]


Apology is due to Mr. Horace Traubel, by whose kind permission "Little
Leafy Brothers," in our February issue, was reprinted from "The
Conservator," for not giving proper acknowledgment.  Also to our readers
for the same omission.



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


V.

MASCULINE LITERATURE.


When we are offered a "woman's" paper, page, or column, we find it
filled with matter supposed to appeal to women as a sex or class; the
writer mainly dwelling upon the Kaiser's four K's--Kuchen, Kinder,
Kirche, Kleider.  They iterate and reiterate endlessly the discussion of
cookery, old and new; of the care of children; of the overwhelming
subject of clothing; and of moral instruction.  All this is recognized
as "feminine" literature, and it must have some appeal else the women
would not read it.  What parallel have we in "masculine" literature?

"None!" is the proud reply.  "Men are people!  Women, being 'the sex,'
have their limited feminine interests, their feminine point of view,
which must be provided for.  Men, however, are not restricted--to them
belongs the world's literature!"

Yes, it has belonged to them--ever since there was any.  They have
written it and they have read it.  It is only lately that women,
generally speaking, have been taught to read; still more lately that
they have been allowed to write.  It is but a little while since Harriet
Martineau concealed her writing beneath her sewing when visitors came
in--writing was "masculine"--sewing "feminine."

We have not, it Is true, confined men to a narrowly construed "masculine
sphere," and composed a special literature suited to it.  Their effect
on literature has been far wider than that, monopolizing this form of
art with special favor.  It was suited above all others to the dominant
impulse of self-expression; and being, as we have seen essentially and
continually "the sex;" they have impressed that sex upon this art
overwhelmingly; they have given the world a masculized literature.

It is hard for us to realize this.  We can readily see, that if women
had always written the books, no men either writing or reading them,
that would have surely "feminized" our literature; but we have not in
our minds the concept, much less the word, for an overmasculized
influence.

Men having been accepted as humanity, women but a side-issue; (most
literally if we accept the Hebrew legend!), whatever men did or said was
human--and not to be criticized.  In no department of life is it easier
to contravert this old belief; to show how the male sex as such differs
from the human type; and how this maleness has monopolized and
disfigured a great social function.

Human life is a very large affair; and literature is its chief art.  We
live, humanly, only through our power of communication.  Speech gives us
this power laterally, as it were, in immediate personal contact.  For
permanent use speech becomes oral tradition--a poor dependence.
Literature gives not only an infinite multiplication to the lateral
spread of communion but adds the vertical reach.  Through it we know the
past, govern the present, and influence the future.  In its servicable
common forms it is the indispensable daily servant of our lives; in its
nobler flights as a great art no means of human inter-change goes so
far.

In these brief limits we can touch but lightly on some phases of so
great a subject; and will rest the case mainly on the effect of an
exclusively masculine handling of the two fields of history and fiction.
 In poetry and the drama the same influence is easily traced, but in the
first two it is so baldly prominent as to defy objection.

History is, or should be, the story of our racial life.  What have men
made it?  The story of warfare and conquest.  Begin at the very
beginning with the carven stones of Egypt, the clay records of Chaldea,
what do we find of history?

"I Pharaoh, King of Kings! Lord of Lords! (etc. etc.), "went down into
the miserable land of Kush, and slew of the inhabitants thereof an
hundred and forty and two thousands!"  That, or something like it, is
the kind of record early history gives us.

The story of Conquering Kings, who and how many they killed and
enslaved; the grovelling adulation of the abased; the unlimited
jubilation of the victor; from the primitive state of most ancient
kings, and the Roman triumphs where queens walked in chains, down to our
omni present soldier's monuments: the story of war and conquest--war and
conquest--over and over; with such boasting and triumph, such cock-crow
and flapping of wings as show most unmistakably the natural source.

All this will strike the reader at first as biased and unfair.  "That
was the way people lived in those days!" says the reader.

No--it was not the way women lived.

"O, women!" says the reader, "Of course not!  Women are different."

Yea, women are different; and _men are different!_  Both of them, as
sexes, differ from the human norm, which is social life and all social
development.  Society was slowly growing in all those black blind years.
 The arts, the sciences, the trades and crafts and professions,
religion, philosophy, government, law, commerce, agriculture--all the
human processes were going on as well as they were able, between wars.

The male naturally fights, and naturally crows, triumphs over his rival
and takes the prize--therefore was he made male.  Maleness means war.

Not only so; but being male, he cares only for male interests.  Men,
being the sole arbiters of what should be done and said and written,
have given us not only a social growth scarred and thwarted from the
beginning by continual destruction; but a history which is one unbroken
record of courage and red cruelty, of triumph and black shame.

As to what went on that was of real consequence, the great slow steps of
the working world, the discoveries and inventions, the real progress of
humanity--that was not worth recording, from a masculine point of view.
Within this last century, "the woman's century," the century of the
great awakening, the rising demand for freedom, political, economic, and
domestic, we are beginning to write real history, human history, and not
merely masculine history.  But that great branch of literature--Hebrew,
Greek, Roman, and all down later times, shows beyond all question, the
influence of our androcentric culture.

Literature is the most powerful and necessary of the arts, and fiction
is its broadest form.  If art "holds the mirror up to nature" this art's
mirror is the largest of all, the most used.  Since our very life
depends on some communication; and our progress is in proportion to our
fullness and freedom of communication; since real communication requires
mutual understanding; so in the growth of the social consciousness, we
note from the beginning a passionate interest in other people's lives.

The art which gives humanity consciousness is the most vital art.  Our
greatest dramatists are lauded for their breadth of knowledge of "human
nature," their range of emotion and understanding; our greatest poets
are those who most deeply and widely experience and reveal the feelings
of the human heart; and the power of fiction is that it can reach and
express this great field of human life with no limits but those of the
author.

When fiction began it was the legitimate child of oral tradition; a
product of natural brain activity; the legend constructed instead of
remembered.  (This stage is with us yet as seen in the constant changes
in repetition of popular jokes and stories.)

Fiction to-day has a much wider range; yet it is still restricted,
heavily and most mischievously restricted.

What is the preferred subject matter of fiction?

There are two main branches found everywhere, from the Romaunt of the
Rose to the Purplish Magazine;--the Story of Adventure, and the Love
Story.

The Story-of-Adventure branch is not so thick as the other by any means,
but it is a sturdy bough for all that.  Stevenson and Kipling have
proved its immense popularity, with the whole brood of detective stories
and the tales of successful rascality we call "picaresque"  Our most
popular weekly shows the broad appeal of this class of fiction.

All these tales of adventure, of struggle and difficulty; of hunting and
fishing and fighting; of robbing and murdering, catching and punishing,
are distinctly and essentially masculine.  They do not touch on human
processes, social processes, but on the special field of predatory
excitement so long the sole province of men.

It is to be noted here that even in the overwhelming rise of industrial
interests to-day, these, when used as the basis for a story, are forced
into line with one, or both, of these two main branches of
fiction;--conflict or love.  Unless the story has one of these
"interests" in it, there is no story--so holds the editor; the dictum
being, put plainly, "life has no interests except conflict and love!"

It is surely something more than a coincidence that these are the two
essential features of masculinity--Desire and Combat--Love and War.

As a matter of fact the major interests of life are in line with its
major processes; and these--in our stage of human development--are more
varied than our fiction would have us believe.  Half the world consists
of women, we should remember, who are types of human life as well as
men, and their major processes are not those of conflict and adventure,
their love means more than mating.  Even on so poor a line of
distinction as the "woman's column" offers, if women are to be kept to
their four Ks, there should be a "men's column" also; and all the
"sporting news" and fish stories be put in that; they are not world
interests; they are male interests.

Now for the main branch--the Love Story.  Ninety per cent. of fiction is
In this line; this is preeminently the major interest of life--given in
fiction.  What is the love-story, as rendered by this art?

It is the story of the pre-marital struggle.  It is the Adventures of
Him in Pursuit of Her--and it stops when he gets her!  Story after
story, age after age, over and over and over, this ceaseless repetition
of the Preliminaries.

Here is Human Life.  In its large sense, its real sense, it is a matter
of inter-relation between individuals and groups, covering all emotions,
all processes, all experiences.  Out of this vast field of human life
fiction arbitrarily selects one emotion, one process, one experience, as
its necessary base.

"Ah! but we are persons most of all!" protests the reader.  "This is
personal experience--it has the universal appeal!"

Take human life personally then.  Here is a Human Being, a life,
covering some seventy years; involving the changing growth of many
faculties; the ever new marvels of youth, the long working time of
middle life, the slow ripening of age.  Here is the human soul, in the
human body, Living.  Out of this field of personal life, with all of its
emotions, processes, and experiences, fiction arbitrarily selects one
emotion, one process, one experience, mainly of one sex.

The "love" of our stories is man's love of woman.  If any dare dispute
this, and say it treats equally of woman's love for man, I answer, "Then
why do the stories stop at marriage?"

There is a current jest, revealing much, to this effect:

The young wife complains that the husband does not wait upon and woo her
as he did before marriage; to which he replies, "Why should I run after
the street-car when I've caught it?"

Woman's love for man, as currently treated in fiction is largely a
reflex; it is the way he wants her to feel, expects her to feel; not a
fair representation of how she does feel.  If "love" is to be selected
as the most important thing in life to write about, then the mother's
love should be the principal subject: This is the main stream.  This is
the general underlying, world-lifting force.  The "life-force," now so
glibly chattered about, finds its fullest expression in motherhood; not
in the emotions of an assistant in the preliminary stages.

What has literature, what has fiction, to offer concerning mother-love,
or even concerning father-love, as compared to this vast volume of
excitement about lover-love?  Why is the search-light continually
focussed upon a two or three years space of life "mid the blank miles
round about?"  Why indeed, except for the clear reason, that on a
starkly masculine basis this is his one period of overwhelming interest
and excitement.

If the beehive produced literature, the bee's fiction would be rich and
broad; full of the complex tasks of comb-building and filling; the care
and feeding of the young, the guardian-service of the queen; and far
beyond that it would spread to the blue glory of the summer sky, the
fresh winds, the endless beauty and sweetness of a thousand thousand
flowers.  It would treat of the vast fecundity of motherhood, the
educative and selective processes of the group-mothers; and the passion
of loyalty, of social service, which holds the hive together.

But if the drones wrote fiction, it would have no subject matter save
the feasting of many; and the nuptial flight, of one.

To the male, as such, this mating instinct is frankly the major interest
of life; even the belligerent instincts are second to it.  To the
female, as such, it is for all its intensity, but a passing interest.
In nature's economy, his is but a temporary devotion, hers the slow
processes of life's fulfillment.

In Humanity we have long since, not outgrown, but overgrown, this stage
of feeling.  In Human Parentage even the mother's share begins to pale
beside that ever-growing Social love and care, which guards and guides
the children of to-day.

The art of literature in this main form of fiction is far too great a
thing to be wholly governed by one dominant note. As life widened and
intensified, the artist, if great enough, has transcended sex; and in
the mightier works of the real masters, we find fiction treating of
life, life in general, in all its complex relationships, and refusing to
be held longer to the rigid canons of an androcentric past.

This was the power of Balzac--he took in more than this one field.  This
was the universal appeal of Dickens; he wrote of people, all kinds of
people, doing all kinds of things.  As you recall with pleasure some
preferred novel of this general favorite, you find yourself looking
narrowly for the "love story" in it.  It is there--for it is part of
life; but it does not dominate the whole scene--any more than it does in
life.

The thought of the world is made and handed out to us in the main.  The
makers of books are the makers of thoughts and feelings for people in
general.  Fiction is the most popular form in which this world-food is
taken.  If it were true, it would teach us life easily, swiftly, truly;
teach not by preaching but by truly re-presenting; and we should grow up
becoming acquainted with a far wider range of life in books than could
even be ours in person.  Then meeting life in reality we should be
wise--and not be disappointed.

As it is, our great sea of fiction is steeped and dyed and flavored all
one way.  A young man faces life--the seventy year stretch, remember,
and is given book upon book wherein one set of feelings is continually
vocalized and overestimated.  He reads forever of love, good love and
bad love, natural and unnatural, legitimate and illegitimate; with the
unavoidable inference that there is nothing else going on.

If he is a healthy young man he breaks loose from the whole thing,
despises "love stories" and takes up life as he finds it.  But what
impression he does receive from fiction is a false one, and he suffers
without knowing it from lack of the truer broader views of life it
failed to give him.

A young woman faces life--the seventy year stretch remember; and is
given the same books--with restrictions.  Remember the remark of
Rochefoucauld, "There are thirty good stories in the world and
twenty-nine cannot be told to women."  There is a certain broad field of
literature so grossly androcentric that for very shame men have tried to
keep it to themselves.  But in a milder form, the spades all named
teaspoons, or at the worst appearing as trowels--the young woman is
given the same fiction.  Love and love and love--from "first sight" to
marriage.  There it stops--just the fluttering ribbon of announcement,
"and lived happily ever after."

Is that kind of fiction any sort of picture of a woman's life?  Fiction,
under our androcentric culture, has not given any true picture of
woman's life, very little of human life, and a disproportioned section
of man's life.

As we daily grow more human, both of us, this noble art is changing for
the better so fast that a short lifetime can mark the growth.  New
fields are opening and new laborers are working in them.  But it is no
swift and easy matter to disabuse the race mind from attitudes and
habits inculcated for a thousand years.  What we have been fed upon so
long we are well used to, what we are used to we like, what we like we
think is good and proper.

The widening demand for broader, truer fiction is disputed by the slow
racial mind: and opposed by the marketers of literature on grounds of
visible self-interest, as well as lethargic conservatism.

It is difficult for men, heretofore the sole producers and consumers of
literature; and for women, new to the field, and following masculine
canons because all the canons were masculine; to stretch their minds to
a recognition of the change which is even now upon us.

This one narrow field has been for so long overworked, our minds are so
filled with heroes and heroes continually repeating the one-act play,
that when a book like David Harum is offered the publisher refuses it
repeatedly, and finally insists on a "heart interest" being injected by
force.

Did anyone read David Harum for that heart interest?  Does anyone
remember that heart interest?  Has humanity no interests but those of
the heart?

Robert Ellesmere was a popular book--but not because of its heart
interest.

Uncle Tom's Cabin appealed to the entire world, more widely than any
work of fiction that was ever written; but if anybody fell in love and
married in it they have been forgotten.  There was plenty of love in
that book, love of family, love of friends, love of master for servant
and servant for master; love of mother for child; love of married people
for each other; love of humanity and love of God.

It was extremely popular.  Some say it was not literature.  That opinion
will live, like the name of Empedocles.

The art of fiction is being re-born in these days.  Life is discovered
to be longer, wider, deeper, richer, than these monotonous players of
one June would have us believe.

The humanizing of woman of itself opens five distinctly fresh fields of
fiction: First the position of the young woman who is called upon to
give up her "career"--her humanness--for marriage, and who objects to
it; second, the middle-aged woman who at last discovers that her
discontent is social starvation--that it is not more love that she
wants, but more business in life: Third the interrelation of women with
women--a thing we could never write about before because we never had it
before: except in harems and convents: Fourth the inter-action between
mothers and children; this not the eternal "mother and child," wherein
the child is always a baby, but the long drama of personal relationship;
the love and hope, the patience and power, the lasting joy and triumph,
the slow eating disappointment which must never be owned to a living
soul--here are grounds for novels that a million mothers and many
million children would eagerly read: Fifth the new attitude of the
full-grown woman who faces the demands of love with the high standards
of conscious motherhood.

There are other fields, broad and brilliantly promising, but this
chapter is meant merely to show that our one-sided culture has, in this
art, most disproportionately overestimated the dominant instincts of the
male--Love and War--an offense against art and truth, and an injury to
life.



WATER-LURE


We who were born of water, in the warm slow ancient years,
 Love it to-day for all we pay
 Of terror and loss and tears.

The child laughs loud at the fountain, laughs low in the April rain,
 And the sea's bright brim is a lure to him
 Where a lost life lives again.



COMMENT AND REVIEW


In a recent number of a leading "woman's" periodical is a disquisition
on love--a girl's ideals of love, based on Elaine and the Sleeping
Beauty.

This is a serious matter surely.  Love being an essential preliminary to
the best parenthood, and the major element of personal happiness, is a
most commanding subject; and as the woman is the most important factor
in both lines, her ideals are worth discussing.

We note that the author says "girl" instead of woman; but as boys and
girls do have ideals they too are worth considering.  What are these
ideals as discussed in this worthy periodical?

We are told that the girl is often unfit to meet "the big grave
questions of love itself;" and "to make sure that she has these ideals
from the highest sources."

"What are these sources?" pursues this sagacious monitor; and then she
offers--"fairy tales and old romance."  For ideals of love--here--in
America to-day--we are referred to Grimm's Marchen; to Cinderella, the
Goose Girl, Beauty and the Beast, and the Sleeping Beauty!  Various
heroines of mythology and fiction are adduced, and the crowning type of
all is Elaine, The Lily Maid of Astolat.

A careful reading of fairy tales, however worthy, does not seem to throw
much light on the problems of marriage; and right marriage is what all
this love and its ideals are for.  Here is a matter calling for the
widest knowledge, the noblest purpose, the highest principles, the most
practical action; a matter concerning not only the private happiness of
two persons, but the lives of several others; a matter not only of
individual appeal, but of the very broadest social duty; and for its
ideals we are referred to old fairy tales!

The Sleeping Beauty is a most happy instance of woman's right attitude
toward love and marriage--she is to remain starkly unconscious, using
absolutely no discretion; and cheerfully marry the first man that kisses
her!  In the fairy story he was a noble prince--but the average sleeping
beauty of to-day is often waked up by the wrong man!

Sometimes she is married first, and wakes up afterward; like the lady in
Lear's limerick:

"There a an old man of Jamaica,
Who suddenly married a Quaker.
 But she cried out, "O Lack!
 I have married a Black!"
Which grieved that old man of Jamaica."

How does Elaine answer as an ideal?  Almost as well as the Sleeping
Beauty.  Ignorance absolute; instant surrender to the first man
appearing; no shadow of inquiry as to his being married or single; much
less as to his morals.  Then the apotheosis of the tidy-making
instinct--embroidering a cover for a steel shield! a thing meant to bear
the hardest kind of blows, made for that purpose, and she so afraid it
will get "rust or soilure" that she constructs this decorated case for
it.

Then the going forth to nurse her wounded hero, and the ingenuous
proposal, when he offers to requite her.

Being refused, what then?  Any thought of her duty in the world?  Of her
two good brothers?  Of her aged father--very fond of her too, that old
father?  Not the slightest.  Not even a glimmer of purpose to live
on--if her love was so wonderful, and be of some use to the great man,
by and by.

Nothing but herself.  "I want something!  I can't have it!  I will
die!"--and die she did, of set purpose, by a sort of flabby suicide;
making the most careful arrangements for a spectacular funeral barge,
and a letter that should wring the heart of the obdurate man.

Well, I can remember when I cried over it--at about thirteen.  It does
appeal to girls; but is it therefore an ideal to be held up as a High
Source and followed?

It is time and more than time for us to recognize that marriage is for
men and women, not girls and boys; that "love" is not a rosy dream but a
responsible undertaking, with consequences; that no true ideals of love
can be formed without full recognition of its purpose.

*

A thin small book of verse, a booklet, called "Philemon's Verses," from
The Evergreen Press, Montrose, Pa., has been sent me for review.

Now I have a theory of my own in regard to what we are pleased to call
"minor poets"; namely, that poetry is a natural form of expression to
most human beings, and should be used as such.

Why do we imagine that the best method of ensuring our output of poetry
is to have a few huge monoliths of poets--and no more?  Is the great
poet surer of recognition, safer in his unparalleled superiority because
there is nothing between him and the unpoetical?  Is a vast audience of
the dumb and verseless, who do not care enough for poetry to write any
of it, the best for the great poet?

According to my theory there is as much room for short-distance poetry
as for the kind that rings around the world for centuries.

As I look over this small collection, I am impressed most with its clear
sincerity, in feeling and expression.  These verses are not cooked--they
grew.

Then I feel anew the range of interests of the modern singer--so swiftly
widening, so intensely human, and yet so sympathetic with nature.
Democracy in literature is a good thing; not only in subject matter but
in universal participation.

So that the contribution be genuine, the real speech of an honest soul,
it has its own place in the literature of the day; and that is evidently
the case with Philemon's Verses.

*

"The Lords of High Decision" is a title more high-sounding than
descriptive.  If the story had been called "The Slaves of Low Decision"
it would be more recognizable.

Here is a man who wabbles through some thirty years of life without
coming to any decision at all; a woman who at no time had any decision;
another who decided wrong, then right, then wrong again, and was finally
let out by an accident; a first-class pitcher who gives up his chosen
field to be a chauffeur and general attache of the wabbler, and finally
loses his life to save another man--perhaps he was a Lord of High
Decision.

Perhaps Paddock, the settlement-running clergyman was.  Or Walsh,--the
suppressed parent.  Colonel Craighill, the father of the Wabbler, is
well drawn, evidently from nature.

A highly Episcopalian attitude toward divorce is taken; the heroine, who
has been for some years free of a husband casually married in youth, is
led to see her duty in going back to him; even though she deeply loves
another man.  As her ex-husband has more sense than she, he refuses to
accept this living sacrifice.  She succeeds in giving up something,
however, for her lover, a man of considerable wealth, makes his proposal
in this wise:

"I know I ask a great deal when I ask you to give up your work for
me--and yet I ask it.  Remember, there is no gratitude in this--you are
a woman, and I am a man--and I love you."

Poor girl!  She has struggled through poverty, a broken marriage, long
years of valiant endeavor for this work of hers; it was the innocent and
easily domesticated task of drawing children's faces--she was an
illustrator.  Yet the first thing her "lover" does, in the very height
of his new virtue, in the very act of offering himself, is to assume as
a matter of course that she would give it up.  And she did--for this
Lord of High Decision.

"The Lords of High Decision," by Meredith Nicholson.  Doubleday, Page &
Co.  $1.50.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


Here is a "Personal" of distinct interest.

May it reach its mark!

"WANTED:

"By a Socialist woman of mature years, a congenial person of similar
sex, education and tastes to share with her the expense of a country
home in the mountains, and the study--as far as may be agreeable--of
nature, music, literature, sociology and socialism.  No objection to
Suffragette or Vegetarian, but advocates of Anarchism or Free Love are
hereby contra-indicated.  Credentials to be frankly exchanged with
personal history.  Address: The Widow Baucis, Care of The Forerunner, 67
Wall St., New York City."

*

Apropos of the above, there are no more intimate and pressing  problems
than those of the business of living, the mere every day processes.

We are still so hampered by the customs and habits of the proprietary
family that we assume as a matter of course that one must live, first,
in childhood and youth, with one's parental family; second, in middle
life, with one's matrimonial family; and third in age, with one's
descendants.

Now suppose one is of age, unmarried, and not fond of living with one's
parents.  This is not wicked.  It is not extremely unusual.  One may be
very fond of one's parents, as parents, yet prefer other society in
daily life.  Enforced residence in the same home of a number of grown
people of widely different ages, interests, and ideas, is not made happy
by the fact of blood-relationship.

There are many indications to show an increasing divergence of tastes
between our rapidly changing generations.  Each set of young people seem
to differ more sharply from their parents than they, in their youth,
similarly differed.

Moreover, there are a number of persons who do not marry, and yet have a
right to live--yes, and to enjoy living.

Men have long ago solved this problem to their own satisfaction.  They
leave home early; they have learned in cabin, camp and club to live in
groups, without women; and many, with an apartment of their own as a
base, seem to find enough society in visits among their friends.

But women are only beginning to realize that it is possible to live,
yes, and to have a "home," even if one has not, in the original sense,
"a family."  The amount of happiness that really congenial friends can
find in living together is fully as great as that of some marriages; and
quite outside of daily contact in the household remains that boundless
field of strength, stimulus and delight which comes of true social
contact.

But the machinery of life is all arranged for married couples; who
rightly constitute the majority; and the unmarried woman is not allowed
for.  She is, however, rapidly awakening to the fact that she has an
actual individual existence--as well as a potential marital existence;
and is learning how to use and enjoy it.



PLAYTIME


AUNT ELIZA

(This was done by two persons, in alternate lines, as a game.)

Seven days had Aunt Eliza
Read the Boston Advertiser,
 Seven days on end;
But in spite of her persistence
Still she met with some resistance
 From her bosom friend.

Thomas Brown, the Undertaker,
Who declared he'd have to shake her,
 Daily called at ten;
Asking if dear Aunt's condition
Would allow of his admission,
 With his corps of men.

Aunt Eliza heard him pleading,
Ceased an instant from her reading,
 Softly downward stole;
Soon broke up the conversation,
Punctuating Brown's oration,
With a shower of coal.



THE CRIPPLE


There are such things as feet, human feet;
But these she does not use;
Firm and supple, white and sweet,
Softly graceful, lightly fleet,
For comfort, beauty, service meet--
There are feet, human feet,
These she does with scorn refuse--
Preferring shoes.

There are such things as shoes--human shoes;
Though scant and rare the proof;
Serviceable, soft and strong,
Pleasant, comely, wearing long,
Easy as a well-known song--
There are shoes, human shoes,
But from these she holds aloof--
Prefers the hoof!

There are such things as hoofs, sub-human hoofs,
High-heeled, sharp anomalies;
Small and pinching, hard and black,
Shiny as a beetle's back,
Cloven, clattering on the track,
There are hoofs, sub-human hoofs,
She cares not for truth, nor ease--
Preferring these!





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 6
APRIL, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

The human soul is built for the love and service of the whole world.
We confine it to the love and service of five or six persons, and the
salvation of one.




WHEN THOU GAINEST HAPPINESS


When thou gainest happiness,
 Life's full cup of sweetest wine;
Dost thou stop in grieving blind
Over those dark years behind?
Bitter now, rebellious, mad,
For the things thou hast not had--
 Before everything was thine?

Dost not rather wonder why
 Nearing blaze of joy like this,
Some prevision had not lit
Those dark hours with hope of it?
That thou couldst in patient strength
Have endured that sorrow's length--
 _Nothing_--to the coming bliss!

Now, awaken!  Look ahead!
 See the earth one garden fair!
See the evils of to-day
Like a child's faults put away!
See our little history seem
Like a short forgotten dream!
See a full-grown rising race
Find our joy their commonplace!
Find such new joy of their own
As our best hopes have not known!
 And take shame for thy despair!



MARTHA'S MOTHER


It was nine feet long.

It was eight feet high.

It was six feet wide.

There was a closet, actually!--a closet one foot deep--that was why she
took this room.  There was the bed, and the trunk, and just room to open
the closet door part way--that accounted for the length.  There was the
bed and the bureau and the chair--that accounted for the width.  Between
the bedside and the bureau and chair side was a strip extending the
whole nine feet.  There was room to turn around by the window.  There
was room to turn round by the door.  Martha was thin.

One, two, three, four--turn.

One, two, three, four--turn.

She managed it nicely.

"It is a stateroom," she always said to herself.  "It is a luxurious,
large, well-furnished stateroom with a real window.  It is _not_ a
cell."

Martha had a vigorous constructive imagination.  Sometimes it was the
joy of her life, her magic carpet, her Aladdin's lamp.  Sometimes it
frightened her--frightened her horribly, it was so strong.

The cell idea had come to her one gloomy day, and she had foolishly
allowed it to enter--played with it a little while.  Since then she had
to keep a special bar on that particular intruder, so she had arranged a
stateroom "set," and forcibly kept it on hand.

Martha was a stenographer and typewriter in a real estate office.  She
got $12 a week, and was thankful for it.  It was steady pay, and enough
to live on.  Seven dollars she paid for board and lodging, ninety cents
for her six lunches, ten a day for carfare, including Sundays;
seventy-five for laundry; one for her mother--that left one dollar and
sixty-five cents for clothes, shoes, gloves, everything.  She had tried
cheaper board, but made up the cost in doctor's bills; and lost a good
place by being ill.

"Stone walls do not a prison make, nor hall bedrooms a cage," said she
determinedly.  "Now then--here is another evening--what shall I do?
Library?  No.  My eyes are tired.  Besides, three times a week is
enough.  'Tisn't club night.  Will _not_ sit in the parlor.  Too wet to
walk.  Can't sew, worse'n reading--O good _land!_  I'm almost ready to
go with Basset!"

She shook herself and paced up and down again.

Prisoners form the habit of talking to themselves--this was the
suggestion that floated through her mind--that cell idea again.

"I've got to get out of this!" said Martha, stopping short.  "It's
enough to drive a girl crazy!"

The driving process was stayed by a knock at the door.  "Excuse me for
coming up," said a voice.  "It's Mrs. MacAvelly."

Martha knew this lady well.  She was a friend of Miss Podder at the
Girls' Trade Union Association.  "Come in.  I'm glad to see you!" she
said hospitably.  "Have the chair--or the bed's really more
comfortable!"

"I was with Miss Podder this evening and she was anxious to know whether
your union has gained any since the last meeting--I told her I'd find
out--I had nothing else to do.  Am I intruding?"

"Intruding!"  Martha, gave a short laugh.  "Why, it's a godsend, Mrs.
MacAvelly!  If you knew how dull the evenings are to us girls!"

"Don't you--go out much?  To--to theaters--or parks?"  The lady's tone
was sympathetic and not inquisitive.

"Not very much," said Martha, rather sardonically.  "Theaters--two
girls, two dollars, and twenty cents carfare.  Parks, twenty cents--walk
your feet off, or sit on the benches and be stared at.  Museums--not
open evenings."

"But don't you have visitors--in the parlor here?"

"Did you see it?" asked Martha.

Mrs. MacAvelly had seen it.  It was cold and also stuffy.  It was ugly
and shabby and stiff.  Three tired girls sat there, two trying to read
by a strangled gaslight overhead; one trying to entertain a caller in a
social fiction of privacy at the other end of the room.

"Yes, we have visitors--but mostly they ask us out.  And some of us
don't go," said Martha darkly.

"I see, I see!" said Mrs. MacAvelly, with a pleasant smile; and Martha
wondered whether she did see, or was just being civil.

"For instance, there's Mr. Basset," the girl pursued, somewhat
recklessly; meaning that her visitor should understand her.

"Mr. Basset?"

"Yes, 'Pond & Basset'--one of my employers."

Mrs. MacAvelly looked pained. "Couldn't you--er--avoid it?" she
suggested.

"You mean shake him?" asked Martha.  "Why, yes--I could.  Might lose my
job.  Get another place--another Basset, probably."

"I see!" said Mrs. MacAvelly again.  "Like the Fox and the Swarm of
Flies!  There ought to be a more comfortable way of living for all you
girls!  And how about the union--I have to be going back to Miss
Podder."

Martha gave her the information she wanted, and started to accompany her
downstairs.  They heard the thin jangle of the door-bell, down through
the echoing halls, and the dragging feet of the servant coming up.  A
kinky black head was thrust in at the door.

"Mr. Basset, callin' on Miss Joyce," was announced formally.

Martha stiffened.  "Please tell Mr. Basset I am not feeling well
to-night--and beg to be excused.

She looked rather defiantly at her guest, as Lucy clattered down the
long stairs; then stole to the railing and peered down the narrow well.
She heard the message given with pompous accuracy, and then heard the
clear, firm tones of Mr. Basset:

"Tell Miss Joyce that I will wait."

Martha returned to her room in three long steps, slipped off her shoes
and calmly got into bed.  "Good-night, Mrs. MacAvelly," she said.  "I'm
so sorry, but my head aches and I've gone to bed!  Would you be so very
good as to tell Lucy so as you're going down."

Mrs. MacAvelly said she would, and departed, and Martha lay
conscientiously quiet till she heard the door shut far below.

She was quiet, but she was not contented.

*

Yet the discontent of Martha was as nothing to the discontent of Mrs.
Joyce, her mother, in her rural home.  Here was a woman of fifty-three,
alert, vigorous, nervously active; but an automobile-agitated horse had
danced upon her, and her usefulness, as she understood it, was over.
She could not get about without crutches, nor use her hands for
needlework, though still able to write after a fashion.  Writing was not
her _forte,_ however, at the best of times.

She lived with a widowed sister in a little, lean dusty farmhouse by the
side of the road; a hill road that went nowhere in particular, and was
too steep for those who were going there.

Brisk on her crutches, Mrs. Joyce hopped about the little house, there
was nowhere else to hop to.  She had talked her sister out long
since--Mary never had never much to say.  Occasionally they quarreled
and then Mrs. Joyce hopped only in her room, a limited process.

She sat at the window one day, staring greedily out at the lumpy
rock-ribbed road; silent, perforce, and tapping the arms of her chair
with nervous intensity.  Suddenly she called out, "Mary!  Mary Ames!
Come here quick!  There's somebody coming up the road!"

Mary came in, as fast as she could with eggs in her apron.  "It's Mrs.
Holmes!" she said.  "And a boarder, I guess."

"No, it ain't," said Mrs. Joyce, eagerly.  "It's that woman that's
visiting the Holmes--she was in church last week, Myra Slater told me
about her.  Her name's MacDowell, or something."

"It ain't MacDowell," said her sister.  "I remember; it's MacAvelly."

This theory was borne out by Mrs. Holmes' entrance and introduction of
her friend.

"Have you any eggs for us, Mrs. Ames?" she said.

"Set down--set down," said Mrs. Ames cordially.  "I was just getting in
my eggs--but here's only about eight yet.  How many was you wantin'?"

"I want all you can find," said Mrs. Holmes.  "Two dozen, three
dozen--all I can carry."

"There's two hens layin' out--I'll go and look them up.  And I ain't
been in the woodshed chamber yet.  I'll go'n hunt.  You set right here
with my sister."  And Mrs. Ames bustled off.

"Pleasant view you have here," said Mrs. MacAvelly politely, while Mrs.
Holmes rocked and fanned herself.

"Pleasant!  Glad you think so, ma'am.  Maybe you city folks wouldn't
think so much of views if you had nothing else to look at!"

"What would you like to look at?"

"Folks!" said Mrs. Joyce briefly.  "Lots of folks!  Somethin' doin'."

"You'd like to Iive in the city?"

"Yes, ma'am--I would so!  I worked in the city once when I was a girl.
Waitress.  In a big restaurant.  I got to be cashier--in two years!  I
like the business!"

"And then you married a farmer?" suggested Mrs. Holmes.

"Yes, I did.  And I never was sorry, Mrs. Holmes.  David Joyce was a
mighty good man.  We was engaged before I left home--I was workin' to
help earn, so 't we could marry."

"There's plenty of work on a farm, isn't there?" Mrs. MacAvelly
inquired.

Mrs. Joyce's eager eyes kindled.  "There is _so!_" she agreed.  "Lots to
do.  And lots to manage!  We kept help then, and the farm hands, and the
children growin' up.  And some seasons we took boarders."

"Did you like that?"

"I did.  I liked it first rate.  I like lots of people, and to do for
'em.  The best time I ever had was one summer I ran a hotel."

"Ran a hotel!  How interesting!"

"Yes'm--it was interesting!  I had a cousin who kept a summer hotel up
here in the mountains a piece--and he was short-handed that summer and
got me to go up and help him out.  Then he was taken sick, and I had the
whole thing on my shoulders!  I just enjoyed it!  And the place cleared
more that summer'n it ever did!  He said 'twas owin' to his advantageous
buyin'.  Maybe 'twas!  But I could 'a bought more advantageous than he
did--I could a' told him that.  Point o' fact, I did tell him that--and
he wouldn't have me again."

"That was a pity!" said Mrs. Holmes.  "And I suppose if it wasn't for
your foot you would do that now--and enjoy it!"

"Of course I could!" protested Mrs. Joyce.  "Do it better 'n ever, city
or country!  But here I am, tied by the leg!  And dependent on my sister
and children!  It galls me terribly!"

Mrs. Holmes nodded sympathetically.  "You are very brave, Mrs. Joyce,"
she said.  "I admire your courage, and--" she couldn't say patience, so
she said, "cheerfulness."

Mrs. Ames came in with more eggs.  "Not enough, but some," she said, and
the visitors departed therewith.

Toward the end of the summer, Miss Podder at the Girls' Trade Union
Association, sweltering in the little office, was pleased to receive a
call from her friend, Mrs. MacAvelly.

"I'd no idea you were in town," she said.

"I'm not, officially," answered her visitor, "just stopping over between
visits.  It's hotter than I thought it would be, even on the upper west
side."

"Think what it is on the lower east side!" answered Miss Podder,
eagerly.  "Hot all day--and hot at night!  My girls do suffer so!  They
are so crowded!"

"How do the clubs get on?" asked Mrs. MacAvelly.  "Have your girls any
residence clubs yet?"

"No--nothing worth while.  It takes somebody to run it right, you know.
The girls can't; the people who work for money can't meet our wants--and
the people who work for love, don't work well as a rule."

Mrs. McAvelly smiled sympathetically.  "You're quite right about that,"
she said.  "But really--some of those 'Homes' are better than others,
aren't they?"

"The girls hate them," answered Miss Podder.  "They'd rather board--even
two or three in a room.  They like their independence.  You remember
Martha Joyce?"

Mrs. MacAvelly remembered.  "Yes," she said, "I do--I met her mother
this summer."

"She's a cripple, isn't she?" asked Miss Podder.  "Martha's told me
about her."

"Why, not exactly.  She's what a Westerner might call 'crippled up
some,' but she's livelier than most well persons."  And she amused her
friend with a vivid rehearsal of Mrs. Joyce's love of the city and her
former triumphs in restaurant and hotel.

"She'd be a fine one to run such a house for the girls, wouldn't she?"
suddenly cried Miss Podder.

"Why--if she could," Mrs. MacAvelly admitted slowly.

"_Could!_  Why not?  You say she gets about easily enough.  All she's
have to do is _manage,_ you see. She could order by 'phone and keep the
servants running!"

"I'm sure she'd like it," said Mrs. MacAvelly.  "But don't such things
require capital?"

Miss Podder was somewhat daunted.  "Yes--some; but I guess we could
raise it.  If we could find the right house!"

"Let's look in the paper," suggested her visitor.  "I've got a
_Herald._"

"There's one that reads all right," Miss Podder presently proclaimed.
"The location's good, and it's got a lot of rooms--furnished.  I suppose
it would cost too much."

Mrs. MacAvelly agreed, rather ruefully.

"Come," she said, "it's time to close here, surely.  Let's go and look
at that house, anyway.  It's not far."

They got their permit and were in the house very shortly.  "I remember
this place," said Miss Podder.  "It was for sale earlier in the summer."

It was one of those once spacious houses, not of "old," but at least of
"middle-aged" New York; with large rooms arbitrarily divided into
smaller ones.

"It's been a boarding-house, that's clear," said Mrs. MacAvelly.

"Why, of course," Miss Podder answered, eagerly plunging about and
examining everything.  "Anybody could see that!  But it's been done
over--most thoroughly.  The cellar's all whitewashed, and there's a new
furnace, and new range, and look at this icebox!"  It was an ice-closet,
as a matter of fact, of large capacity, and a most sanitary aspect.

"Isn't it too big?" Mrs. MacAvelly inquired.

"Not for a boarding-house, my dear," Miss Podder enthusiastically
replied.  "Why, they could buy a side of beef with that ice-box!  And
look at the extra ovens!  Did you ever see a place better furnished--for
what we want?  It looks as if it had been done on purpose!"

"It does, doesn't it?" said Mrs. MacAvelley.

Miss Podder, eager and determined, let no grass grow under her feet.
The rent of the place was within reason.

"If they had twenty boarders--and some "mealers," I believe it could be
done! she said.  "It's a miracle--this house.  Seems as if somebody had
done it just for us!"

*

Armed with a list of girls who would agree to come, for six and seven
dollars a week, Miss Podder made a trip to Willettville and laid the
matter before Martha's mother.

"What an outrageous rent!" said that lady.

"Yes--New York rents _are_ rather inconsiderate," Miss Podder admitted.
"But see, here's a guaranteed income if the girls stay--and I'm sure
they will; and if the cooking's good you could easily get table boarders
besides."

Mrs. Joyce hopped to the bureau and brought out a hard, sharp-pointed
pencil, and a lined writing tablet.

"Let's figger it out," said she.  "You say that house rents furnished at
$3,200.  It would take a cook and a chambermaid!"

"And a furnace man," said Miss Podder.  "They come to about fifty a
year.  The cook would be thirty a month, the maid twenty-five, if you
got first-class help, and you'd need it."

"That amounts to $710 altogether," stated Mrs. Joyce.

"Fuel and light and such things would be $200," Miss Podder estimated,
"and I think you ought to allow $200 more for breakage and extras
generally."

"That's $4,310 already," said Mrs. Joyce.

Then there's the food," Miss Podder went on.  "How much do you think it
would cost to feed twenty girls, two meals a day, and three Sundays?"

"And three more," Mrs. Joyce added, "with me, and the help,
twenty-three.  I could do it for $2.00 a week apiece."

"Oh!" said Miss Podder.  "_Could_ you?  At New York prices?"

"See me do it!" said Mrs. Joyce.

"That makes a total expense of $6,710 a year.  Now, what's the income,
ma'am?"

The income was clear--if they could get it.  Ten girls at $6.00 and ten
at $7.00 made $130.00 a week--$6,700.00 a year.

"There you are!" said Mrs. Joyce triumphantly.  "And the 'mealers'--if
my griddle-cakes don't fetch 'em I'm mistaken!  If I have ten--at $5.00
a week and clear $3.00 off 'em--that'll be another bit--$1,560.00 more.
Total income $8,320.00.  More'n one thousand clear!  Maybe I can feed
'em a little higher--or charge less!"

The two women worked together for an hour or so; Mrs. Ames drawn in
later with demands as to butter, eggs, and "eatin' chickens."

"There's an ice-box as big as a closet," said Miss Podder.

Mrs. Joyce smiled triumphantly.  "Good!" she said.  "I can buy my
critters of Judson here and have him freight 'em down.  I can get apples
here and potatoes, and lots of stuff."

"You'll need, probably, a little capital to start with," suggested Miss
Podder.  "I think the Association could--"

"It don't have to, thank you just the same," said Mrs. Joyce.  "I've got
enough in my stocking to take me to New York and get some fuel.
Besides, all my boarders is goin' to pay in advance--that's the one sure
way.  The mealers can buy tickets!"

Her eyes danced.  She fairly coursed about the room on her nimble
crutches.

"My!" she said, "it will seem good to have my girl to feed again."

*

The house opened in September, full of eager girls with large appetites
long unsatisfied.  The place was new-smelling, fresh-painted,
beautifully clean.  The furnishing was cheap, but fresh, tasteful, with
minor conveniences dear to the hearts of women.

The smallest rooms were larger than hall bedrooms, the big ones were
shared by friends.  Martha and her mother had a chamber with two beds
and space to spare!

The dining-room was very large, and at night the tables were turned into
"settles" by the wall and the girls could dance to the sound of a hired
pianola.  So could the "mealers," when invited; and there was soon a
waiting list of both sexes.

"I guess I can make a livin'," said Mrs. Joyce, "allowin' for bad
years."

"I don't understand how you feed us so well--for so little," said Miss
Podder, who was one of the boarders.

"'Sh!" said Mrs. Joyce, privately.  "Your breakfast don't really cost
more'n ten cents--nor your dinner fifteen--not the way I order!  Things
taste good 'cause they're _cooked_ good--that's all!"

"And you have no troubles with your help?"

"'Sh!" said Mrs. Joyce again, more privately.  "I work 'em hard--and pay
'em a bonus--a dollar a week extra, as long as they give satisfaction.
It reduces my profits some--but it's worth it!"

"It's worth it to us, I'm sure!" said Miss Podder.

Mrs. MacAvelly called one evening in the first week, with warm interest
and approval.  The tired girls were sitting about in comfortable rockers
and lounges, under comfortable lights, reading and sewing.  The untired
ones were dancing in the dining-room, to the industrious pianola, or
having games of cards in the parlor.

"Do you think it'll be a success?" she asked her friend.

"It _is_ a success!" Miss Podder triumphantly replied.  "I'm immensely
proud of it!"

"I should think you would be," aid Mrs. MacAvelly.

The doorbell rang sharply.

Mrs. Joyce was hopping through the hall at the moment, and promptly
opened it.

"Does Miss Martha Joyce board here?" inquired a gentleman.

"She does."

"I should like to see her," said he, handing in his card.

Mrs. Joyce read the card and looked at the man, her face setting in hard
lines.  She had heard that name before.

"Miss Joyce is engaged," she replied curtly, still holding the door.

He could see past her into the bright, pleasant rooms.  He heard the
music below, the swing of dancing feet, Martha's gay laugh from the
parlor.

The little lady on crutches blocked his path.

"Are you the housekeeper of this place?" he asked sharply.

"I'm more'n that!" she answered.  "I'm Martha's mother."

Mr. Basset concluded he would not wait.



FOR FEAR


For fear of prowling beasts at night
 They blocked the cave;
Women and children hid from sight,
 Men scarce more brave.

For fear of warrior's sword and spear
 They barred the gate;
Women and children lived in fear,
 Men lived in hate.

For fear of criminals to-day
 We lock the door;
Women and children still to stay
 Hid evermore.

Come out!  You need no longer hide!
 What fear ye now?
No wolf nor lion waits outside--
 Only a cow.

Come out!  The world approaches peace,
 War nears its end;
No warrior watches your release--
 Only a friend.

Come out!  The night of crime his fled--
 Day is begun;
Here is no criminal to dread--
 Only your son!

The world, half yours, demands your care,
 Waken, and come!
Make it a woman's world, safe, fair,
 Garden and home!



NURSERY-MINDEDNESS


Where do we get our first training in the field of common behavior, our
earliest and strongest impressions of ethics?

In the nursery, in the early environment of the little child, in the
daily influences that affect the opening mind; or, to put it in a phrase
hallowed by poetic imagery, "at our mother's knee."  We are accustomed
to think highly of these early influences.  Almost any man will say that
his mother taught him what was right--it was his own evil nature that
drove him wrong.  So believing, we perpetuate these influences unchanged
from age to age, and it is small wonder we think human nature to be
inherently perverse if it continues to show such poor results from such
good education.

Suppose for a moment we take down one more old idol, and look into his
record, examining the environment of the little child as dispassionately
as we would examine the environment of a college student.

The child is born into an atmosphere of personality, which is essential,
and reared continuously in that atmosphere, which is not so essential.
Owing to these early impressions; so deep and ineffaceable, he grows to
look at human life with a huge "I," and an almost as large "My Family,"
in his immediate foreground; so out of drawing as to throw the whole
world into false perspective, seen as a generality, dim, confused and
distant.

In this atmosphere of unbroken personality, he repeats continually the
mistakes of the early savage, the animistic tendency we should as a race
have long since outgrown.  The family with the male head was the great
hotbed of early religions.

In this primitive group, unchecked by any higher authority of king or
governor, arose ancestor-worship--that unnatural religion which erases
the laws of life and bids the chicken feed the hen--or rather the
rooster.  No matriarchal cult would have made that mistake.  The
patriarch owned his women, owned his children, owned all the property;
he gave and took away at his pleasure.  Therefore, looming vast in
unchecked pride, he erected sacrificial religions all his own, demanding
sons to perform sacred rites in his honor; and grew so inflated with
superiority that he thanked his patriarchal God and Father every day
that he was not born a woman.

This Personality has cast its shadow across heaven.  It has deified its
own traits and worships them.  Through blind and selfish eyes it has
mis-seen and misrepresented God, and forced dark dogmas on its children,
age after age.  Each child of us, though really born to the broad light
of a democratic age, is reared in the patriarchate.  Each child of us
sees the father, dispenser of benefits, arbiter and ruler of the family;
and, so reared, each child of us repeats from generation to generation
the mistakes of personality.

The basic law of the patriarchal system was obedience, and is yet.  The
child's first ethical lesson is in the verb "to obey."  Not with any
convincing instance of right or wrong, though life bristles with them,
but as the duty of submission.  He is not taught to observe, to relate,
to make his inference, to act, and to note results.  He is taught that
his one duty is not to think, observe, or experiment, but to do what he
is told.

This is a convenient habit for those in authority; but not conducive to
any true development of the ethical sense.  We are turned out into a
world of cause and effect, with no knowledge, no experience, no guide
whatever, but the painfully acquired habit of doing what some one else
tells us.  We are not taught to study right and wrong conduct, to
understand it, to see the wisdom of the one and the folly of the other.

The child's first notion of "being good" is either sheer inaction or
prompt submission.  What we call "a good baby" is one who does
absolutely nothing.  Here we have an explanation of the amazing inertia
of people in general; of the smug immobility of those shining lights
"the best people."  We all have been taught--rigorously taught in our
infancy--that to "keep quiet" was a virtue; and we keep quiet through
life.  This is one clear instance of our nursery-mindedness.

We are reared in a black and white world: sharp wrong,--to do almost
anything amusing, and particularly and most of all, To Disobey; sharp
right,--to do nothing whatever, and particularly and best of all, To
Obey.  We come out into a world that is all colors of the rainbow in
every shade and blending, where the things people tell us to do are
mostly wrong, and to do right requires the most strenuous and
independent activity.  Greatly are we hindered in the work of life
to-day by our mis-taught infancy.

In the narrow round of family life, the inevitable repetitions, the
natural ruts of usage, the child has forced upon him the conservatism he
should have every help to out-grow.  Habit uncriticized and unresisted;
convention an unquestioned good; these are the rules of the little
world.  How he hates it!  How he longs for something different--for
something to happen!  The world is full of differences and happenings,
but he is helpless to meet them--he has been only trained in narrow
routine.

The oldest status in life, that of serving woman, is about him in his
infancy.  That mother should do for him is right and natural, but why
should his mother be waiting on these other persons?  Why is she the
house-servant as well as the mother?  If she is but a fashionable person
in gay attire, he still has about him women servants.  He cannot think
as yet, but he accepts from daily contact this serving womanhood as
natural and right, grows up to demand it in his household and to rear
his children in its shadow; and so perpetuate from age to age the
patriarchal error.

Then deep into this infant soul sinks the iron weight of what we call
Discipline.  We women, having small knowledge of child-nature or
world-nature, never studying nature at all, but each girl-mother handed
on from nursery to nursery, a child teaching children, we undertake to
introduce the new soul to life!

We show him, as "life," the nursery, kitchen and parlor group in which
we live.  We try to teach him the behavior required by these
surroundings.  Two of the heaviest crosses to both the child and mother
lie in his bi- and tri-daily difficulties with clothing, and prolonged
initiation to the sacred mysteries of the table.  We seek, as best we
may, to bend the new soul visiting this world to a correct fulfilment of
the polite functions of our domestic shrine; and we succeed unhappily
well.  We rear a world of people who put manners before morals,
conventions before principles, conformity before initiative.  Sorely do
we strive with the new soul, to choke questionings and crush its
resistance.

"Why?" says the child, "Why?" protesting with might and main against the
mummery into which he is being forced.

"Because Mother says so!" is the reason given.  "Because you must obey!"
is the duty given; and to enforce the command comes punishment.

Punishment is a pitiful invention arbitrarily inserted in place of
consequence.  Its power is in giving pain.  Its appeal is to terror.
We, immovable and besotted in our ancient sanctuaries, deliberately give
pain to little children, deliberately arouse in them that curse of old
savagery, blind fear.  To compel behavior which we cannot explain even
to ourselves, to force the new wine of their young lives into the old
bottles of our traditional habits, we keep alive in the little child an
attitude of mind the whole world should seek to outgrow and forget
forever.

The ethics of the nursery does not give us laws to be learned and
understood; relations of cause and effect for instructive practice;
matters of general use and welfare not to know and practice which argues
a foolish ignorance.  It gives command purely arbitrary and
disconnected; their profit is not visible to the child; and their
penalties, while painfully conspicuous, bear no real relation to
offences.

Besides being arbitrary and disconnected, the penalties we give our
children have this alarming weakness--they are wholly contingent upon
discovery.  No whipped child is too young to learn that his whipping did
not follow on the act--unless his mother knew he did it.  Thus with
elaborate care, with trouble to ourselves and anguish to the child, we
develop in him the attitude of mind with which our criminals, big and
little, face the world--it is not what you do that matters--it is being
found out.  This is not the position of the thinking being--it is
nursery-mindedness.

Pain and terror we teach our babies, and also shame.  The child is pure,
innocent, natural.  One of the first efforts of nursery culture is to
smear that white page with our self-made foulness.  We labor
conscientiously and with patience, to teach our babies shame.  We
degrade the human body, we befoul the habits of nature, we desecrate
life, teaching evil and foolish falsehood to our defenceless little
children.  The "sex-taboos" of darkest savagery, the decencies and
indecencies of primitive convention, we have preserved throughout the
ages in our guarded temple of ancient idols, and in that atmosphere we
rear the child.

The heaviest drag on progress is the persistence of race-habits and
traditions, once natural and useful, but long since outgrown.  The main
stronghold of this body of tradition is in that uneducated, undeveloped,
unorganized, lingering rudiment of earlier social forms--the
woman-servant group of primitive industries, in which our children grow.

We have cried out against the crushing restriction of old religions;
and, going farther, have seen that these religions have their strongest
hold on the woman and the child.  It is here suggested that it is not
the religion that keeps down the woman and renews its grip on each new
generation of children, but that it is the degraded status of the woman
and her influence on the child which made possible such religions in the
first instance, and which accounts for their astonishing persistence in
modern times.

In the atmosphere of the nursery each child re-learns continually the
mental habits of a remote and lowly past.  His sense of duty is a
personal one, it is obligation; and justified when we attempt to justify
it by the beneficent services of the parent.  This parental religion
naturally pictures God as a parent--a father of course, and people as
his children.  We, as his children, are to love and serve and glorify
him, and he to take care of us, parentally.

Coming out into the world of which he has been taught nothing, the young
man finds no corroboration whatever for this theory.  He does not see
the alleged grounds of the religious views given him, and so he drops
his religion altogether.

If he had early been shown God in a thousand beautiful common instances,
as ever-present, unescapable, and beneficent Law--the sure, sound
constant force of life, then he would find the same God still visibly at
work in the world of love and labor, and not lose his religion by
outgrowing his nursery.

Instead of personal gratitude for personal service as a cause for good
behavior, he should be shown that his parents and teachers serve him and
other children because so best is the human race improved; and that he,
and the other children, owe their life's service to the same great body,
to the human race.  This ideal would need neither patching nor
enlargement, but would last unbroken through life.

Our nursery-bred consciences suffer personally for personal sins, with
morbid keenness, but are stone blocks of indifference to the collective
sins which are the major evils of life to-day.  A man may pointed out to
us as a wholesale malefactor, a dealer in bad meat, a poisoner of the
public mind through a degraded press, an extortioner, liar, doer of
uncounted evil; we reply that he is a "moral man"--that his personal
relations are excellent; and, if one continues to complain, we say,
"What has he done to you?"

Personality is the limit of our moral sense, the steady check to growth
in ethical understanding, as it is in economics, and in art.  The normal
growth of the human soul to-day is into a wide, fluent, general relation
with mankind; and a deeper more satisfying and _workable_ conception of
God than we ever knew before.  In our nursery-mindedness we face the
problems of civic morality, catching visible offenders and shutting them
in a closet, sending them supperless to bed, hurting and depriving them
in various ways, as blindly, stupidly and unprofitably as a woman spanks
her child.

Children reared in a democratic, scientific, broadly educative
atmosphere, would grow up able to see the absurdity of our primitive
institutions--but such an atmosphere does not originate in and cannot be
brought into the nursery.

As an inevitable reaction from nursery-government, the child finds
joyous relief in sheer riot and self-will.  The behavior of our boys in
college shows well their previous uneducated and ill-educated condition.
 The persistence of "hazing" among twentieth century persons old enough
to go to school, shows the weakness of nursery culture.  This is a
custom prevalent among low savage races, known as "initiation by
torture."  Its reason--if it ever had any--was to outdo nature's
cruelest and most wasteful methods, and to prepare for a life of
struggle and pain by a worse experience to begin with.  About the age of
puberty, when body and mind are both sensitive, this pleasant rite took
place.  Those who survived it, habituated to cruelty and unreason, were
thereby fitted to live cruel and unreasonable lives--and did so.

Race-customs, as old as this, die hard.  They have to be understood,
condemned, opposed, and educated out of us.  Our small children get no
such education.  They, as a class, get no influence tending to uplift
and develop their sociological status.  Clever and "well-trained" they
may be; well-loved and well--at least, expensively-dressed.  But as soon
as they escape the nursery bounds, out pops the primeval savage,
unrestrained.  These young students, with their revolting practices,
ought to know that they are in the social stage with cannibalism,
voudooism, fetich-worship; and to be hot with shame at their condition.
It is the race's babyhood,--a drooling, fumbling, infantile
folly--manifested almost to adult age.  That it endures is due to our
nursery-mindedness.

About the little child should cluster and concentrate the noblest forces
of our latest days, our highest wisdom and deepest experience, our most
subtle skill.  Such wisdom, skill and experience do not exist in the
average young woman, albeit a mother; still less in her low-class,
ignorant serving-maids.  A wider, deeper love would desire better
environment for the child, more foresight and more power would provide
it.  But our love, though intense, is narrow and largely childish--the
mother has not long left the influence of her own nursery; and neither
wisdom nor power grew there.  Some day our women will see this.  They
will understand at last what womanhood is for, and the power and glory
of civilized motherhood.  They will see that the educative influences of
the first few years are pre-eminently important, and prepare for them as
assiduously as they prepare to give a college education to older
children.

The baby is a new human soul, learning Life.  He should have about him
from the first, Truth and Order, with a sequence of impressions which
great minds have labored to prepare.  He should have his mother's love,
his father's care, his brother's and sister's society; his home's
seclusion; and he should also have from his earliest days, a place to
share with many other children, and the love and care and service of
such guides and teachers as are most fit to help the growing of the
world.

We have gone far indeed in those things we learn after we leave home.
In our trades and professions, our arts and sciences, in the broad
avenues of the world's life, we have made great progress--albeit
hampered always to some extent by our nursery-mindedness.

But in our own personal relations we are stagnant, hide-bound, inert.
Our littleness, our morbidness, our self-consciousness, our narrowness,
our short-sightedness, our oppressive, insistent, omnipresent
personality--all these still crush us down.  Bumptious with a good
child's complacency, grieving with a bad child's remorse, indifferent
and rebellious as ill-trained children are, we live unawakened among
social laws.  We enjoy when we can; we suffer much--and needlessly; but
we seem incapable of taking hold of our large world-questions and
settling them.

It is only an apparent limitation.  We are quite capable were we but
taught so.  What hinders us is Nursery-Mindedness.



A VILLAGE OF FOOLS


There was a certain village, a little village on a little stream; and
the inhabitants thereof were Fools.

By profession they were tillers of the soil; and they kept beasts,
beasts of burden, and beasts to furnish meat.  They lived upon the
products of their tillage, and upon the beasts, and upon fish from the
stream.

The Wise said, "This is a good village.  There is land to furnish food,
and beasts in plenty, and a good stream flowing steadily from the
tree-clothed hills.  These people should prosper well."

They did not know that the people of the village were Fools; Utter
Fools.  Observe now their Foolishness!  They cut down the trees of the
hills to make their fires withal; many and great fires, without stint or
hindrance; and presently there was no more any forest upon the hills to
cover them.  Then the moist breath of the cloud-building forest was
dried away; and the thick wet sponge about the roots of the forest was
dried away; and the snow slid down the hills as it slides down steep
roof gables; and the rain ran down the narrow valleys as it runs down
gutter pipes; and the village was swept by floods in flood time, and lay
parched and thirsty in the dry season.  And the people of the village
called the flood an Act of God, and they called the drought an Act of
God; for they were Fools.

Their fields they tilled continuously, for they needs must eat;
gathering from the good ground year after year, and generation after
generation, till the ground became sour and stale, and was bad ground
and bore no fruit.

"Surely," said the Wise, "they will gather from the stables of their
beasts and from the village that which shall enrich their soil and make
it bear fruit again."

They did not know that the people of the Village were Fools.

Thus did they with their beasts.  They kept them thick in their village;
draught animals and burden-bearers; and from the defiled streets arose a
Plague of Flies, and tormented the people, so that they fell sick of
divers diseases.  And they themselves crowded together ever more
thickly, till all the village became unsavory and unfit for human
habitation.  Then they arose, wagging their heads sagaciously; and with
vast labor and expense they gathered together from their stables and
their habitations all that which should enrich the soil and produce
fruit again; and they poured it carefully into the stream.  Now this was
the stream from which they drank; and when they drank their diluted
diseases they fell sick anew, and many died.

Also the fish fed upon this filth, and they also absorbed diseases; and
the people fed upon the fish which had fed upon the filth, and again
fell sick, and many died.

And those who died they carefully wrapped up in many coverings and laid
in the ground--them and their diseases with them--that the seeds thereof
might be fostered eternally, and continually came forth anew.

But the Wise burned their dead in clean fire, cherishing their memories
in their hearts, but not their slowly deteriorating remains in the dark
earth.  And the wise kept their forests as a wild garden, planting as
well as reaping; having wood therefrom at need, and always the green
beauty and the cool shade, the moist winds and carpet of held water over
the hill slopes.

Their streams were pure and steady, tree shadowed and grass bordered
from end to end; for a tree beareth food as well as a field, and is
planted in a moment and the young tree cometh up as the old tree dieth.

And their fields they fed continually, so that they bore more rather
than less from year to year, and they prospered and did not die of
hand-made diseases.

But they knew not their own wisdom, for these things it seemed to them
that even Fools might see, and do accordingly.

Neither did the Fools know their own foolishness.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER VI.

THE CYNOSURE.


It's a singular thing that the commonest place
 Is the hardest to properly fill;
That the labor imposed on a full half the race
 Is so seldom performed with good will--
 To say nothing of knowledge or skill!

What we ask of all women, we stare at in one,
 And tribute of wonderment bring;
If this task of the million is once fitly done
 We all hold our hands up and sing!
 It's really a singular thing!


Isabel Porne was a cautious woman, and made no acclaim over her new
acquisition until its value was proven.  Her husband also bided his
time; and when congratulated on his improved appearance and air of
contentment, merely vouchsafed that his wife had a new girl who could
cook.

To himself he boasted that he had a new wife who could love--so cheerful
and gay grew Mrs. Porne in the changed atmosphere of her home.

"It is remarkable, Edgar," she said, dilating repeatedly on the peculiar
quality of their good fortune.  "It's not only good cooking, and good
waiting, and a clean house--cleaner than I ever saw one before; and it's
not only the quietness, and regularity and economy--why the bills have
gone down more than a third!"

"Yes--even I noticed that," he agreed.

"But what I enjoy the most is the _atmosphere,_" she continued.  "When I
have to do the work, the house is a perfect nightmare to me!"  She
leaned forward from her low stool, her elbows on her knees, her chin in
her hands, and regarded him intently.

"Edgar!  You know I love you.  And I love my baby--I'm no unfeeling
monster!  But I can tell you frankly that if I'd had any idea of what
housework was like I'd never have given up architecture to try it."

"Lucky for me you hadn't!" said he fondly.  "I know it's been hard for
you, little girl.  I never meant that you should give up
architecture--that's a business a woman could carry on at home I
thought, the designing part anyway.  There's your 'drawing-room' and all
your things--"

"Yes," she said, with reminiscent bitterness, "there they are--and there
they might have stayed, untouched--if Miss Bell hadn't come!"

"Makes you call her "Miss Bell" all the time, does she?"

Mrs. Porne laughed.  "Yes.  I hated it at first, but she asked if I
could give her any real reason why the cook should be called by her
first name more than the seamstress or governess.  I tried to say that
it was shorter, but she smiled and said that in this case it was
longer!--Her name is Diantha--I've seen it on letters.  And it is one
syllable longer.  Anyhow I've got used to Miss Bell now."

"She gets letters often?"

"Yes--very often--from Topolaya where she came from.  I'm afraid she's
engaged."  Mrs. Porne sighed ruefully.

"I don't doubt it!" said Mr. Porne.  "That would account for her six
months' arrangement!  Well, my dear--make hay while the sun shines!"

"I do!" she boasted.  "Whole stacks!  I've had a seamstress in, and got
all my clothes in order and the baby's.  We've had lot of dinner-parties
and teas as you know--all my "social obligations" are cleared off!
We've had your mother for a visit, and mine's coming now--and I wasn't
afraid to have either of them!  There's no fault to be found with my
housekeeping now!  And there are two things better than that--yes,
three."

"The best thing is to see you look so young and handsome and happy
again," said her husband, with a kiss.

"Yes--that's one.  Another is that now I feel so easy and lighthearted I
can love you and baby--as--as I _do!_  Only when I'm tired and
discouraged I can't put my hand on it somehow.

He nodded sympathetically.  "I know, dear," he said.  "I feel that way
myself--sometimes.  What's the other?"

"Why that's best of aIl!" she cried triumphantly.  "I can Work again!
When Baby's asleep I get hours at a time; and even when he's awake I've
fixed a place where he can play--and I can draw and plan--just as I used
to--_better_ than I used to!"

"And that is even more to you than loving?" he asked in a quiet
inquiring voice.

"It's more because it means _both!_"  She leaned to him, glowing, "Don't
you see?  First I had the work and loved it.  Then you came--and I loved
you--better!  Then Baby came and I loved him--best?  I don't know--you
and baby are all one somehow."

There was a brief interim and then she drew back, blushing richly.  "Now
stop--I want to explain.  When the housework got to be such a
nightmare--and I looked forward to a whole lifetime of it and _no_
improvement; then I just _ached_ for my work--and couldn't do it!  And
then--why sometimes dear, I just wanted to run away!  Actually!  From
_both_ of you!--you see, I spent five years studying--I was a _real_
architect--and it did hurt to see it go.  And now--O now I've got It and
You too, darling!  _And_ the Baby!--O I'm so happy!"

"Thanks to the Providential Miss Bell," said he.  "If she'll stay I'll
pay her anything!"

The months went by.

Peace, order, comfort, cleanliness and economy reigned in the Porne
household, and the lady of the house blossomed into richer beauty and
happiness; her contentment marred only by a sense of flying time.

Miss Bell fulfilled her carefully specified engagement to the letter;
rested her peaceful hour in the morning; walked and rode in the
afternoon; familiarized herself with the length and breadth of the town;
and visited continuously among the servants of the neighborhood,
establishing a large and friendly acquaintance.  If she wore rubber
gloves about the rough work, she paid for them herself; and she washed
and ironed her simple and pretty costumes herself--with the result that
they stayed pretty for surprising periods.

She wrote letters long and loving, to Ross daily; to her mother twice a
week; and by the help of her sister's authority succeeded in maintaining
a fairly competent servant in her deserted place.

"Father was bound he wouldn't," her sister wrote her; "but I stood right
up to him, I can now I'm married!--and Gerald too--that he'd no right to
take it out of mother even if he was mad with you.  He made a fuss about
your paying for the girl--but that was only showing off--_he_ couldn't
pay for her just now--that's certain.  And she does very well--a good
strong girl, and quite devoted to mother."  And then she scolded
furiously about her sister's "working out."

Diantha knew just how hard it was for her mother.  She had faced all
sides of the question before deciding.

"Your mother misses you badly, of course," Ross wrote her.  "I go in as
often as I can and cheer her up a bit.  It's not just the work--she
misses you.  By the way--so do I."  He expressed his views on her new
employment.

Diantha used to cry over her letters quite often.  But she would put
them away, dry her eyes, and work on at the plans she was maturing, with
grim courage.  "It's hard on them now," she would say to herself.  "Its
hard on me--some.  But we'll all be better off because of it, and not
only us--but everybody!"

Meanwhile the happy and unhappy households of the fair town buzzed in
comment and grew green with envy.

In social circles and church circles and club circles, as also in
domestic circles, it was noised abroad that Mrs. Edgar Porne had "solved
the servant question."  News of this marvel of efficiency and propriety
was discussed in every household, and not only so but in barber-shops
and other downtown meeting places mentioned.  Servants gathered it at
dinner-tables; and Diantha, much amused, regathered it from her new
friends among the servants.


Does she keep on just the same?" asked little Mrs. Ree of Mrs. Porne in
an awed whisper.

"Just the same if not better.  I don't even order the meals now, unless
I want something especial.  She keeps a calendar of what we've had to
eat, and what belongs to the time of year, prices and things.  When I
used to ask her to suggest (one does, you know: it is so hard to think
up a variety!), she'd always be ready with an idea, or remind me that we
had had so and so two days before, till I asked her if she'd like to
order, and she said she'd be willing to try, and now I just sit down to
the table without knowing what's going to be there."

"But I should think that would interfere with your sense of freedom,"
said Mrs. Ellen A Dankshire, "A woman should be mistress of her own
household."

"Why I am!  I order whenever I specially want anything.  But she really
does it more--more scientifically.  She has made a study of it.  And the
bills are very much lower."

"Well, I think you are the luckiest woman alive!" sighed Mrs. Ree.  "I
wish I had her!"

Many a woman wished she had her, and some, calling when they knew Mrs.
Porne was out, or descending into their own kitchens of an evening when
the strange Miss Bell was visiting "the help," made flattering
propositions to her to come to them.  She was perfectly polite and
agreeable in manner, but refused all blandishments.

"What are you getting at your present place--if I may ask?" loftily
inquired the great Mrs. Thaddler, ponderous and beaded.

"There is surely no objection to your asking, madam," she replied
politely.  "Mrs. Porne will not mind telling you, I am sure."

"Hm!" said the patronizing visitor, regarding her through her lorgnette.
 "Very good.  Whatever it is I'll double it.  When can you come?"

"My engagement with Mrs. Porne is for six months," Diantha answered,
"and I do not wish to close with anyone else until that time is up.
Thank you for your offer just the same."

"Peculiarly offensive young person!" said Mrs. Thaddler to her husband.
"Looks to me like one of these literary imposters.  Mrs. Porne will
probably appear in the magazines before long."

Mr. Thaddler instantly conceived a liking for the young person, "sight
unseen."

Diantha acquired quite a list of offers; places open to her as soon as
she was free; at prices from her present seven dollars up to the
proposed doubling.

"Fourteen dollars a week and found!--that's not so bad," she meditated.
"That would mean over $650 clear in a year!  It's a wonder to me girls
don't try it long enough to get a start at something else.  With even
two or three hundred ahead--and an outfit--it would be easier to make
good in a store or any other way.  Well--I have other fish to fry!"

So she pursued her way; and, with Mrs. Porne's permission--held a sort
of girl's club in her spotless kitchen one evening a week during the
last three months of her engagement.  It was a "Study and Amusement
Club."  She gave them short and interesting lessons in arithmetic, in
simple dressmaking, in easy and thorough methods of housework.  She gave
them lists of books, referred them to articles in magazines, insidiously
taught them to use the Public Library.

They played pleasant games in the second hour, and grew well acquainted.
 To the eye or ear of any casual visitor it was the simplest and most
natural affair, calculated to "elevate labor" and to make home happy.

Diantha studied and observed.  They brought her their poor confidences,
painfully similar.  Always poverty--or they would not be there.  Always
ignorance, or they would not stay there.  Then either incompetence in
the work, or inability to hold their little earnings--or both; and
further the Tale of the Other Side--the exactions and restrictions of
the untrained mistresses they served; cases of withheld wages; cases of
endless requirements; cases of most arbitrary interference with their
receiving friends and "followers," or going out; and cases, common
enough to be horrible, of insult they could only escape by leaving.

"It's no wages, of course--and no recommendation, when you leave like
that--but what else can a girl do, if she's honest?"

So Diantha learned, made friends and laid broad foundations.

The excellence of her cocking was known to many, thanks to the weekly
"entertainments."  No one refused.  No one regretted acceptance.  Never
had Mrs. Porne enjoyed such a sense of social importance.

All the people she ever knew called on her afresh, and people she never
knew called on her even more freshly.  Not that she was directly
responsible for it.  She had not triumphed cruelly over her less happy
friends; nor had she cried aloud on the street corners concerning her
good fortune.  It was not her fault, nor, in truth anyone's.  But in a
community where the "servant question" is even more vexed than in the
country at large, where the local product is quite unequal to the
demand, and where distance makes importation an expensive matter, the
fact of one woman's having, as it appeared, settled this vexed question,
was enough to give her prominence.

Mrs. Ellen A. Dankshire, President of the Orchardina Home and Culture
Club, took up the matter seriously.

"Now Mrs. Porne," said she, settling herself vigorously into a
comfortable chair, "I just want to talk the matter over with you, with a
view to the club.  We do not know how long this will last--"

"Don't speak of it!" said Mrs. Porne.

"--and it behooves us to study the facts while we have them."

"So much is involved!" said little Mrs. Ree, the Corresponding
Secretary, lifting her pale earnest face with the perplexed fine lines
in it.  "We are all so truly convinced of the sacredness of the home
duties!"

"Well, what do you want me to do?" asked their hostess.

"We must have that remarkable young woman address our club!" Mrs.
Dankshire announced.  "It is one case in a thousand, and must be
studied!"

"So noble of her!" said Mrs. Ree.  "You say she was really a
school-teacher?  Mrs. Thaddler has put it about that she is one of these
dreadful writing persons--in disguise!"

"O no," said Mrs. Porne.  "She is perfectly straightforward about it,
and had the best of recommendations.  She was a teacher, but it didn't
agree with her health, I believe."

"Perhaps there is a story to it!" Mrs. Ree advanced; but Mrs. Dankshire
disagreed with her flatly.

"The young woman has a theory, I believe, and she is working it out.  I
respect her for it.  Now what we want to ask you, Mrs. Porne, is this:
do you think it would make any trouble for you--in the household
relations, you know--if we ask her to read a paper to the Club?  Of
course we do not wish to interfere, but it is a remarkable
opportunity--very.  You know the fine work Miss Lucy Salmon has done on
this subject; and Miss Frances Kellor.  You know how little data we
have, and how great, how serious, a question it is daily becoming!  Now
here is a young woman of brains and culture who has apparently grappled
with the question; her example and influence must not be lost!  We must
hear from her.  The public must know of this."

"Such an ennobling example!" murmured Mrs. Ree.  "It might lead numbers
of other school-teachers to see the higher side of the home duties!"

"Furthermore," pursued Mrs. Dankshire, "this has occured to me.  Would
it not be well to have our ladies bring with them to the meeting the
more intelligent of their servants; that they might hear and see
the--the dignity of household labor--so ably set forth?

"Isn't it--wouldn't that be a--an almost dangerous experiment?" urged
Mrs. Ree; her high narrow forehead fairly creped with little wrinkles:
"She might--say something, you know, that they might--take advantage
of!"

"Nonsense, my dear!" replied Mrs. Dankshire.  She was very fond of Mrs.
Ree, but had small respect for her judgment.  "What could she say?  Look
at what she does!  And how beautifully--how perfectly--she does it!  I
would wager now--_may_ I try an experiment Mrs. Porne?" and she stood
up, taking out her handkerchief.

"Certainly," said Mrs. Porne, "with pleasure!  You won't find any!"

Mrs. Dankshire climbed heavily upon a carefully selected chair and
passed her large clean plain-hemmed handkerchief across the top of a
picture.

"I knew it!" she proclaimed proudly from her eminence, and showed the
cloth still white.  "That," she continued in ponderous descent, "that is
Knowledge, Ability and Conscience!"

"I don't see how she gets the time!" breathed Mrs. Ree, shaking her head
in awed amazement, and reflecting that she would not dare trust Mrs.
Dankshire's handkerchief on her picture tops.

"We must have her address the Club," the president repeated.  "It will
do worlds of good.  Let me see--a paper on--we might say 'On the True
Nature of Domestic Industry.'  How does that strike you, Mrs. Ree?"

"Admirable!" said Mrs. Ree.  "So strong! so succinct."

"That certainly covers the subject," said Mrs. Porne.  "Why don't you
ask her?"

"We will.  We have come for that purpose.  But we felt it right to ask
you about it first," said Mrs. Dankshire.

"Why I have no control over Miss Bell's movements, outside of working
hours," answered Mrs. Porne.  "And I don't see that it would make any
difference to our relations.  She is a very self-poised young woman, but
extremely easy to get along with.  And I'm sure she could write a
splendid paper.  You'd better ask her, I think."

"Would you call her in?" asked Mrs. Dankshire, "or shall we go out to
the kitchen?"

"Come right out; I'd like you to see how beautifully she keeps
everything."

The kitchen was as clean as the parlor; and as prettily arranged.  Miss
Bell was making her preparation for lunch, and stopped to receive the
visitors with a serenely civil air--as of a country store-keeper.

"I am very glad to meet you, Miss Bell, very glad indeed," said Mrs.
Dankshire, shaking hands with her warmly.  "We have at heard so much of
your beautiful work here, and we admire your attitude!  Now would you be
willing to give a paper--or a talk--to our club, the Home and Culture
Club, some Wednesday, on The True Nature of Domestic Industry?"

Mrs. Ree took Miss Bell's hand with something of the air of a Boston
maiden accosting a saint from Hindoostan.  "If you only would!" she
said.  "I am sure it would shed light on this great subject!"

Miss Bell smiled at them both and looked at Mrs. Porne inquiringly.

"I should be delighted to have you do it," said her employer.  "I know
it would be very useful."

"Is there any date set?" asked Miss Bell.

"Any Wednesday after February," said Mrs. Dankshire.

"Well--I will come on the first Wednesday in April.  If anything should
happen to prevent I will let you know in good season, and if you should
wish to postpone or alter the program--should think better of the
idea--just send me word.  I shall not mind in the least."

They went away quite jubilant, Miss Bell's acceptance was announced
officially at the next club-meeting, and the Home and Culture Club felt
that it was fulfilling its mission.



[Untitled]


I gave myself to God.--
 With humility and contrition,
 In sacrifice and submission.
"Take me!  Do not refuse me!
Order me--govern me--use me!
 Nothing I ask for my own--
 I pray to be thine alone!--"
  And God smiled.

I gave myself to mankind.--
 With sorrow and sympathy deep,
 With pity that would not sleep.
"To serve you and save you, brothers!
To give my life for the others!
 I ask no price--no place--
 I seek but to help the race!--"
  And God smiled.

I gave myself to Myself.--
 In the knowledge that opens power;
 In the truth's unfolding hour;
In the glory of service free;
The joy that such life can be:--
 My life--that is never done!
 For my neighbor and I are One!--
  And God smiled.



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


VI.

GAMES AND SPORTS


One of the sharpest distinctions both between the essential characters
and the artificial positions of men and women, is in the matter of games
and sports.  By far the greater proportion of them are essentially
masculine, and as such alien to women; while from those which are
humanly interesting, women have been largely debarred by their arbitrary
restrictions.

The play instinct is common to girls and boys alike; and endures in some
measure throughout life.  As other young animals express their abounding
energies in capricious activities similar to those followed in the
business of living, so small children gambol, physically, like lambs and
kids; and as the young of higher kinds of animals imitate in their play
the more complex activities of their elders, so do children imitate
whatever activities they see about them.  In this field of playing there
is no sex.

Similarly in adult life healthy and happy persons, men and women,
naturally express surplus energy in various forms of sport.  We have
here one of the most distinctively human manifestations.  The great
accumulation of social energy, and the necessary limitations of one kind
of work, leave a human being tired of one form of action, yet still
uneasy for lack of full expression; and this social need has been met by
our great safety valve of games and sports.

In a society of either sex, or in a society without sex, there would
still be both pleasure and use in games; they are vitally essential to
human life.  In a society of two sexes, wherein one has dictated all the
terms of life, and the other has been confined to an extremely limited
fraction of human living, we may look to see this great field of
enjoyment as disproportionately divided.

It is not only that we have reduced the play impulse in women by
restricting them to one set of occupations, and overtaxing their
energies with mother-work and housework combined; and not only that by
our androcentric conventions we further restrict their amusements; but
we begin in infancy, and forcibly differentiate their methods of play
long before any natural distinction would appear.

Take that universal joy the doll, or puppet, as an instance.  A small
imitation of a large known object carries delight to the heart of a
child of either sex.  The worsted cat, the wooden horse, the little
wagon, the tin soldier, the wax doll, the toy village, the "Noah's Ark,"
the omnipresent "Teddy Bear," any and every small model of a real thing
is a delight to the young human being.  Of all things the puppet is the
most intimate, the little image of another human being to play with.
The fancy of the child, making endless combinations with these visible
types, plays as freely as a kitten in the leaves; or gravely carries out
some observed forms of life, as the kitten imitates its mother's
hunting.

So far all is natural and human.

Now see our attitude toward child's play--under a masculine culture.
Regarding women only as a sex, and that sex as manifest from infancy, we
make and buy for our little girls toys suitable to this view.  Being
females--which means mothers, we must needs provide them with babies
before they cease to be babies themselves; and we expect their play to
consist in an imitation of maternal cares.  The doll, the puppet, which
interests all children, we have rendered as an eternal baby; and we
foist them upon our girl children by ceaseless millions.

The doll, as such, is dear to the little boy as well as the girl, but
not as a baby.  He likes his jumping-jack, his worsted Sambo, often a
genuine rag-doll; but he is discouraged and ridiculed in this.  We do
not expect the little boy to manifest a father's love and care for an
imitation child--but we do expect the little girl to show maternal
feelings for her imitation baby.  It has not yet occurred to us that
this is monstrous.

Little children should not be expected to show, in painful precocity,
feelings which ought never to be experienced till they come at the
proper age.  Our kittens play at cat-sports, little Tom and Tabby
together; but little Tabby does not play she is a mother!

Beyond the continuous dolls and their continuous dressing, we provide
for our little girls tea sets and kitchen sets, doll's houses, little
work-boxes--the imitation tools of their narrow trades.  For the boy
there is a larger choice.  We make for them not only the essentially
masculine toys of combat--all the enginery of mimic war; but also the
models of human things, like boats, railroads, wagons.  For them, too,
are the comprehensive toys of the centuries, the kite, the top, the
ball.  As the boy gets old enough to play the games that require skill,
he enters the world-lists, and the little sister, left inside, with her
everlasting dolls, learns that she is "only a girl," and "mustn't play
with boys--boys are so rough!"  She has her doll and her tea set.  She
"plays house."  If very active she may jump rope, in solitary
enthusiasm, or in combination of from two to four.  Her brother is
playing games.  From this time on he plays the games of the world.  The
"sporting page" should be called "the Man's Page" as that array of
recipes, fashions and cheap advice is called "the Woman's Page."

One of the immediate educational advantages of the boy's position is
that he learns "team work."  This is not a masculine characteristic, it
is a human one; a social power.  Women are equally capable of it by
nature; but not by education.  Tending one's imitation baby is not
team-work; nor is playing house.  The little girl is kept forever within
the limitations of her mother's "sphere" of action; while the boy learns
life, and fancies that his new growth is due to his superior sex.

Now there are certain essential distinctions in the sexes, which would
manifest themselves to some degree even in normally reared children; as
for instance the little male would be more given to fighting and
destroying; the little female more to caring for and constructing
things.

"Boys are so destructive!" we say with modest pride--as if it was in
some way a credit to them.  But early youth is not the time to display
sex distinction; and they should be discouraged rather than approved.

The games of the world, now the games of men, easily fall into two broad
classes--games of skill and games of chance.

The interest and pleasure in the latter is purely human, and as such is
shared by the two sexes even now.  Women, in the innocent beginnings or
the vicious extremes of this line of amusement, make as wild gamblers as
men.  At the races, at the roulette wheel, at the bridge table, this is
clearly seen.

In games of skill we have a different showing.  Most of these are
developed by and for men; but when they are allowed, women take part in
them with interest and success.  In card games, in chess, checkers, and
the like, in croquet and tennis, they play, and play well if
well-trained.  Where they fall short in so many games, and are so wholly
excluded in others, is not for lack of human capacity, but for lack of
masculinity.  Most games are male.  In their element of desire to win,
to get the prize, they are male; and in their universal attitude of
competition they are male, the basic spirit of desire and of combat
working out through subtle modern forms.

There is something inherently masculine also in the universal dominance
of the projectile in their games.  The ball is the one unescapable
instrument of sport.  From the snapped marble of infancy to the flying
missile of the bat, this form endures.  To send something forth with
violence; to throw it, bat it, kick it, shoot it; this impulse seems to
date back to one of the twin forces of the universe--the centrifugal and
centripetal energies between which swing the planets.

The basic feminine impulse is to gather, to put together, to construct;
the basic masculine impulse to scatter, to disseminate, to destroy.  It
seems to give pleasure to a man to bang something and drive it from him;
the harder he hits it and the farther it goes the better pleased he is.

Games of this sort will never appeal to women.  They are not wrong; not
necessarily evil in their place; our mistake is in considering them as
human, whereas they are only masculine.

Play, in the childish sense is an expression of previous habit; and to
be studied in that light.  Play in the educational sense should be
encouraged or discouraged to develop desired characteristics.  This we
know, and practice; only we do it under androcentric canons; confining
the girl to the narrow range we consider proper for women, and assisting
the boy to cover life with the expression of masculinity, when we should
be helping both to a more human development.

Our settled conviction that men are people--the people, and that
masculine qualities are the main desideratam in life, is what keeps up
this false estimate of the value of our present games.  Advocates of
football, for instance, proudly claim that it fits a man for life.
Life--from the wholly male point of view--is a battle, with a prize.  To
want something beyond measure, and to fight to get--that is the simple
proposition.  This view of life finds its most naive expression in
predatory warfare; and still tends to make predatory warfare of the
later and more human processes of industry.  Because they see life in
this way they imagine that skill and practice in the art of fighting,
especially in collective fighting, is so valuable in our modern life.
This is an archaism which would be laughable if it were not so dangerous
in its effects.

The valuable processes to-day are those of invention, discovery, all
grades of industry, and, most especially needed, the capacity for honest
service and administration of our immense advantages.  These are not
learned on the football field.  This spirit of desire and combat may be
seen further in all parts of this great subject.  It has developed into
a cult of sportsmanship; so universally accepted among men as of
superlative merit as to quite blind them to other standards of judgment.

In the Cook-Peary controversy of 1909, this canon was made manifest.
Here, one man had spent a lifetime in trying to accomplish something;
and at the eleventh hour succeeded.  Then, coming out in the rich
triumph long deferred, he finds another man, of character well known to
him, impudently and falsely claiming that he had done it first.  Mr.
Peary expressed himself, quite restrainedly and correctly, in regard to
the effrontery and falsity of this claim--and all the country rose up
and denounced him as "unsportsmanlike!"

Sport and the canons of sport are so dominant in the masculine mind that
what they considered a deviation from these standards was of far more
importance than the question of fact involved; to say nothing of the
moral obliquity of one lying to the whole world, for money; and that at
the cost of another's hard-won triumph.

If women had condemned the conduct of one or the other as "not good
house-wifery," this would have been considered a most puerile comment.
But to be "unsportsmanlike" is the unpardonable sin.

Owing to our warped standards we glaringly misjudge the attitude of the
two sexes in regard to their amusements.  Of late years more women than
ever before have taken to playing cards; and some, unfortunately, play
for money.  A steady stream of comment and blame follows upon this.  The
amount of card playing among men--and the amount of money lost and won,
does not produce an equivalent comment.

Quite aside from this one field of dissipation, look at the share of
life, of time, of strength, of money, given by men to their wide range
of recreation.  The primitive satisfaction of hunting and fishing they
maintain at enormous expense.  This is the indulgence of a most
rudimentary impulse; pre-social and largely pre-human, of no service
save as it affects bodily health, and of a most deterring influence on
real human development.  Where hunting and fishing is of real human
service, done as a means of livelihood, it is looked down upon like any
other industry; it is no longer "sport."

The human being kills to eat, or to sell and eat from the returns; he
kills for the creature's hide or tusks, for use of some sort; or to
protect his crops from vermin, his flocks from depredation; but the
sportsman kills for the gratification of a primeval instinct, and under
rules of an arbitrary cult.  "Game" creatures are his prey; bird, beast
or fish that is hard to catch, that requires some skill to slay; that
will give him not mere meat and bones, but "the pleasure of the chase."

The pleasure of the chase is a very real one.  It is exemplified, in its
broad sense in children's play.  The running and catching games, the
hiding and finding games, are always attractive to our infancy, as they
are to that of cubs and kittens.  But the long continuance of this
indulgence among mature civilized beings is due to their masculinity.
That group of associated sex instincts, which in the woman prompts to
the patient service and fierce defence of the little child, in the man
has its deepest root in seeking, pursuing and catching.  To hunt is more
than a means of obtaining food, in his long ancestry; it is to follow at
any cost, to seek through all difficulties, to struggle for and secure
the central prize of his being--a mate.

His "protective instincts" are far later and more superficial.  To
support and care for his wife, his children, is a recent habit, in plain
sight historically; but "the pleasure of the chase" is older than that.
We should remember that associate habits and impulses last for ages upon
ages in living forms; as in the tree climbing instincts of our earliest
years, of Simian origin; and the love of water, which dates back through
unmeasured time.  Where for millions of years the strongest pleasure a
given organism is fitted for, is obtained by a certain group of
activities, those activities will continue to give pleasure long after
their earlier use is gone.

This is why men enjoy "the ardor of pursuit" far more than women.  It is
an essentially masculine ardor.  To come easily by what he wants does
not satisfy him.  He wants to want it.  He wants to hunt it, seek it,
chase it, catch it.  He wants it to be "game."  He is by virtue of his
sex a sportsman.

There is no reason why these special instincts should not be gratified
so long as it does no harm to the more important social processes; but
it is distinctly desirable that we should understand their nature.  The
reason why we have the present overwhelming mass of "sporting events,"
from the ball game to the prize fight, is because our civilization is so
overwhelmingly masculine.  We shall criticize them more justly when we
see that all this mass of indulgence is in the first place a form of
sex-expression, and in the second place a survival of instincts older
than the oldest savagery.

Besides our games and sports we have a large field of "amusements" also
worth examining.  We not only enjoy doing things, but we enjoy seeing
them done by others.  In these highly specialized days most of our
amusement consists in paying two dollars to sit three hours and see
other people do things.

This in its largest sense is wholly human.  We, as social creatures, can
enjoy a thousand forms of expression quite beyond the personal.  The
birds must each sing his own song; the crickets chirp in millionfold
performance; but human being feels the deep thrill of joy in their
special singers, actors, dancers, as well as in their own personal
attempts.  That we should find pleasure in watching one another is
humanly natural, but what it is we watch, the kind of pleasure and the
kind of performance, opens a wide field of choice.

We know, for instance, something of the crude excesses of aboriginal
Australian dances; we know more of the gross license of old Rome; we
know the breadth of the jokes in medieval times, and the childish
brutality of the bull-ring and the cockpit.  We know, in a word, that
amusements vary; that they form a ready gauge of character and culture;
that they have a strong educational influence for good or bad.  What we
have not hitherto observed is the predominant masculine influence on our
amusements.  If we recall once more the statement with regard to
entertaining anecdotes, "There are thirty good stories in the world, and
twenty-nine of them cannot be told to women," we get a glaring sidelight
on the masculine specialization in jokes.

"Women have no sense of humor" has been frequently said, when "Women
have not a masculine sense of humor" would be truer.  If women had
thirty "good stories" twenty-nine of which could not be told to men, it
is possible that men, if they heard some of the twenty-nine, would not
find them funny.  The overweight of one sex has told in our amusements
as everywhere else.

Because men are further developed in humanity than women are as yet,
they have built and organized great places of amusement; because they
carried into their humanity their unchecked masculinity, they have made
these amusements to correspond.  Dramatic expression, is in its true
sense, not only a human distinction, but one of our noblest arts.  It is
allied with the highest emotions; is religious, educational, patriotic,
covering the whole range of human feeling.  Through it we should be able
continually to express, in audible, visible forms, alive and moving,
whatever phase of life we most enjoyed or wished to see.  There was a
time when the drama led life; lifted, taught, inspired, enlightened.
Now its main function is to amuse.  Under the demand for amusement, it
has cheapened and coarsened, and now the thousand vaudevilles and
picture shows give us the broken fragments of a degraded art of which
our one main demand is that it shall make us laugh.

There are many causes at work here; and while this study seeks to show
in various fields one cause, it does not claim that cause is the only
one.  Our economic conditions have enormous weight upon our amusements,
as on all other human phenomena; but even under economic pressure the
reactions of men and women are often dissimilar.  Tired men and women
both need amusement, the relaxation and restful change of irresponsible
gayety.  The great majority of women, who work longer hours than any
other class, need it desperately and never get it.  Amusement,
entertainment, recreation, should be open to us all, enjoyed by all.
This is a human need, and not a distinction of either sex.  Like most
human things it is not only largely monopolized by men, but masculized
throughout.  Many forms of amusement are for men only; more for men
mostly; all are for men if they choose to go.

The entrance of women upon the stage, and their increased attendance at
theatres has somewhat modified the nature of the performance; even the
"refined vaudeville" now begins to show the influence of women.  It
would be no great advantage to have this department of human life
feminized; the improvement desired is to have it less masculized; to
reduce the excessive influence of one, and to bring out those broad
human interests and pleasures which men and women can equally
participate in and enjoy.



HIS AGONY


A Human Being goes past my house
Day after day, hour after hour,
Screaming in agony.
It is dreadful to hear him.
He beats the air with his hands, blindly, despairingly.
He shrieks with pain.
The passers-by do not notice him.
The woman who is with him does not notice him.
The policeman does not notice him.
No ambulance comes ringing.
No doctor rushes out of a house--no crowd collects.
He screams and screams.
No one notices him.
I bear him coming again.
It is terrible--one day after another.
I look out of my window.
Yes--the same Human Being--the same agony.
I cannot bear it.  I rush down--out into the street.
I say to the woman who is with him--
"Why do you not do something?"
She says there is nothing to be done.  She resents my interference.
She is a hired person, hired by the owner of the Human Being.
That is why no one does anything--
We dare not interfere with the Owner.
He is a very young Human Being,
That is why no one notices--
We are used to the sound of agony and the indifference of hired persons.



COMMENT AND REVIEW


The spread of social ethics among the medical profession is cause for
great rejoicing.  Long and justly celebrated as benefactors of humanity,
and upholding with devotion the high ideals of their profession, they
have now begun to widen their usefulness and extend their ideals under
the general social awakening of our time.

Social sanitation is a rapidly extending process; as fast as our
discoveries reveal the nature of disease or new remedies therefor, our
governments, local and national, are beginning to safeguard the
community.

In the general movement to lengthen and strengthen human life, doctors
are necessarily most prominent because of their special knowledge.  They
have long been necessary.  they have become more and more valuable, but
their usefulness is still checked (as is true of all of us) by the
persistence of conservatism and old ideas.

Very recently the advance of bacteriological science has thrown new
light on a group of especially dangerous diseases; and still more
recently the doctors themselves, with a splendid exertion of social
conscience against tradition and habit, have begun to disseminate this
new light to the general public.

Those special payments of the "wages of sin," spoken of in varying
euphemisms, most commonly as "social diseases" are now better understood
by physicians; and they are making noble efforts to spread this
understanding among the people.  Their efforts are gravely hindered by
two obstacles; one the professional tradition known as "the medical
secret," the other the universal prevalence of that primordial
superstition--the sex tabu.

This last belongs to the very deepest sedimentary deposit in the human
mind.  The first rules the lowest savage peoples began to make were the
sex tabus and food tabus.  Secrecy, mystery, all manner of childish
hocus pocus, were used to establish these primitive ideas; and the
weight of that black past is upon its yet.

The less developed a race, the less educated a class, the more solemn
and earnest they are in preserving the sex tabus; whereas with wide
scientific knowledge this field of facts is seen to be like others;
important and worth understanding; but not as special arcana to be
concealed and avoided.

If the doctors come forward to tell us how the typhoid bacillus is
disseminated, how dangerous it is, and how it is to be avoided, we are
interested, grateful, and more or less willing to profit by the
instruction.  But when they try to tell us how the gonococcus attacks
humanity, how dangerous it, and how it is to be avoided, we say, "Sh!
That is something you mustn't talk about!"

To the credit of the profession they have kept on talking, many of them.
 To the credit of some of our bravest and wisest editors the talk has
been widely published.  And right here I wish to pay a well deserved
tribute to the "Ladies' Home Journal," which ought to have a Nobel prize
for great public service.

That paper--long scorned by me as the arch-type of all small
ultra-feminine backwardness, did the bravest thing a paper can do,
risked its whole position by flying in the face of the public and
printing the clearest, fullest, most enlightening accounts of the
present status of these "social diseases," their terrible effects, and
our duty toward them.  It lost subscribers by the thousand and hundred
thousand, but it did the work; and did it better than any other
publication could; not only on account of its enormous circulation, but
because it went into the homes of pious and unenlightened persons who
would never have seen the information in more progressive magazines.

The negative inertia and positive resistance of the popular mind cannot
forever resist the constantly increasing pressure of knowledge now
poured forth on this subject.

But there is that other obstacle--the tradition of secrecy in the
medical profession.

Doctors take the Hipprocratic oath.  They solemnly swear not to reveal
the confidences of their patients; or, more properly their innocent
confidences.  They are not bound like priests in the confessional; if a
patient tells the doctor he has poisoned his mother or is about to
poison his father, the doctor is not bound to conceal the facts.

Nevertheless, if a patient afflicted with one of these highly contagious
diseases tells his doctor that he has poisoned his wife, or is to poison
his child--the doctor feels professionally bound to keep silence.

What puzzles an outsider is to see why the medical mind discriminates so
sharply here between the conduct required in cases of small pox or
scarlet fever, and in this case.  If you tell the doctor you have
leprosy--there's nothing sacred about that.  Off with you to the pest
house, at any cost of pain and shame to you or your family.  Is the
whole community to be exposed to infection just to save your feelings?

So even with measles, with diphtheria, with yellow fever.  The privacy
of the home is invaded, families are ruthlessly separated, the strong
arm of the law is reached out to protect the public against this danger;
and the doctor, so far from conniving with the patient, is legally
required to record all cases of this sort.

Now where is the difference?

These special diseases are more dangerous--and far more common, than
most of these mentioned above; and their effects, hereditary as well as
contagious, of measureless evil.

We are told that the difference is one of moral obliquity.

But surely there is no veil of secrecy about moral obliquity!  If a man
is a thief or a murderer we do not respect his confidence and conceal
his offence.  The papers justify their fierce blazonry of crimes and
sins by saying that it strengthens public opinion--protects the people.
No, it is not because of moral obliquity.

It is for precisely the same reason that you must not make inquiries of
a Chinaman as to his wife's health, or see a Turkish lady without her
veil--it is "improper!"

The doctors and the boards of health together can soon change this silly
convention, and the physician be required to register every case of this
sort as he does in other contagious diseases.

All this is called up at this time by a little book named "Never Told
Tales," sent me by the author, Dr. William Robinson of New York City.

It is a brave little book.  Dr. Robinson is not a novelist by
profession, but his heart is so wrung and his brain so roused by the
hidden tragedy he sees all about him that he has reached out into
literature for aid.  Everywhere this mischief creeps about, centering
rankly in every large city; carried everywhere by those infected;
bringing death, deformity, and hideous diseases into thousands of
innocent families; spreading, growing, and nobody saying anything about
it!

Dr. Robinson has said something.  He has thrown out the little book of
stories, hoping that in the vivid narrative form it may reach and appeal
to those who would not read "medical literature"; or even the new and
impressive books now to be had on this subject.

For solid information of a clear and serious sort, readable and clean,
Dr. Prince Morrow's book, "Social Diseases and Marriage" is the best I
know.  Dr. Morrow is the founder of the American Society of Sanitary and
Moral Prophylaxis in New York City; a splendid effort on the part of the
medical profession to spread even to unwilling ears this necessary
knowledge.

The New York Federation of Women's Clubs has lately taken action on the
subject; passing resolutions urging in this state an amendment to the
Domestic Relations law requiring every marriage certificate to be
accompanied by a medical certificate also, certifying the applicant to
be free from contagious disease.  This is already required in several
western states.  It seems a simple and righteous proposition.  If a man
wishes to join the army or navy, or to have his life insured, he has to
pass a physical examination, and is refused if he is unfit.  Is not
marriage and parenthood as important as carrying life insurance?

There is a large and growing interest in these matters among intelligent
women; and it is a natural and proper one.  If a woman is to unite her
life with a man, she surely has a right to know whether her own life is
to be risked by the union.  If she looks forward to motherhood as every
normal woman should, she should be safeguarded from this terrible
possibility.

It is time there was wide, full public knowledge on this subject.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


This from a recent newspaper: "When a reporter called at the address,
Miss Doe or Mrs. Roe appeared in a highly nervous state as a result of
her struggles during the day to keep out of the way of reporters.  It
took half an hour's argument to induce her to acknowledge the marriage."

As the whole story treats of this lady's marriage, the calling her
"Miss" appears to be a needlessly elaborate insult; but what seems most
prominent here is the naive brutality of the inquisitor.

Here is a runaway match; the groom being a student and the son of a
somewhat prominent man; it is a bit of gossip, of no general importance
whatever, the publication of which is sure to cause intense distress to
the bride, the groom, the father, and the heads of the institution where
the young man was being educated.

In pursuit of this utterly unnecessary "news" the young bride is hounded
into a "highly nervous condition" by the person hired to meddle in
private affairs for trade purposes.  The effect of her previous
"struggle to keep out of the way" is calmly noted by the successful
intruder; he forces himself in where he was not wanted; he remains
admittedly against the will of the occupier; he talks like a book-agent
and wears out the already nervous woman till he makes her "acknowledge
the marriage."

As a personal problem, why should any citizen submit to be exploited in
this manner for trade purposes?

As a public problem, why should any tradesman be allowed to practice
this sort of psychic assault and battery?

The position was well expressed by a wise man as follows: "If the
newspaper is a public business for public service, by what right do
personal owners make fortunes out of it?  If it is a personal business
for personal profit, by what right does it meddle with my private
affairs?"

This might be made an extremely debatable question: What right has
anyone to keep to himself some process, drug, or special knowledge of
real value to humanity?  Patents or royalties may be allowed, with full
freedom to use, but has he the right to conceal and withhold his
benefaction?  Or suppose again, that one has some distinction of no use
to humanity, yet of sufficient interest to the gaping crowd to command a
price for exhibition; if one is a Bearded Lady, say, or a Living
Skeleton, or a Fat Boy, and if one makes a living by exhibiting these
peculiarities and selling one's photograph--then would it be just to
allow any and every photographer to forcibly take one's picture and sell
it?

Further, suppose one has a private history rich in biographical
revelations, and intended to publish the same, after the manner of those
major and minor ego-maniacs of the astounding "confessions"; then is it
right that the public scandal pedlars be allowed to chase their prey
into his or her private house, and by a sort of "third degree" process
wring from the exhausted and irritated victim these biographical
tidbits, that they may go and sell them to their own profit?

"The public is interested in these things," we are gravely told by these
who thus make a living.

The Public might, conceivably, be interested in the table manners of
certain noted persons, or their expressions while shaving, or "doing
their hair."

Is it therefore permissible that dealers in picture post-cards, or
makers of moving picture.  shows, come in with cameras at mealtimes or
toilette hours, and photograph the lifted soupspoon, the purchased hair,
or cheek stretched under the razor?

The right of society to the best service of all, we must accept as
paramount; but what right has a private individual to exploit the
secrets of other private individuals merely for his own financial
profit?  And how can he claim "social service" as his excuse, when what
he does is no benefit but an injury to society?

Do we not need a wide and thorough revision of our ideas as to social
and personal rights?



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK


AS TO PURPOSE:


_What is The Forerunner?_  It is a monthly magazine, publishing stories
short and serial, article and essay; drama, verse, satire and sermon;
dialogue, fable and fantasty, comment and review.  It is written
entirely by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

_What is it For?_  It is to stimulate thought: to arouse hope, courage
and impatience; to offer practical suggestions and solutions, to voice
the strong assurance of better living, here, now, in our own hands to
make.

_What is it about?_  It is about people, principles, and the questions
of every-day life; the personal and public problems of to-day.  It gives
a clear, consistent view of human life and how to live it.

_Is it a Woman's magazine?_  It will treat all three phases of our
existence--male, female and human.  It will discuss Man, in his true
place in life; Woman, the Unknown Power; the  Child, the most important
citizen.

_Is it a Socialist Magazine?_  It is a magazine for humanity, and
humanity is social.  It holds that Socialism, the economic theory, is
part of our gradual Socialization, and that the duty of conscious
humanity is to promote Socialization.

_Why is it published?_  It is published to express ideas which need a
special medium; and in the belief that there are enough persons
interested in those ideas to justify the undertaking.


AS TO ADVERTISING:


We have long heard that "A pleased customer is the best advertiser."
The Forerunner offers to its advertisers and readers the benefit of this
authority.  In its advertising department, under the above heading, will
be described articles personally known and used.  So far as individual
experience and approval carry weight, and clear truthful description
command attention, the advertising pages of The Forerunner will be
useful to both dealer and buyer.  If advertisers prefer to use their own
statements The Forerunner will publish them if it believes them to be
true.


AS TO CONTENTS:


The main feature of the first year is a new book on a new subject with a
new name:--

_"Our Androcentric Culture."_  this is a study of the historic effect on
normal human development of a too exclusively masculine civilization.
It shows what man, the male, has done to the world: and what woman, the
more human, may do to change it.

_"What Diantha Did."_  This is a serial novel.  It shows the course of
true love running very crookedly--as it so often does--among the
obstructions and difficulties of the housekeeping problem--and solves
that problem.  (NOT by co-operation.)

Among the short articles will appear:

"Private Morality and Public Immorality."
"The Beauty Women Have Lost"
"Our Overworked Instincts."
"The Nun in the Kitchen."
"Genius: Domestic and Maternal."
"A Small God and a Large Goddess."
"Animals in Cities."
"How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money."
"Prize Children"
"Kitchen-Mindedness"
"Parlor-Mindedness"
"Nursery-Mindedness"

There will be short stories and other entertaining matter in each issue.
 The department of "Personal Problems" does not discuss etiquette,
fashions or the removal of freckles.  Foolish questions will not be
answered, unless at peril of the asker.


AS TO VALUE:

If you take this magazine one year you will have:


One complete novel . . . By C. P. Gilman
One new book . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve short stories . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more short articles . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more new poems . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve Short Sermons . . . By C. P. Gilman
Besides "Comment and Review" . . . By C. P. Gilman
"Personal Problems" . . . By C. P. Gilman
And many other things . . . By C. P. Gilman

DON'T YOU THINK IT'S WORTH A DOLLAR?


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________



[Advertisement]


TO RENT


A Summer Cottage
on Lake Champlain
Near the Adirondacks


This is a six-room two-story cottage, natural wood finish, unplastered,
on two and a half acres of land, 600 feet on the lake, with an old apple
orchard and many other trees.  It has on two sides covered piazzas,
outside blinds, open fireplaces in two rooms; and new white enameled
open plumbing, with hot and cold water.  It is about a mile and a half
from Essex Village, and about one-quarter of a mile from the post
office, at the Crater Club, an exclusive summer colony.  Access by boat
and train.

I have not seen this cottage, but I've seen plans, elevations and
photographs of it, and of views from it.  It stands on a bluff, close to
the lake, the Green Mountains far in the east, and the Adirondacks some
twelve miles to the west.  The people who own it will answer further
questions and state facts fully on request, both advantages and
disadvantages.

The list of furnishings is accurate and circumstantial, as follows:


INVENTORY OF CONTENTS OF COTTAGE


LIVING ROOM


Mahogany sofa, small mahogany table
Marble-topped table and "Crowning of Esther"
4 rosewood chairs, steamer chair
Whatnot, wall-bracket, books, basket
Mahogany table, small round 3-legged
Long mantel mirror, gilt frame
3 oil paintings, 3 engravings
Rustic seat (filled with wood)
Old-fashioned heating stove, crated
Candle-lantern, 2 Japanese trays
Door-scraper, woodbasket
Tongs-holder, hearth brush
Child's garden tools
2 sofa cushions
Various small ornaments


KITCHEN


Ironing Table, stand, wax, bosom board
Tin pail, dipper, basin
1 new broom, 1 old broom
Tool box, tools, nails, saw, hatchet
Hammock, barrel hammock, tie ropes
Soap rack, dustpan, scrap basket
Folding hat rack, ladder
Carving set, 6 knives (very old)
Coffee pot, toaster, egg whip, egg beater
5 large white china plates
5 medium and 6 small ditto
6 demi tasse and saucers, same
2 tea cups, 6 saucers, same
2 egg stands, green; 2 sugar bowls
1 butterfly cup and saucer
6 glasses, 1 lemon squeezer
1 mechanical red-glass lamp
2 reading lamps, 3 small hand lamps
3 small bracket lamps, 1 shade
White shades at all windows


GREEN BEDROOM


Green bedstead (three-quarter)
2 mattresses, 2 pillows, madras cover
Green bureau; green washstand
Green table; green rocking chair
Oak chair; 2 pictures; 1 chamber


LARGE EAST BEDROOM


Oak bedstead (double)
Oak bureau, oak washstand
2 mattresses, 2 feather beds, 1 bolster
2 pillows, madras spread
1 box cot, 1 mattress, straw pillow
2 chairs, 2 towel racks
Bureau cover, pen cushion, etc.
3 pictures


SOUTHWEST BEDROOM
Black walnut single bedstead
1 hair mattress and bolster
1 pillow, 1 feather bed, 1 madras spread
Bureau (mirror broken), 2 towel racks
Mahogany washstand, mirror
Small 3-legged table
3 rosewood chairs
Bureau cover, pin cushion, etc.
Shoebag on wall
Oil painting, on copper
Brass stair rods, in closet


NORTHWEST BEDROOM

2 mahogany bureaus, empty trunk
Portable bath-tub, clothes basket
On shelves: 7 sheets, 7 pillow cases
3 table cloths, 10 doilies
4 towels, dish cloths and towels
Bureau and tray cloths
Curtains, enough for doors
Curtains for some windows


Apply to "Summer Cottage," care of The Forerunner or to John B. Burnham,
Agent, Essex, N.Y.





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 7
MAY, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

Having made pockets, we need not carry so many things in our hands.
Having made books, we need not carry so many things in our heads.




BRAIN SERVICE


We offer our hearts to God, contrite and broken;
 Why not offer our brains, whole and alive?
Why follow the grovelling words wailing old races have spoken?
 Bow and submit, when we ought to resist and strive!

What is this "heart" that you offer?  A circulator,
 An organ that quivers and starts at the fears of the hour.
Why not offer your head?  And hold it straighter?
 Bring to the service of God your noblest power?

When we learn to credit Him with our great ideals, and greater--
 When we all stand up at last, stop kissing the rod--
When we bring the brains of to-day to seek and serve the Creator--
 God will look better to us, and we shall look better to God.



WHEN I WAS A WITCH


If I had understood the terms of that one-sided contract with Satan, the
Time of Witching would have lasted longer--you may be sure of that.  But
how was I to tell?  It just happened, and has never happened again,
though I've tried the same preliminaries as far as I could control them.

The thing began all of a sudden, one October midnight--the 30th, to be
exact.  It had been hot, really hot, all day, and was sultry and
thunderous in the evening; no air stirring, and the whole house stewing
with that ill-advised activity which always seems to move the steam
radiator when it isn't wanted.

I was in a state of simmering rage--hot enough, even without the weather
and the furnace--and I went up on the roof to cool off.  A top-floor
apartment has that advantage, among others--you can take a walk without
the mediation of an elevator boy!

There are things enough in New York to lose one's temper over at the
best of times, and on this particular day they seemed to all happen at
once, and some fresh ones.  The night before, cats and dogs had broken
my rest, of course.  My morning paper was more than usually mendacious;
and my neighbor's morning paper--more visible than my own as I went down
town--was more than usually salacious.  My cream wasn't cream--my egg
was a relic of the past.  My "new" napkins were giving out.

Being a woman, I'm supposed not to swear; but when the motorman
disregarded my plain signal, and grinned as he rushed by; when the
subway guard waited till I was just about to step on board and then
slammed the door in my face--standing behind it calmly for some minutes
before the bell rang to warrant his closing--I desired to swear like a
mule-driver.

At night it was worse.  The way people paw one's back in the crowd!  The
cow-puncher who packs the people in or jerks them out--the men who smoke
and spit, law or no law--the women whose saw-edged cart-wheel hats,
swashing feathers and deadly pins, add so to one's comfort inside.

Well, as I said, I was in a particularly bad temper, and went up on the
roof to cool off.  Heavy black clouds hung low overhead, and lightning
flickered threateningly here and there.

A starved, black cat stole from behind a chimney and mewed dolefully.
Poor thing!  She had been scalded.

The street was quiet for New York.  I leaned over a little and looked up
and down the long parallels of twinkling lights.  A belated cab drew
near, the horse so tired he could hardly hold his head up.

Then the driver, with a skill born of plenteous practice, flung out his
long-lashed whip and curled it under the poor beast's belly with a
stinging cut that made me shudder.  The horse shuddered too, poor
wretch, and jingled his harness with an effort at a trot.

I leaned over the parapet and watched that man with a spirit of
unmitigated ill-will.

"I wish," said I, slowly--and I did wish it with all my heart--"that
every person who strikes or otherwise hurts a horse unnecessarily, shall
feel the pain intended--and the horse not feel it!"

It did me good to say it, anyhow, but I never expected any result.  I
saw the man swing his great whip again, and--lay on heartily.  I saw him
throw up his hands--heard him scream--but I never thought what the
matter was, even then.

The lean, black cat, timid but trustful, rubbed against my skirt and
mewed.

"Poor Kitty" I said; "poor Kitty!  It is a shame!"  And I thought
tenderly of all the thousands of hungry, hunted cats who stink and
suffer its a great city.

Later, when I tried to sleep, and up across the stillness rose the
raucous shrieks of some of these same sufferers, my pity turned cold.
"Any fool that will try to keep a cat in a city!"  I muttered, angrily.

Another yell--a pause--an ear-torturing, continuous cry.  "I wish," I
burst forth, "that every cat in the city was comfortably dead!"

A sudden silence fell, and in course of time I got to sleep.

Things went fairly well next morning, till I tried another egg.  They
were expensive eggs, too.

"I can't help it!" said my sister, who keeps house.

"I know you can't," I admitted.  "But somebody could help it.  I wish
the people who are responsible had to eat their old eggs, and never get
a good one till they sold good ones!"

"They'd stop eating eggs, that's all," said my sister, "and eat meat."

"Let 'em eat meat!" I said, recklessly.  "The meat is as bad as the
eggs!  It's so long since we've had a clean, fresh chicken that I've
forgotten how they taste!"

"It's cold storage," said my sister.  She is a peaceable sort; I'm not.

"Yes, cold storage!" I snapped.  "It ought to be a blessing--to tide
over shortages, equalize supplies, and lower prices.  What does it do?
Corner the market, raise prices the year round, and make all the food
bad!"

My anger rose.  "If there was any way of getting at them!" I cried.
"The law don't touch 'em.  They need to be cursed somehow!  I'd like to
do it!  I wish the whole crowd that profit by this vicious business
might taste their bad meat, their old fish, their stale milk--whatever
they ate.  Yes, and feel the prices as we do!"

"They couldn't you know; they're rich," said my sister.

"I know that," I admitted, sulkily.  "There's no way of getting at 'em.
But I wish they could.  And I wish they knew how people hated 'em, and
felt that, too--till they mended their ways!"

When I left for my office I saw a funny thing.  A man who drove a
garbage cart took his horse by the bits and jerked and wrenched
brutally.  I was amazed to see him clap his hands to his own jaws with a
moan, while the horse philosophically licked his chops and looked at
him.

The man seemed to resent his expression, and struck him on the head,
only to rub his own poll and swear amazedly, looking around to see who
had hit him.  the horse advanced a step, stretching a hungry nose toward
a garbage pail crowned with cabbage leaves, and the man, recovering his
sense of proprietorship, swore at him and kicked him in the ribs.  That
time he had to sit down, turning pale and weak.  I watched with growing
wonder and delight.

A market wagon came clattering down the street; the hard-faced young
ruffian fresh for his morning task.  He gathered the ends of the reins
and brought them down on the horse's back with a resounding thwack.  The
horse did not notice this at all, but the boy did.  He yelled!

I came to a place where many teamsters were at work hauling dirt and
crushed stone.  A strange silence and peace hung over the scene where
usually the sound of the lash and sight of brutal blows made me hurry
by.  The men were talking together a little, and seemed to be exchanging
notes.  It was too good to be true.  I gazed and marvelled, waiting for
my car.

It came, merrily running along.  It was not full.  There was one not far
ahead, which I had missed in watching the horses; there was no other
near it in the rear.

Yet the coarse-faced person in authority who ran it, went gaily by
without stopping, though I stood on the track almost, and waved my
umbrella.

A hot flush of rage surged to my face.  "I wish you felt the blow you
deserve," said I, viciously, looking after the car.  "I wish you'd have
to stop, and back to here, and open the door and apologize.  I wish that
would happen to all of you, every time you play that trick."

To my infinite amazement, that car stopped and backed till the front
door was before me.  The motorman opened it.  holding his hand to his
cheek.  "Beg your pardon, madam!" he said.

I passed in, dazed, overwhelmed.  Could it be?  Could it possibly be
that--that what I wished came true.  The idea sobered me, but I
dismissed it with a scornful smile.  "No such luck!" said I.

Opposite me sat a person in petticoats.  She was of a sort I
particularly detest.  No real body of bones and muscles, but the
contours of grouped sausages.  Complacent, gaudily dressed, heavily
wigged and ratted, with powder and perfume and flowers and jewels--and a
dog.

A poor, wretched, little, artificial dog--alive, but only so by virtue
of man's insolence; not a real creature that God made.  And the dog had
clothes on--and a bracelet!  His fitted jacket had a pocket--and a
pocket-handkerchief!  He looked sick and unhappy.

I meditated on his pitiful position, and that of all the other poor
chained prisoners, leading unnatural lives of enforced celibacy, cut off
from sunlight, fresh air, the use of their limbs; led forth at stated
intervals by unwilling servants, to defile our streets; over-fed,
under-exercised, nervous and unhealthy.

"And we say we love them!" said I, bitterly to myself.  "No wonder they
bark and howl and go mad.  No wonder they have almost as many diseases
as we do!  I wish--" Here the thought I had dismissed struck me agin.
"I wish that all the unhappy dogs in cities would die at once!"

I watched the sad-eyed little invalid across the car.  He dropped his
head and died.  She never noticed it till she got off; then she made
fuss enough.

The evening papers were full of it.  Some sudden pestilence had struck
both dogs and cats, it would appear.  Red headlines struck the eye, big
letters, and columns were filled out of the complaints of those who had
lost their "pets," of the sudden labors of the board of health, and
interviews with doctors.

All day, as I went through the office routine, the strange sense of this
new power struggled with reason and common knowledge.  I even tried a
few furtive test "wishes"--wished that the waste basket would fall over,
that the inkstand would fill itself; but they didn't.

I dismissed the idea as pure foolishness, till I saw those newspapers,
and heard people telling worse stories.

One thing I decided at once--not to tell a soul.  "Nobody'd believe me
if I did," said I to myself.  "And I won't give 'em the chance.  I've
scored on cats and dogs, anyhow--and horses."

As I watched the horses at work that afternoon, and thought of all their
unknown sufferings from crowded city stables, bad air and insufficient
food, and from the wearing strain of asphalt pavements in wet and icy
weather, I decided to have another try on horses.

"I wish," said I, slowly and carefully, but with a fixed intensity of
purposes, "that every horse owner, keeper, hirer and driver or rider,
might feel what the horse feels, when he suffers at our hands.  Feel it
keenly and constantly till the case is mended."

I wasn't able to verify this attempt for some time; but the effect was
so general that it got widely talked about soon; and this "new wave of
humane feeling" soon raised the status of horses in our city.  Also it
diminished their numbers.  People began to prefer motor drays--which was
a mighty good thing.

Now I felt pretty well assured in my own mind, and kept my assurance to
my
self.  Also I began to make a list of my cherished grudges, with a fine
sense of power and pleasure.

"I must be careful," I said to myself; "very careful; and, above all
things, make the punishment fit the crime."

The subway crowding came to my mind next; both the people who crowd
because they have to, and the people who make them.  "I mustn't punish
anybody, for what they can't help," I mused.  "But when it's pure
meanness!"  Then I bethought me of the remote stockholders, of the more
immediate directors, of the painfully prominent officials and insolent
employees--and got to work.

"I might as well make a good job of it while this lasts," said I to
myself.  "It's quite a responsibility, but lots of fun."  And I wished
that every person responsible for the condition of our subways might be
mysteriously compelled to ride up and down in them continuously during
rush hours.

This experiment I watched with keen interest, but for the life of me I
could see little difference.  There were a few more well-dressed persons
in the crowds, that was all.  So I came to the conclusion that the
general public was mostly to blame, and carried their daily punishment
without knowing it.

For the insolent guards and cheating ticket-sellers who give you short
change, very slowly, when you are dancing on one foot and your train is
there, I merely wished that they might feel the pain their victims would
like to give them, short of real injury.  They did, I guess.

Then I wished similar things for all manner of corporations and
officials.  It worked.  It worked amazingly.  There was a sudden
conscientious revival all over the country.  The dry bones rattled and
sat up.  Boards of directors, having troubles enough of their own, were
aggravated by innumerable communications from suddenly sensitive
stockholders.

In mills and mints and railroads, things began to mend.  The country
buzzed.  The papers fattened.  The churches sat up and took credit to
themselves.  I was incensed at this; and, after brief consideration,
wished that every minister would preach to his congregation exactly what
he believed and what he thought of them.

I went to six services the next Sunday--about ten minutes each, for two
sessions.  It was most amusing.  A thousand pulpits were emptied
forthwith, refilled, re-emptied, and so on, from week to week.  People
began to go to church; men largely--women didn't like it as well.  They
had always supposed the ministers thought more highly of them than now
appeared to be the case.

One of my oldest grudges was against the sleeping-car people; and now I
began to consider them.  How often I had grinned and borne it--with
other thousands--submitting helplessly.

Here is a railroad--a common carrier--and you have to use it.  You pay
for your transportation, a good round sum.

Then if you wish to stay in the sleeping car during the day, they charge
you another two dollars and a half for the privilege of sitting there,
whereas you have paid for a seat when you bought your ticket.  That seat
is now sold to another person--twice sold!  Five dollars for twenty-four
hours in a space six feet by three by three at night, and one seat by
day; twenty-four of these privileges to a car--$120 a day for the rent
of the car--and the passengers to pay the porter besides.  That makes
$44,800 a year.

Sleeping cars are expensive to build, they say.  So are hotels; but they
do not charge at such a rate.  Now, what could I do to get even?
Nothing could ever put back the dollars into the millions of pockets;
but it might be stopped now, this beautiful process.

So I wished that all persons who profited by this performance might feel
a shame so keen that they would make public avowal and apology, and, as
partial restitution, offer their wealth to promote the cause of free
railroads!

Then I remembered parrots.  This was lucky, for my wrath flamed again.
It was really cooling, as I tried to work out responsibility and adjust
penalties.  But parrots!  Any person who wants to keep a parrot should
go and live on an island alone with their preferred conversationalist!

There was a huge, squawky parrot right across the street from me, adding
its senseless, rasping cries to the more necessary evils of other
noises.

I had also an aunt with a parrot.  She was a wealthy, ostentatious
person, who had been an only child and inherited her money.

Uncle Joseph hated the yelling bird, but that didn't make any difference
to Aunt Mathilda.

I didn't like this aunt, and wouldn't visit her, lest she think I was
truckling for the sake of her money; but after I had wished this time, I
called at the time set for my curse to work; and it did work with a
vengeance.  There sat poor Uncle Joe, looking thinner and meeker than
ever; and my aunt, like an overripe plum, complacent enough.

"Let me out!" said Polly, suddenly.  "Let me out to take a walk!"

"The clever thing!" said Aunt Mathilda.  "He never said that before."

She let him out.  Then he flapped up on the chandelier and sat among the
prisms, quite safe.

"What an old pig you are, Mathilda!" said the parrot.

She started to her feet--naturally.

"Born a Pig--trained a Pig--a Pig by nature and education!" said the
parrot.  "Nobody'd put up with you, except for your money; unless it's
this long-suffering husband of yours.  He wouldn't, if he hadn't the
patience of Job!"

"Hold your tongue!" screamed Aunt Mathilda.  "Come down from there!
Come here!"

Polly cocked his head and jingled the prisms.  "Sit down, Mathilda!" he
said, cheerfully.  "You've got to listen.  You are fat and homely and
selfish.  You are a nuisance to everybody about you.  You have got to
feed me and take care of me better than ever--and you've got to listen
to me when I talk.  Pig!"

I visited another person with a parrot the next day.  She put a cloth
over his cage when I came in.

"Take it off!" said Polly.  She took it off.

"Won't you come into the other room?" she asked me, nervously.

"Better stay here!" said her pet.  "Sit still--sit still!"

She sat still.

"Your hair is mostly false," said pretty Poll.  "And your teeth--and
your outlines.  You eat too much.  You are lazy.  You ought to exercise,
and don't know enough.  Better apologize to this lady for backbiting!
You've got to listen."

The trade in parrots fell off from that day; they say there is no call
for them.  But the people who kept parrots, keep them yet--parrots live
a long time.

Bores were a class of offenders against whom I had long borne undying
enmity.  Now I rubbed my hands and began on them, with this simple wish:
That every person whom they bored should tell them the plain truth.

There is one man whom I have specially in mind.  He was blackballed at a
pleasant club, but continues to go there.  He isn't a member--he just
goes; and no one does anything to him.

It was very funny after this.  He appeared that very night at a meeting,
and almost every person present asked him how he came there.  "You're
not a member, you know," they said.  "Why do you butt in?  Nobody likes
you."

Some were more lenient with him.  "Why don't you learn to be more
considerate of others, and make some real friends?" they said.  "To have
a few friends who do enjoy your visits ought to be pleasanter than being
a public nuisance."

He disappeared from that club, anyway.

I began to feel very cocky indeed.

In the food business there was already a marked improvement; and in
transportation.  The hubbub of reformation waxed louder daily, urged on
by the unknown sufferings of all the profiters by iniquity.

The papers thrived on all this; and as I watched the loud-voiced
protestations of my pet abomination in journalism, I had a brilliant
idea, literally.

Next morning I was down town early, watching the men open their papers.
My abomination was shamefully popular, and never more so than this
morning.  Across the top was printing in gold letters:


All intentional lies, in adv., editorial, news, or any other column. .
.Scarlet
All malicious matter. . .Crimson
All careless or ignorant mistakes. . .Pink
All for direct self-interest of owner. . .Dark green
All mere bait--to sell the paper. . .Bright green
All advertising, primary or secondary. . .Brown
All sensational and salacious matter. . .Yellow
All hired hypocrisy. . .Purple
Good fun, instruction and entertainment. . .Blue
True and necessary news and honest editorials. . .Ordinary print


You never saw such a crazy quilt of a paper.  They were bought like hot
cakes for some days; but the real business fell off very soon.  They'd
have stopped it all if they could; but the papers looked all right when
they came off the press.  The color scheme flamed out only to the
bona-fide reader.

I let this work for about a week, to the immense joy of all the other
papers; and then turned it on to them, all at once.  Newspaper reading
became very exciting for a little, but the trade fell off.  Even
newspaper editors could not keep on feeding a market like that.  The
blue printed and ordinary printed matter grew from column to column and
page to page.  Some papers--small, to be sure, but refreshing--began to
appear in blue and black alone.

This kept me interested and happy for quite a while; so much so that I
quite forgot to be angry at other things.  There was _such_ a change in
all kinds of business, following the mere printing of truth in the
newspapers.  It began to appear as if we had lived in a sort of
delirium--not really knowing the facts about anything.  As soon as we
really knew the facts, we began to behave very differently, of course.

What really brought all my enjoyment to an end was women.  Being a
woman, I was naturally interested in them, and could see some things
more clearly than men could.  I saw their real power, their real
dignity, their real responsibility in the world; and then the way they
dress and behave used to make me fairly frantic.  'Twas like seeing
archangels playing jackstraws--or real horses only used as
rocking-horses.  So I determined to get after them.

How to manage it!  What to hit first!  Their hats, their ugly, inane,
outrageous hats--that is what one thinks of first.  Their silly,
expensive clothes--their diddling beads and jewelry--their greedy
childishness--mostly of the women provided for by rich men.

Then I thought of all the other women, the real ones, the vast majority,
patiently doing the work of servants without even a servant's pay--and
neglecting the noblest duties of motherhood in favor of house-service;
the greatest power on earth, blind, chained, untaught, in a treadmill.
I thought of what they might do, compared to what they did do, and my
heart swelled with something that was far from anger.

Then I wished--with all my strength--that women, all women, might
realize Womanhood at last; its power and pride and place in life; that
they might see their duty as mothers of the world--to love and care for
everyone alive; that they might see their dirty to men--to choose only
the best, and then to bear and rear better ones; that they might see
their duty as human beings, and come right out into full life and work
and happiness!

I stopped, breathless, with shining eyes.  I waited, trembling, for
things to happen.

Nothing happened.

You see, this magic which had fallen on me was black magic--and I had
wished white.

It didn't work at all, and, what was worse, it stopped all the other
things that were working so nicely.

Oh, if I had only thought to wish permanence for those lovely
punishments!  If only I had done more while I could do it, had half
appreciated my privileges when I was a Witch!



[Untitled]


"I can understand," says Eugene Wood, "how some women want to vote.  And
I can understand how some women do not want to vote."

"But I can't understand how some women do not want other women to vote."



BELIEVING AND KNOWING


What is Believing--psychologically?  What does the brain do when it
"believes" that is different from what it does when it "knows"?

There is a difference.  When you know a thing you don't have to believe
it.  There is no effort, and no credit attached, in knowing; but this
act of "believing" has long been held as both difficult and worthy.

There seems to be not only a clearly marked distinction between knowing
and believing, but a direct incompatibility.  It may be said roughly
that the less we know the more we believe, and the more we know the less
we believe.  The credulity of the child, the savage, and the less
educated classes in society, is in sharp contrast with the relative
incredulity of the adult civilized human, and the more highly educated.

There is a difference also shown in our mental sensations as to a thing
believed and a thing known.  If a man tells you that grass is red and
the sky yellow, you merely think him color blind--It does not anger you
nor alter your opinion.  If he tells you that two and two make ten, you
think him ignorant, weak-minded, but your view is not changed, nor are
you enraged by him.  But if he contradicts you on some religious dogma
you are hurt and angry.  Why?  As a matter of direct
physicho-psychological action, why?

To make a physical comparison, it is like the difference between being
pushed against when you stand square on your feet, and pushed when you
stand on one leg.

Or again, the thing you know is like something nailed down, or planted
and growing; the thing you believe like something held up by main force,
and quite likely to be joggled or blown away.  "Do not try to shake my
faith!" protests the believer.  He does not object to your trying to
shake his knowledge.

If the new knowledge you bring him is evidently a matter of fact, if his
brain rationally perceives that he was wrong about this thing, and you
are right, he removes his incorrect idea and establishes the correct
one, with no more disagreeable sensation than a little sense of
shame:--not that, if he was wise enough to admit ignorance gracefully.

But the new faith you bring him is quite another matter.  He hangs on to
his old faith as if there was a virtue in the mental attitude of
belief--aha! now we are on the track!  He has been taught that there is!

We receive knowledge and faith in quite different ways, with quite
different emphasis.  The child learns--and learns--and learns--every day
of his life; learns year after year, as long as his brain is able to
receive impressions.  This vast mass of knowledge is for the most part
received indiscriminately and assorted by the brain after its own
fashion.

There are but few departments of knowledge to which we have attached
arbitrary ideas of superiority; and those fortunately, are all old ones.
 Knowledge of "the classics" was once kept in the same box with social
standing, if not with orthodoxy; and to this day an error in spelling or
grammar will condemn a person far more than entire ignorance of
physiology or mechanics.  Knowledge is a vast range, an unlimited range,
visibly subject to extension; each new peak surmounted showing us many
more.  We learn, unlearn, and relearn, without much opposition or
criticism, so long as our little bunch of specialties is assured--the
spelling, for instance.

But when it comes to believing, disbelieving, and rebelieving--that is a
different matter.  Certain things were given us to believe--in our
racial infancy--before we knew much of anything, and were therefore far
more capable of believing.  These articles of belief were sincerely held
to be the most important matters; and they were too; because, if any
stronger minded race infant refused to believe them, he was
ostracised--or executed.  What a man believed, or disbelieved, was the
keynote of life--in that interesting race infancy of ours.  All the
other mental processes were as nothing compared to this.  Knowledge?
There was none to speak of.  Doubt was a crime.  Inquiry was the
beginning of doubt.

The dogmas inserted did change, though slowly; but their importance in
the scheme of life did not change.  Whatever else the man might or might
not be the first question was, "Art thou a Believer?"  And he was.  What
he believed might be the One Absolute Truth; or one of many contemptible
heresies; but he was always a believer.

They began with the helpless little children, and told them as the most
important basic truths, whatsoever religious doctrines were current at
the time; and renewed this process with every generation until this very
day--and are still at it.  Many of the most pronounced free-thinkers not
only prefer to have their women still "devout," but insist on putting
their children through the old course of instruction.

So, in the course of these unbroken ages; under a combined treatment of
rigid "natural selection"--the elimination of the unfit, who were burned
or beheaded--and of the heaviest social pressure, in both education and
imitation; we have developed in the race mind a special area for
"believing" as distinct front knowing.  This area is abnormally
sensitive because in those long ages behind us, it was the very vital
base of life itself.  If your Belief was steady and intact, you were
permitted to live.  If it was in the least degree wavering you were in
danger.  Is it any wonder we object so automatically to anyone's trying
to "shake our faith?"

The change of the last century in this regard has been not only in the
sudden opening up of new fields of knowledge; not only in the adoption
of entire new methods in the acquisition of knowledge; not only in the
rapid popularization of knowledge; but most of all in a new relation of
ideas.  We are beginning dimly to grasp something of the real scheme of
life; to get our sense of the basic verities from observation of facts.
That underlying scheme of life which the brain as an organ hungers for,
is now opening to us in the field of ascertained fact.

A broad deep satisfying conception of life may now be gathered from the
open book of natural law, both the perception of and the inspiration to
right living are to be found there; all matters of calm clear easily
held knowledge.  When one knows enough to build a working religion on
established facts, one does not have so much need of that extra capacity
of believing.

You may also believe what you know--but it isn't necessary.

It will be a wonderful thing for the world when in every mind the
beautiful truths of life shall be common knowledge.  You may believe in
an alleged father you have never seen; but when you live with your
father you know him.



THE KINGDOM


"Where is Heaven?" asked the Person.
"I want Heaven--to enjoy it;
I want Heaven, recompensing
For the evils I have suffered--
All the terrible injustice,
All the foolish waste and hunger--
Where is Heaven?  Can I get there?"

Then the Priest expounded Heaven:
"Heaven is a place for dead men;
After you are dead you'll find it,
_If_"--and here the Priest was earnest--
"_If_ you do the things I tell you--
Do exactly what is ordered!
It will cost you quite a little--
You must pay a price for Heaven--
You must pay before you enter."

"Am I sure of what I'm getting?"
Asked the mean, suspicious Person.
"What you urge is disagreeable;
What you ask is quite expensive;
Am I sure of getting Heaven?"

Then the Priest prepared a potion,
Made of Concentrated Ages,
Made of Many Mingled Feelings--
Highest Hope and Deepest Terror--
Mixed our best and worst together,
Reverence and Love and Service,
Coward Fear and rank Self-Interest--
Gave him this when he was little,
Pumped it in before the Person
Could examine his prescription.
So the Person, thus instructed,
Now believed the things he told him;
Paid the price as he was able,
Died--the Priest said, went to Heaven--
None came back to contradict him!

*

"We want Heaven," said the People;
We believe in God and Heaven;
Where God is, there must be Heaven;
God is Here--and this is Heaven."

Then they saw the earth was lovely;
Life was sweet, and love eternal;
Then they learned the joy of living,
Caught a glimpse of what Life might be,
What it could be--should be--would be--
When the People chose to have it!

Then they bought no further tickets
Of the sidewalk speculators;
They no longer gave their children
The "spring medicine" of Grandma.
They said, "We will take no chances
Of what happens after dying;
We perceive that Human Beings,
Wise, and sweet, and brave, and tender,
Strong, and beautiful, and noble,
Living peaceably together,
In a universal garden,
With the Sciences for Soldiers,
With the Allied Arts for Angels,
With the Crafts and Trades for Servants,
With all Nature for the Teacher,
And all People for the Students,
Make a very pleasant Heaven.
We can see and understand it,
We believe we'd really like some;
Now we'll set to work and make it!

So they set to work, together,
In the Faith that rests on Knowledge,
In the Hope that's born of Wisdom.
In the Love that grows with Practise
And proceeded to make Heaven.

*

And God smiled.  He had been tired
Of the everlasting dead men,
Of the hungry, grasping dead men;
He had always wanted live ones--
Wanted them to build the Kingdom!



PRIZE CHILDREN


A prosperous farmer, driving a valuable horse, will exhibit with pride
the "points" of his swift roadster--the fine action, the speed and
endurance.  He himself sits stoop-shouldered and muscle-bound; strong,
it may be, but slow and awkward, with bad teeth and poor digestion; by
no means a model human being either in "points" or "action."

He never thinks of these things.

A virtuous housewife, running a comfortable house, has a justifiable
pride in the cleanliness, comfort and convenience of the place, in its
beautiful appointments and conveniences, and in her own. fine clothes!
She herself is stout, short-legged, incapable of any swift agility of
action; a brief run leaves her panting; she would be grotesque as a
statue; and her internal housekeeping is by no means as efficient as a
doctor would approve.

She never thinks of these things.

The same farmer will show you his stock--sheep, swine, fowls, cattle;
point out their superiority and talk learnedly of the best methods of
improvement.  The same housewife will show you her fine needlework, her
fine cooking, and discuss patterns and recipes with gusto.  Both the
farmer and his wife took prizes at the county fair--he for pigs and
poultry, she for pies.

Now look at their children.

She gathers little Johnny into her motherly arms.  "Johnny was always
delicate!" she says tenderly.  "He's a little backward because he's
delicate.  Mother's boy!"  And she kisses his smooth head as he nestles
up to her.  "Adelaide had better go and lie down.  Adelaide's not
strong.  They work her too hard in school."

Jim looks sturdy enough, and makes noise enough, but the expert
perceives that Jimmy has adenoids, breathes through his mouth, is really
undersized.

Here is the oldest boy, a tall, heavy fellow; but what a complexion!
"Quite natural for boys of that age; yes, he's real sensitive about it."

*

Well?  They are "good children."  When properly dressed, they compare
favorably with other people's children.

None of them would take any prizes in an exhibition of Human Stock.
There are no such prizes.  As to the exhibition--that is continuous.  We
are so used to the exhibition, and to its pitiful average, that we have
no ideals left.

Neither the farmer nor his wife ever thought of a Human Standard;
whether they came up to it, or if their children did, or of how they
might improve the breed.

We take humanity as we find it.  We admire "beauty," or what we call
beauty; but we don't care enough for it to try to increase it.  We are
concerned about our health after we lose it, but give small thought to
lifting the average.  Young men vie with one another in athletic sports,
and have certain ideals, perhaps, of "military bearing," and the kind of
chest and chin a man should have; but all their ideals put together do
not make us as beautiful and strong as we have a right to be.

Then arise those who come to us talking largely of eugenics; wanting us
to breed super-men and super-women; talk[ing of improving] the race by
right selection.  There is a lot of sense in this; we could do wonders
that way; of course, if we would.  Certain obstacles arise, however.
Men and women seem to love each other on other grounds than physical
superiority.  Those physically superior do not always have the most
superior children.  Then, again, the physically superior children do not
always hold out through life, somehow.

This method of breeding and selection is nature's way.  It works
well--give it a chance; but it has to be accompanied by a ruthless
slaughter of the unfit, and takes thousands upon thousands of years.  We
have a method worth two of that.

We can improve the species after it is born.

That's the great human power, the conscious ability to improve ourselves
and our children.  We have the power.  We have the knowledge, too--some
of us have it, and all of us can get it.

The trouble is, speaking generally, that we haven't the standards.

Here is where our mothers need new ideals, and new information.  A
person who is going to raise cattle ought to know something about
cattle; know what to expect of cattle, and how to produce it.  Suppose
we had a course in Humaniculture to study.  We have Agricultural
colleges; we study Horticulture, and Floriculture, and Apiculture and
Arboriculture.  Why not have a Humanicultural College, and learn
something about how to raise people?

Such a course of study would begin with the theory, illustrating by
picture and model; and later should have practical illustration from the
living model, in nursery and school.  The graduate from such a course
would have quite a different idea of human standards.

She would know the true proportions of the human body, and not call a
No. 2 foot "beautiful" on a No. 10 body.  She would know what the real
shape of the human body is, and that to alter it arbitrarily is a habit
of the lowest savagery.  The shape of the body is the result of its
natural activities, and cannot be altered without injury to them.  She
would learn that to interfere with the human shape, moulding it to lines
that have nothing to do with the living structure and its complex
functions, is as offensive and ridiculous as it would be to alter the
shape of a horse.

Should we not laugh to see a horse in corsets?  The time is coming when
we shall so laugh to see a woman.

She would learn to measure beauty, human beauty, by full health and
vigor first of all, right proportion, full possession of all natural
power, and that the human animal is by nature swift, agile, active to a
high degree, and should remain so throughout life.  So trained, she
would regard being "put on a car" by the elbow as an insult, not a
compliment.

Then at last we should begin to have some notion of what to expect in
children, and how to get it.  The girl would look forward not merely to
some vague little ones to love and care for, but to having finer
children than anyone else--if she could!  And she would naturally have a
new standard of fatherhood, and sternly refuse to accept disease and the
vice which makes disease.

Then, when the children came, she would know the size and weight that
was normal, the way to feed and clothe the little body so as to promote
the best growth; the kind of exercise and training essential to develop
that legitimate human beauty and power which ought to belong to all of
us.

We have our vulgar "Baby Shows," where fat-cheeked, over-fed younglings
are proudly exhibited.  A time is coming when, without public
exhibitions, without prize-money or clamorous vote, we shall raise a new
standard in child culture--and live up to it.



HEAVEN FORBID!


When I was seventeen, you'd find
 No youth so brash as I;
Things must be settled to my mind,
 Or I'd know why!

I knew it all, and somewhat more,
 What I believed was true;
The future held no task in store
 I could not do!

If I had died in my youthful pride--
 And no man can say when--
Should I have been immortal
 As I was then?  (Heaven forbid!)

When I was forty-two I stood
 Successful, proud and strong;
Little I cared for bad or good--
 My purse was long.

My breakfast, newspaper and train,--
 My office,--the Exchange--
My work, my pleasure, and my gain--
 A narrow range.

If I had died in my business pride--
 And no man can say when--
Should I have been immortal
 As I was then?  (Heaven forbid!)

Now I am old, and yet I keep
 Intelligent content;
I wake and sleep in the quiet deep
 Of disillusionment.

I don't believe, nor disbelieve--
 I simply do not know.
I fear no grave--no heaven crave--
Am quite prepared to go.

But when I die--and I would not stay,
 Though a friend should show me how,
Shall I become immortal,
 As I am now?  (Heaven forbid!)



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER VII.

HERESY AND SCHISM.


You may talk about religion with a free and open mind,
 For ten dollars you may criticize a judge;
You may discuss in politics the newest thing you find,
 And open scientific truth to all the deaf and blind,
But there's one place where the brain must never budge!

CHORUS.

Oh, the Home is Utterly Perfect!
And all its works within!
 To say a word about it--
 To criticize or doubt it--
 To seek to mend or move it--
 To venture to improve it--
Is The Unpardonable Sin!

--"Old Song."


Mr. Porne took an afternoon off and came with his wife to hear their
former housemaid lecture.  As many other men as were able did the same.
All the members not bedridden were present, and nearly all the guests
they had invited.

So many were the acceptances that a downtown hall had been taken; the
floor was more than filled, and in the gallery sat a block of servant
girls, more gorgeous in array than the ladies below whispering excitedly
among themselves.  The platform recalled a "tournament of roses," and,
sternly important among all that fragrant loveliness, sat Mrs. Dankshire
in "the chair" flanked by Miss Torbus, the Recording Secretary, Miss
Massing, the Treasurer, and Mrs. Ree, tremulous with importance in her
official position.  All these ladies wore an air of high emprise, even
more intense than that with which they usually essayed their public
duties.  They were richly dressed, except Miss Torbus, who came as near
it as she could.

At the side, and somewhat in the rear of the President, on a chair quite
different from "the chair," discreetly gowned and of a bafflingly serene
demeanor, sat Miss Bell.  All eyes were upon her--even some opera
glasses.

"She's a good-looker anyhow," was one masculine opinion.

"She's a peach," was another, "Tell you--the chap that gets her is well
heeled!" said a third.

The ladies bent their hats toward one another and conferred in flowing
whispers; and in the gallery eager confidences were exchanged, with
giggles.

On the small table before Mrs. Dankshire, shaded by a magnificent bunch
of roses, lay that core and crux of all parliamentry dignity, the gavel;
an instrument no self-respecting chairwoman may be without; yet which
she still approaches with respectful uncertainty.

In spite of its large size and high social standing, the Orchardina Home
and Culture Club contained some elements of unrest, and when the yearly
election of officers came round there was always need for careful work
in practical politics to keep the reins of government in the hands of
"the right people."

Mrs. Thaddler, conscious of her New York millions, and Madam
Weatherstone, conscious of her Philadelphia lineage, with Mrs. Johnston
A. Marrow ("one of the Boston Marrows!" was awesomely whispered of her),
were the heads of what might be called "the conservative party" in this
small parliament; while Miss Miranda L. Eagerson, describing herself as
'a journalist,' who held her place in local society largely by virtue of
the tacit dread of what she might do if offended--led the more radical
element.

Most of the members were quite content to follow the lead of the solidly
established ladies of Orchard Avenue; especially as this leadership
consisted mainly in the pursuance of a masterly inactivity.  When wealth
and aristocracy combine with that common inertia which we dignify as
"conservatism" they exert a powerful influence in the great art of
sitting still.

Nevertheless there were many alert and conscientious women in this large
membership, and when Miss Eagerson held the floor, and urged upon the
club some active assistance in the march of events, it needed all Mrs.
Dankshire's generalship to keep them content with marking time.

On this auspicious occasion, however, both sides were agreed in interest
and approval.  Here was a subject appealing to every woman present, and
every man but such few as merely "boarded"; even they had memories and
hopes concerning this question.

Solemnly rose Mrs. Dankshire, her full silks rustling about her, and let
one clear tap of the gavel fall into the sea of soft whispering and
guttural murmurs.

In the silence that followed she uttered the momentous announcements:
"The meeting will please come to order," "We will now hear the reading
of the minutes of the last meeting," and so on most conscientiously
through officer's reports and committees reports to "new business."

Perhaps it is their more frequent practice of religious rites, perhaps
their devout acceptance of social rulings and the dictates of fashion,
perhaps the lifelong reiterance of small duties at home, or all these
things together, which makes women so seriously letter-perfect in
parliamentry usage.  But these stately ceremonies were ended in course
of time, and Mrs. Dankshire rose again, even more solemn than before,
and came forward majestically.

"Members---and guests," she said impressively, "this is an occasion
which brings pride to the heart of every member of the Home and Culture
Club.  As our name implies, this Club is formed to serve the interests
of The Home--those interests which stand first, I trust, in every human
heart."

A telling pause, and the light patter of gloved hands.

"Its second purpose," pursued the speaker, with that measured delivery
which showed that her custom, as one member put it, was to "first write
and then commit," "is to promote the cause of Culture in this community.
 Our aim is Culture in the broadest sense, not only in the curricula of
institutions of learning, not only in those spreading branches of study
and research which tempts us on from height to height"--("proof of
arboreal ancestry that," Miss Eagerson confided to a friend, whose
choked giggle attracted condemning eyes)--"but in the more intimate
fields of daily experience."

"Most of us, however widely interested in the higher education, are
still--and find in this our highest honor--wives and mothers."  These
novel titles called forth another round of applause.

"As such," continued Mrs. Dankshire, "we all recognize the
difficult--the well-nigh insuperable problems of the"--she glanced at
the gallery now paying awed attention--"domestic question."

"We know how on the one hand our homes yawn unattended"--("I yawn while
I'm attending--eh?" one gentleman in the rear suggested to his
neighbor)--while on the other the ranks of mercenary labor are
overcrowded.  Why is it that while the peace and beauty, the security
and comfort, of a good home, with easy labor and high pay, are open to
every young woman, whose circumstances oblige her to toil for her
living, she blindly refuses these true advantages and loses her health
and too often what is far more precious!--in the din and tumult of the
factory, or the dangerous exposure of the public counter."

Madam Weatherstone was much impressed at this point, and beat her black
fan upon her black glove emphatically.  Mrs. Thaddler also nodded; which
meant a good deal from her.  The applause was most gratifying to the
speaker, who continued:

"Fortunately for the world there are some women yet who appreciate the
true values of life."  A faint blush crept slowly up the face of
Diantha, but her expression was unchanged.  Whoso had met and managed a
roomful of merciless children can easily face a woman's club.

"We have with us on this occasion one, as we my say, our equal in birth
and breeding,"--Madam Weatherstone here looked painfully shocked as also
did the Boston Marrow; possibly Mrs. Dankshire, whose parents were Iowa
farmers, was not unmindful of this, but she went on smoothly, "and whose
first employment was the honored task of the teacher; who has
deliberately cast her lot with the domestic worker, and brought her
trained intelligence to bear upon the solution of this great
question--The True Nature of Domestic Service.  In the interests of this
problem she has consented to address us--I take pleasure in introducing
Miss Diantha Bell."

Diantha rose calmly, stepped forward, bowed to the President and
officers, and to the audience.  She stood quietly for a moment,
regarding the faces before her, and produced a typewritten paper.  It
was clear, short, and to some minds convincing.

She set forth that the term "domestic industry" did not define certain
kinds of labor, but a stage of labor; that all labor was originally
domestic; but that most kinds had now become social, as with weaving and
spinning, for instance, for centuries confined to the home and done by
women only; now done in mills by men and women; that this process of
socialization has now been taken from the home almost all the
manufactures--as of wine, beer, soap, candles, pickles and other
specialties, and part of the laundry work; that the other processes of
cleaning are also being socialized, as by the vacuum cleaners, the
professional window-washers, rug cleaners, and similar professional
workers; and that even in the preparation of food many kinds are now
specialized, as by the baker and confectioner.  That in service itself
we were now able to hire by the hour or day skilled workers necessarily
above the level of the "general."

A growing rustle of disapproval began to make itself felt, which
increased as she went on to explain how the position of the housemaid is
a survival of the ancient status of woman slavery, the family with the
male head and the group of servile women.

"The keynote of all our difficulty in this relation is that we demand
celibacy of our domestic servants," said Diantha.

A murmur arose at this statement, but she continued calmly:

"Since it is natural for women to marry, the result is that our domestic
servants consist of a constantly changing series of young girls,
apprentices, as it were; and the complicated and important duties of the
household cannot be fully mastered by such hands."

The audience disapproved somewhat of this, but more of what followed.
She showed (Mrs. Porne nodding her head amusedly), that so far from
being highly paid and easy labor, house service was exacting and
responsible, involving a high degree of skill as well as moral
character, and that it was paid less than ordinary unskilled labor, part
of this payment being primitive barter.

Then, as whispers and sporadic little spurts of angry talk increased,
the clear quiet voice went on to state that this last matter, the
position of a strange young girl in our homes, was of itself a source of
much of the difficulty of the situation.

"We speak of giving them the safety and shelter of the home,"--here
Diantha grew solemn;--"So far from sharing our homes, she gives up her
own, and has none of ours, but the poorest of our food and a cramped
lodging; she has neither the freedom nor the privileges of a home; and
as to shelter and safety--the domestic worker, owing to her peculiarly
defenceless position, furnishes a terrible percentage of the
unfortunate."

A shocked silence met this statement.

"In England shop-workers complain of the old custom of 'sleeping
in'--their employers furnishing them with lodging as part payment; this
also is a survival of the old apprentice method.  With us, only the
domestic servant is held to this antiquated position."

Regardless of the chill displeasure about her she cheerfully pursued:

"Let us now consider the economic side of the question.  'Domestic
economy' is a favorite phrase.  As a matter of fact our method of
domestic service is inordinately wasteful.  Even where the wife does all
the housework, without pay, we still waste labor to an enormous extent,
requiring one whole woman to wait upon each man.  If the man hires one
or more servants, the wastes increase.  If one hundred men undertake
some common business, they do not divide in two halves, each man having
another man to serve him--fifty productive laborers, and fifty cooks.
Two or three cooks could provide for the whole group; to use fifty is to
waste 47 per cent. of the labor.

"But our waste of labor is as nothing to our waste of money.  For, say
twenty families, we have twenty kitchens with all their furnishings,
twenty stoves with all their fuel; twenty cooks with all their wages; in
cash and barter combined we pay about ten dollars a week for our
cooks--$200 a week to pay for the cooking for twenty families, for about
a hundred persons!

"Three expert cooks, one at $20 a week and two at $15 would save to
those twenty families $150 a week and give them better food.  The cost
of kitchen furnishings and fuel, could be reduced by nine-tenths; and
beyond all that comes our incredible waste in individual purchasing.
What twenty families spend on individual patronage of small retailers,
could be reduced by more than half if bought by competent persons in
wholesale quantities.  Moreover, our whole food supply would rise in
quality as well as lower in price if it was bought by experts.

"To what does all this lead?" asked Diantha pleasantly.

Nobody said anything, but the visible attitude of the house seemed to
say that it led straight to perdition.

"The solution for which so many are looking is no new scheme of any
sort; and in particular it is not that oft repeated fore-doomed failure
called "co-operative housekeeping."

At this a wave of relief spread perceptibly.  The irritation roused by
those preposterous figures and accusations was somewhat allayed.  Hope
was relit in darkened countenances.

"The inefficiency of a dozen tottering households is not removed by
combining them," said Diantha.  This was of dubious import.  "Why should
we expect a group of families to "keep house" expertly and economically
together, when they are driven into companionship by the fact that none
of them can do it alone."

Again an uncertain reception.

"Every family is a distinct unit," the girl continued.  "Its needs are
separate and should be met separately.  The separate house and garden
should belong to each family, the freedom and group privacy of the home.
 But the separate home may be served by a common water company, by a
common milkman, by a common baker, by a common cooking and a common
cleaning establishment.  We are rapidly approaching an improved system
of living in which the private home will no more want a cookshop on the
premises than a blacksmith's shop or soap-factory.  The necessary work
of the kitchenless house will be done by the hour, with skilled labor;
and we shall order our food cooked instead of raw.  This will give to
the employees a respectable well-paid profession, with their own homes
and families; and to the employers a saving of about two-thirds of the
expense of living, as well as an end of all our difficulties with the
servant question.  That is the way to elevate--to enoble domestic
service.  It must cease to be domestic service--and become world
service."

Suddenly and quietly she sat down.

Miss Eagerson was on her feet.  So were others.

"Madam President!  Madam President!" resounded from several points at
once.  Madam Weatherstone--Mrs. Thaddler--no! yes--they really were both
on their feet.  Applause was going on--irregularly--soon dropped.  Only,
from the group in the gallery it was whole-hearted and consistent.

Mrs. Dankshire, who had been growing red and redder as the paper
advanced, who had conferred in alarmed whispers with Mrs. Ree, and Miss
Massing, who had even been seen to extend her hand to the gavel and
finger it threateningly, now rose, somewhat precipitately, and came
forward.

"Order, please!  You will please keep order.  You have heard the--we
will now--the meeting is now open for discussion, Mrs. Thaddler!"  And
she sat down.  She meant to have said Madam Weatherstone, by Mrs.
Thaddler was more aggressive.

"I wish to say," said that much beaded lady in a loud voice, "that I was
against this--unfortunate experiment--from the first.  And I trust it
will never be repeated!"  She sat down.

Two tight little dimples flickered for an instant about the corners of
Diantha's mouth.

"Madam Weatherstone?" said the President, placatingly.

Madam Weatherstone arose, rather sulkily, and looked about her.  An
agitated assembly met her eye, buzzing universally each to each.

"Order!" said Mrs. Dankshire, "ORDER, please!" and rapped three times
with the gavel.

"I have attended many meetings, in many clubs, in many states," said
Madam Weatherstone, "and have heard much that was foolish, and some
things that were dangerous.  But I will say that never in the course of
all my experience have I heard anything so foolish and so dangerous, as
this.  I trust that the--doubtless well meant--attempt to throw light on
this subject--from the wrong quarter--has been a lesson to us all.  No
club could survive more than one such lamentable mistake!"  And she sat
down, gathering her large satin wrap about her like a retiring Caesar.

"Madam President!" broke forth Miss Eagerson.  "I was up first--and have
been standing ever since--"

"One moment, Miss Eagerson," said Mrs. Dankshire superbly, "The Rev. Dr.
Eltwood."

If Mrs. Dankshire supposed she was still further supporting the cause of
condemnation she made a painful mistake.  The cloth and the fine bearing
of the young clergyman deceived her; and she forgot that he was said to
be "advanced" and was new to the place.

"Will you come to the platform, Dr. Eltwood?"

Dr. Eltwood came to the platform with the easy air of one to whom
platforms belonged by right.

"Ladies," he began in tones of cordial good will, "both employer and
employed!--and gentlemen--whom I am delighted to see here to-day!  I am
grateful for the opportunity so graciously extended to me"--he bowed six
feet of black broadcloth toward Mrs. Dankshire--"by your honored
President.

"And I am grateful for the opportunity previously enjoyed, of listening
to the most rational, practical, wise, true and hopeful words I have
ever heard on this subject.  I trust there will be enough open-minded
women--and men--in Orchardina to make possible among us that higher
business development of a great art which has been so convincingly laid
before us.  This club is deserving of all thanks from the community for
extending to so many the privilege of listening to our valued
fellow-citizen--Miss Bell."

He bowed again--to Miss Bell--and to Mrs. Dankshire, and resumed his
seat, Miss Eagerson taking advantage of the dazed pause to occupy the
platform herself.

"Mr. Eltwood is right!" she said.  "Miss Bell is right!  This is the
true presentation of the subject, 'by one who knows.'  Miss Bell has
pricked our pretty bubble so thoroughly that we don't know where we're
standing--but she knows!  Housework is a business--like any other
business--I've always said so, and it's got to be done in a business
way.  Now I for one--" but Miss Eagerson was rapped down by the
Presidential gavel; as Mrs. Thaddler, portentous and severe, stalked
forward.

"It is not my habit to make public speeches," she began, "nor my desire;
but this is a time when prompt and decisive action needs to be taken.
This Club cannot afford to countenance any such farrago of mischievous
nonsense as we have heard to-day.  I move you, Madam President, that a
resolution of condemnation be passed at once; and the meeting then
dismissed!"

She stalked back again, while Mrs. Marrow of Boston, in clear, cold
tones seconded the motion.

But another voice was heard--for the first time in that assembly--Mrs.
Weatherstone, the pretty, delicate widower daughter-in-law of Madam
Weatherstone, was on her feet with "Madam President!  I wish to speak to
this motion."

"Won't you come to the platform, Mrs. Weatherstone?" asked Mrs.
Dankshire graciously, and the little lady came, visibly trembling, but
holding her head high.

All sat silent, all expected--what was not forthcoming.

"I wish to protest, as a member of the Club, and as a woman, against the
gross discourtesy which has been offered to the guest and speaker of the
day.  In answer to our invitation Miss Bell has given us a scholarly and
interesting paper, and I move that we extend her a vote of thanks."

"I second the motion," came from all quarters.

"There is another motion before the house," from others.

Cries of "Madam President" arose everywhere, many speakers were on their
feet.  Mrs. Dankshire tapped frantically with the little gavel, but Miss
Eagerson, by sheer vocal power, took and held the floor.

"I move that we take a vote on this question," she cried in piercing
tones.  "Let every woman who knows enough to appreciate Miss Bell's
paper--and has any sense of decency--stand up!"

Quite a large proportion of the audience stood up--very informally.
Those who did not, did not mean to acknowledge lack of intelligence and
sense of decency, but to express emphatic disapproval of Miss Eagerson,
Miss Bell and their views.

"I move you, Madam President," cried Mrs. Thaddler, at the top of her
voice, "that every member who is guilty of such grossly unparlimentary
conduct be hereby dropped from this Club!"

"We hereby resign!" cried Miss Eagerson.  "_We_ drop _you!_  We'll have
a New Woman's Club in Orchardina with some warmth in its heart and some
brains in its head--even if it hasn't as much money in its pocket!"

Amid stern rappings, hissings, cries of "Order--order," and frantic
"Motions to adjourn" the meeting broke up; the club elements dissolving
and reforming into two bodies as by some swift chemical reaction.

Great was the rejoicing of the daily press; some amusement was felt,
though courteously suppressed by the men present, and by many not
present, when they heard of it.

Some ladies were so shocked and grieved as to withdraw from club-life
altogether.  Others, in stern dignity, upheld the shaken standards of
Home and Culture; while the most conspicuous outcome of it all was the
immediate formation of the New Woman's Club of Orchardina.



THE HOUSE OF APPLES


There was a certain King; young and inexperienced, but a man of resource
and initiative; an efficacious King if he did but know it.  Being new to
his business, however, he did not, as yet, exert himself particularly.

This King, as it happened, was mightily fond of apples; but he was, as
aforesaid, youthful and inexperienced; and too much overwhelmed with new
duties, glories, and responsibilities, to be very exacting.

As a matter of expediency his stewards and servants strove to please
him.  As a matter of course they gave him what he wanted, when they
could.  As a matter of fact his table was provided with the best the
market could afford.

The market, however, could not afford to do very well; at least its
products did not satisfy the King.

"What is the trouble with these apples!" said the King, "Bring me
another kind!"

They brought him several kinds--as many as three or four.

"Bring me more kinds!" said the King.

"These are all that the market affords, O King," they replied.

"Confound the market!" said the King, "I will consider this business
myself."

Then the King consulted his books about apples; and the heads of
departments in his Bureaus of horticulture and of Commerce.  Having thus
added to his information, he then went out to study the facts; and he
found that the facts were these:

Apples grew as easily as ever they did; and there were really more kinds
instead of less.  People liked apples as well as ever they did, and
there were more people instead of less.

Yet in the country the orchards were neglected and the apples fed to
pigs or left to rot; and in the city, the fruit-stalls were loaded with
the monotonous tasteless apples of commerce, cold-stored from time
unknown; and those that were cheap were nasty, and those that were not
nasty and not cheap were by mo means as high in quality as they were in
price.

Then the King issued a Mandate, ordering his subjects far and wide to
send him samples of all kinds of apples that were grown; with their
names and histories and habits.

After this he made a tour of state, visiting his kingdom far and wide,
and studying Appleculture in every quarter.  And he consulted the people
separately, in different places, saying, "Why do you not raise more
apples of this sort and of this?"

And with one accord the people answered him--"It does not pay!"

This his Financial Advisers explained to him, outwardly with deep
respect, but inwardly with derision at his inexperience, that there was
no market for these varieties of apples, and they discoursed on The Law
of Supply and Demand.

Then the King called upon his people to write everyone a postal card to
him, stating the kind of apples they would buy if they could; and how
many barrels or bushels or pecks or quarts they would like to use in a
season, if the price was $2.00 a barrel, or five cents a quart.

This furnished employment to many mathematicians and staticians and
tabulators for many days; but when all was done the King found that the
desire of his people for apples averaged a barrel apiece per year.  And
the King briskly multiplied the number of his people by the price of a
barrel of apples, and obtained a great sum.

"Ah!" said the King.  "This is 'The Market,' is it not?"

But his Financial Advisers laughed in their sleeves, saying solemnly to
him.  "No, O King--this is merely an estimate of the idle desires of the
people--with two large Ifs in it."

"But this is 'the Demand' is it not?" said the King.

And his Financial Advisers put down their sleeves and said, "No, O King
this is but a desire--not a demand."

But the King was fond of apples, and obstinate.

So he caused to be built in every city a House of Apples; and appointed
to each an Apple-Master, to carry out his will.  And he commanded all
his common carriers to carry apples in their season, so many carloads to
a city, according to the desires of his people.  And he offered to all
fruit-raisers, from the humble Farmer to the haughty Horticulturist,
such and such a price for such and such apples; the number thereof to
increase as the population increased from year to year.

In the House of Apples was an Exhibition Hall, showing waxen examples of
every Apple upon earth; and a market where Apples were sold; the
short-lived Apples in their season, and the long-lived Apples the year
around, and some were costly and some were cheap; and in the autumn the
market was flooded--so that then all people could buy apples for a
song--to their hearts' content and their bodies' comfort.

Golden Porters, crystalline and winy, were to be had in their brief
season; and succulent sweetings, to bake with molasses; and
gilliflowers, purple and mealy, and little scarlet sapsons, of which one
eats without counting.  Then the people bought more even than they had
intended; and the farms found apples were a paying crop and cultivated
them; and the common carriers lost nothing, for their carrying grew
greater and the payment was steady and sure.

Now the King was really pleased at this, for he loved Apples and he
loved having his own way--as Kings do.  Also he delighted in the
glorious array of Apples in his Houses; to look at, to eat, and to
smell.

"It is worth the Price!" said the King.  "I know what I want and I'm
willing to pay for it."

But when the Reports of The Apple Masters came in, Lo!  There was a
Great Profit for the King.

"There is no harm in that!"  said he.  And he showed the report to his
Financial Advisers--and his sleeve was across his mouth.

And the name of that King was Demos.



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


VII.

ETHICS AND RELIGION.


The laws of physics were at work before we were on earth, and continued
to work on us long before we had intelligence enough to perceive, much
less understand, them.  Our proven knowledge of these processes
constitutes "the science of physics"; but the laws were there before the
science.

Physics is the science of material relation, how things and natural
forces work with and on one another.  Ethics is the science of social
relation, how persons and social forces work with and on one another.

Ethics is to the human world what physics is to the material world;
ignorance of ethics leaves us in the same helpless position in regard to
one another that ignorance of physics left us in regard to earth, air,
fire and water.

To be sure, people lived and died and gradually improved, while yet
ignorant of the physical sciences; they developed a rough "rule of
thumb" method, as animals do, and used great forces without
understanding them.  But their lives were safer and their improvement
more rapid as they learned more, and began to make servants of the
forces which had been their masters.

We have progressed, lamely enough, with terrible loss and suffering,
from stark savagery to our present degree of civilization; we shall go
on more safely and swiftly when we learn more of the science of ethics.

Let us note first that while the underlying laws of ethics remain steady
and reliable, human notions of them have varied widely and still do so.
In different races, ages, classes, sexes, different views of ethics
obtain; the conduct of the people is modified by their views, and their
prosperity is modified by their conduct.

Primitive man became very soon aware that conduct was of importance.  As
consciousness increased, with the power to modify action from within,
instead of helplessly reacting to stimuli from without, there arose the
crude first codes of ethics, the "Thou shalt" and "Thou shalt not" of
the blundering savage.  It was mostly "Thou shalt not."  Inhibition, the
checking of an impulse proven disadvantageous, was an earlier and easier
form of action than the later human power to consciously decide on and
follow a course of action with no stimulus but one's own will.

Primitive ethics consists mostly of Tabus--the things that are
forbidden; and all our dim notions of ethics to this day, as well as
most of our religions, deal mainly with forbidding.

This is almost the whole of our nursery government, to an extent shown
by the well-worn tale of the child who said her name was "Mary."  "Mary
what?" they asked her.  And she answered, "Mary Don't."  It is also the
main body of our legal systems--a complex mass of prohibitions and
preventions.  And even in manners and conventions, the things one should
not do far outnumber the things one should.  A general policy of
negation colors our conceptions of ethics and religion.

When the positive side began to be developed, it was at first in purely
arbitrary and artificial form.  The followers of a given religion were
required to go through certain motions, as prostrating themselves,
kneeling, and the like; they were required to bring tribute to the gods
and their priests, sacrifices, tithes, oblations; they were set little
special performances to go through at given times; the range of things
forbidden was broad; the range of things commanded was narrow.  The
Christian religion, practically interpreted, requires a fuller "change
of heart" and change of life than any preceding it; which may account at
once for its wide appeal to enlightened peoples, and to its scarcity of
application.

Again, in surveying the field, it is seen that as our grasp of ethical
values widened, as we called more and more acts and tendencies "right"
and "wrong," we have shown astonishing fluctuations and vagaries in our
judgment.  Not only in our religions, which have necessarily upheld each
its own set of prescribed actions as most "right," and its own special
prohibitions as most "wrong"; but in our beliefs about ethics and our
real conduct, we have varied absurdly.

Take, for instance, the ethical concept among "gentlemen" a century or
so since, which put the paying of one's gambling debts as a well-nigh
sacred duty, and the paying of a tradesman who had fed and clothed one
as a quite negligible matter.  If the process of gambling was of social
service, and the furnishing of food and clothes was not, this might be
good ethics; but as the contrary is true, we have to account for this
peculiar view on other grounds.

Again, where in Japan a girl, to maintain her parents, is justified in
leading a life of shame, we have a peculiar ethical standard difficult
for Western minds to appreciate.  Yet in such an instance as is
described in "Auld Robin Gray," we see precisely the same code; the
girl, to benefit her parents, marries a rich old man she does not
love--which is to lead a life of shame.  The ethical view which
justifies this, puts the benefit of parents above the benefit of
children, robs the daughter of happiness and motherhood, injures
posterity to assist ancestors.

This is one of the products of that very early religion, ancestor
worship; and here we lay a finger on a distinctly masculine influence.

We know little of ethical values during the matriarchate; whatever they
were, they must have depended for sanction on a cult of promiscuous but
efficient maternity.  Our recorded history begins in the patriarchal
period, and it is its ethics alone which we know.

The mother instinct, throughout nature, is one of unmixed devotion, of
love and service, care and defence, with no self-interest.  The animal
father, in such cases as he is of service to the young, assists the
mother in her work in similar fashion.  But the human father in the
family with the male head soon made that family an instrument of desire,
and combat, and self-expression, following the essentially masculine
impulses.  The children were his, and if males, valuable to serve and
glorify him.  In his dominance over servile women and helpless children,
free rein was given to the growth of pride and the exercise of
irresponsible tyranny.  To these feelings, developed without check for
thousands of years, and to the mental habits resultant, it is easy to
trace much of the bias of our early ethical concepts.

Perhaps it is worth while to repeat here that the effort of this book is
by no means to attribute a wholly evil influence to men, and a wholly
good one to women; it is not even claimed that a purely feminine culture
would have advanced the world more successfully.  It does claim that the
influence of the two together is better than that of either one alone;
and in especial to point out what special kind of injury is due to the
exclusive influence of one sex heretofore.

We have to-day reached a degree of human development where both men and
women are capable of seeing over and across the distinctions of sex, and
mutually working for the advancement of the world.  Our progress is,
however, seriously impeded by what we may call the masculine tradition,
the unconscious dominance of a race habit based on this long
androcentric period; and it is well worth while, in the interests of
both sexes, to show the mischievous effects of the predominance of one.

We have in our ethics not only a "double standard" in one special line,
but in nearly all.  Man, as a sex, has quite naturally deified his own
qualities rather than those of his opposite.  In his codes of manners,
of morals, of laws, in his early concepts of God, his ancient religions,
we see masculinity written large on every side.  Confining women wholly
to their feminine functions, he has required of them only what he called
feminine virtues, and the one virtue he has demanded, to the complete
overshadowing of all others, is measured by wholly masculine
requirements.

ln the interests of health and happiness, monogamous marriage proves its
superiority in our race as it has in others.  It is essential to the
best growth of humanity that we practice the virtue of chastity; it is a
human virtue, not a feminine one.  But in masculine hands this virtue
was enforced upon women under penalties of hideous cruelty, and quite
ignored by men.  Masculine ethics, colored by masculine instincts,
always dominated by sex, has at once recognized the value of chastity in
the woman, which is right; punished its absence unfairly, which is
wrong; and then reversed the whole matter when applied to men, which is
ridiculous.

Ethical laws are laws--not idle notions.  Chastity is a virtue because
it promotes human welfare--not because men happen to prize it in women
and ignore it themselves.  The underlying reason for the whole thing is
the benefit of the child; and to that end a pure and noble fatherhood is
requisite, as well as such a motherhood.  Under the limitations of a too
masculine ethics, we have developed on this one line social conditions
which would be absurdly funny if they were not so horrible.

Religion, be it noticed, does not bear out this attitude.  The immense
human need of religion, the noble human character of the great religious
teachers, has always set its standards, when first established, ahead of
human conduct.

Some there are, men of learning and authority, who hold that the
deadening immobility of our religions, their resistance to progress and
relentless preservation of primitive ideals, is due to the conservatism
of women.  Men, they say, are progressive by nature; women are
conservative.  Women are more religious than men, and so preserve old
religious forms unchanged after men have outgrown them.

If we saw women in absolute freedom, with a separate religion devised by
women, practiced by women, and remaining unchanged through the
centuries; while men, on the other hand, bounded bravely forward, making
new ones as fast as they were needed, this belief might be maintained.
But what do we see?  All the old religions made by men, and forced on
the women whether they liked it or not.  Often women not even considered
as part of the scheme--denied souls--given a much lower place in the
system--going from the service of their father's gods to the service of
their husbands--having none of their own.  We see religions which make
practically no place for women, as with the Moslem, as rigidly bigoted
and unchanging as any other.

We see also this: that the wider and deeper the religion, the more
human, the more it calls for practical applications in Christianity--the
more it appeals to women.  Further, in the diverging sects of the
Christian religion, we find that its progressiveness is to be measured,
not by the numbers of its women adherents, but by their relative
freedom.  The women of America, who belong to a thousand sects, who
follow new ones with avidity, who even make them, and who also leave
them all as men do, are women, as well as those of Spain, who remain
contented Romanists, but in America the status of women is higher.

The fact is this: a servile womanhood is in a state of arrested
development, and as such does form a ground for the retention of ancient
ideas.  But this is due to the condition of servility, not to womanhood.
 That women at present are the bulwark of the older forms of our
religions is due to the action of two classes of men: the men of the
world, who keep women in their restricted position, and the men of the
church, who take every advantage of the limitations of women.  When we
have for the first time in history a really civilized womanhood, we can
then judge better of its effect on religion.

Meanwhile, we can see quite clearly the effect of manhood.  Keeping in
mind those basic masculine impulses--desire and combat--we see them
reflected from high heaven in their religious concepts.  Reward!
Something to want tremendously and struggle to achieve!  This is a
concept perfectly masculine and most imperfectly religious.  A religion
is partly explanation--a theory of life; it is partly emotion--an
attitude of mind, it is partly action--a system of morals.  Man's
special effect on this large field of human development is clear.  He
pictured his early gods as like to himself, and they behaved in
accordance with his ideals.  In the dimmest, oldest religions, nearest
the matriarchate, we find great goddesses--types of Motherhood,
Mother-love, Mother-care and Service.  But under masculine dominance,
Isis and Ashteroth dwindle away to an alluring Aphrodite--not Womanhood
for the child and the World--but the incarnation of female
attractiveness for man.

As the idea of heaven developed in the man's mind it became the Happy
Hunting Ground of the savage, the beery and gory Valhalla of the
Norseman, the voluptuous, many-houri-ed Paradise of the Mohammedan.
These are men's heavens all.  Women have never been so fond of hunting,
beer or blood; and their houris would be of the other kind.  It may be
said that the early Christian idea of heaven is by no means planned for
men.  That is trite, and is perhaps the reason why it has never had so
compelling an attraction for them.

Very early in his vague efforts towards religious expression, man voiced
his second strongest instinct--that of combat.  His universe is always
dual, always a scene of combat.  Born with that impulse, exercising it
continually, he naturally assumed it to be the major process in life.
It is not.  Growth is the major process.  Combat is a useful subsidiary
process, chiefly valuable for its initial use, to transmit the physical
superiority of the victor.  Psychic and social advantages are not thus
secured or transmitted.

In no one particular is the androcentric character of our common thought
more clearly shown than in the general deification of what are now
described as "conflict stimuli."  That which is true of the male
creature as such is assumed to be true of life in general; quite
naturally, but by no means correctly.  To this universal masculine error
we may trace in the field of religion and ethics the great devil theory,
which has for so long obscured our minds.  A God without an Adversary
was inconceivable to the masculine mind.  From this basic misconception
we find all our ideas of ethics distorted; that which should have been
treated as a group of truths to be learned and habits to be cultivated
was treated in terms of combat, and moral growth made an everlasting
battle.  This combat theory we may follow later into our common notions
of discipline, government, law and punishment; here is it enough to see
its painful effects in this primary field of ethics and religion?

The third essential male trait of self-expression we may follow from its
innocent natural form in strutting cock or stamping stag up to the
characteristics we label vanity and pride.  The degradation of women in
forcing them to adopt masculine methods of personal decoration as a
means of livelihood, has carried with the concomitant of personal
vanity: but to this day and at their worst we do not find in women the
_naive_ exultant glow of pride which swells the bosom of the men who
march in procession with brass bands, in full regalia of any sort, so
that it be gorgeous, exhibiting their glories to all.

It is this purely masculine spirit which has given to our early concepts
of Deity the unadmirable qualities of boundless pride and a thirst for
constant praise and prostrate admiration, characteristics certainly
unbefitting any noble idea of God.  Desire, combat and self-expression
all have had their unavoidable influence on masculine religions.  What
deified Maternity a purely feminine culture might have put forth we do
not know, having had none such.  Women are generally credited with as
much moral sense as men, and as much religious instinct; but so far it
has had small power to modify our prevailing creeds.

As a matter of fact, no special sex attributes should have any weight in
our ideas of right and wrong.  Ethics and religion are distinctly human
concerns; they belong to us as social factors, not as physical ones.  As
we learn to recognize our humanness, and to leave our sex
characteristics where they belong, we shall at last learn something
about ethics as a simple and practical science, and see that religions
grow as the mind grows to formulate them.

If anyone seeks for a clear, simple, easily grasped proof of our ethics,
it is to be found in a popular proverb.  Struggling upward from beast
and savage into humanness, man has seen, reverenced, and striven to
attain various human virtues.

He was willing to check many primitive impulses, to change many
barbarous habits, to manifest newer, nobler powers.  Much he would
concede to Humanness, but not his sex--that was beyond the range of
Ethics or Religion.  By the state of what he calls "morals," and the
laws he makes to regulate them, by his attitude in courtship and in
marriage, and by the gross anomaly of militarism, in all its senseless
waste of life and wealth and joy, we may perceive this little masculine
exception:

"All's fair in love and war."



COMMENT AND REVIEW


"Inspired Millionaires," by Gerald Stanley Lee, has certainly inspired
one.  We read among the quoted letters on the paper cover one from Mr.
Joseph Fels saying, "I want twenty-five copies of the book to distribute
among the millionaires here.  If the books are well received I will
increase the order."

The impression to the lay mind, not too profusely acquainted with
millionaires, is of amazement at his opportunities; twenty-five among
"the millionaires here," and a possible demand for more!

The impression deepens as we read Mr. Fels' second letter, "Please send
fifty more copies.  I am putting them where they tell."

Seventy-five millionaires "here"--wherever that was; and in other places
more and more and even more of them!  Among so many there must be some
common humanity, possibly some uncommon humanity; it would appear as if
Mr. Lee might be right.

He believes that a millionaire may be a good man, a social enthusiast,
an artist and connoisseur, not in spite of his money, but because of it;
not by giving it away, pre- or post mortem; but by using it _in his
business_.

This is a simple thought after you see it; but it has been generally
overlooked.  Mr. Lee has clear eyes and a silver tongue.  His
perceptions are important and his expressions convincing.  He speaks
plainly also, calling some millionaires by name, and designating others
almost as plainly.

"What could be more pathetic, for instance," he says, "than Mr. ----- as
an educator--a man who is educating-and-mowing-down two hundred thousand
(?) men a day, ten hours a day, for forty years of their lives; that is,
who is separating the souls of his employees from their work, bullying
them into being linked with a work and a method they despise, and who is
trying to atone for it all--this vast terrible schooling, ten hours a
fay, forty years, two hundred thousand men's lives--by piecing together
professors and scholars, putting up a little playhouse of learning,
before the world, to give a few fresh young boys and girls four years
with paper books?--a man the very thought of whom has ruined more men
and devastated more faiths and created more cowards and brutes and fools
in all walks of life than any other influence in the nineteenth century,
and who is trying to eke out at last a spoonful of atonement for it
all--all this vast baptism of the business world in despair and force
and cursing and pessimism, by perching up before it ----- University,
like a dove cote on a volcano.

"It may blur people's eyes for a minute, but everyone really knows in
his heart--every man in this nation--that the only real education Mr.
----- has established, or ever can establish, is the way he has made his
money.  Everyone knows also that the only possible, the only real
education Mr. ----- can give to a man would have to be through the daily
thing he gives the man to do, ten hours a day, through the way he lets
him do it, through the spirit and expression he allows him to put into
it ten hours a day.  Mr. -----'s real school, the one with two hundred
thousand men in it, and eighty million helpless spectators in the
galleries, is a school which is working out a daily, bitter, lying curse
upon the rich, and a bitter, lying curse upon the poor, which it is
going to take the world generations to redeem."

This is a long quotation; but it shows our prophet is not blinded by
sentiment; he knows an un-inspired millionaire when he sees him.

He makes this observation of one of the first important acts of Governor
Hughes.  "He did one of the most memorable and enlightened silences that
has ever been done by any man in the United States."  And then he goes
on to show the power that lies in simply being right.

There are plenty of epigrams in the book, plenty of imagination, plenty
of hard sense; and some mistakes.  Various readers will assort these to
suit their several minds.  But it is funny, having so many men, with so
much money, and so little idea of what to do with it, is it not?

Why shouldn't they, or some of them at least, really do business with it
as Mr. Lee suggests?



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


Question:--What can one do with a bore?  I am not over strong, and very
sensitive to people.  When some people come to see me--and stay--and
they always do stay--it makes me ill--I cannot work well next day.

--Sufferer.

Answer:--My dear Sufferer.  Your problem is a serious one.  Bores are
disagreeable to all and dangerous to some.  They cannot be arrested or
imprisoned; and kerosene does not lessen their numbers.  They commit no
active offence--it is not by doing that they affect us so painfully, but
simply by being.  Especially by being there.

Sub-question:--Can a bore be a bore when no one else is present.

Sub-answer:--We suspect they can.  It is because he bores himself when
alone that he seeks continually to bore others.

Yet some of them are well-intentioned persons who would be grieved to
know they were injurious.  Even the dull and thick-skinned are open to
offence if it is forced upon them.

We suspect that the only real cure is courage on the part of the victim.
 If the suffering host or hostess frankly said, "My dear Sir--or
Madam--you are making me very tired.  I wish you would go away," the
result would leave nothing to be desired.  "But," says the sufferer in
alarm, "they would never come to see us again!"

Well.  Do you want them to?

"But--sometimes I like to see them."  Or, "I cannot afford to quarrel
with So and So!"

Ah!  We will now quote Emerson.  "It you want anything, pay for it and
take it, says God."


Question:--"I have a sick parent.  What is my whole duty in the case?"

--Filial Devotee.

Answer:--It depends on your sex.  If you are a man, your duty is to
provide a home for the patient, a servant, a nurse, a physician, food,
medicine, and two short calls a day.  You will be called "A Devoted
Son."

If you are a woman, you need provide none of these things; but must wait
upon the patient with your own hands as nurse and servant; regardless of
your special ability.  If you do at does a devoted son you will be
called "An Unnatural Daughter."


Question:--"Why do the shapes of shoes change from year to year?  Surely
the shapes of our feet do not.

Answer:--This is one of the inscrutable minor problems of Fashion and
The Market.  The desire for novelty; the lack of a real feeling for
beauty; a savage indifference to physical comfort, the pressure of
necessity or greediness urging the manufacturer to sell more shoes than
people need; the brow-beaten submissiveness of most purchasers and the
persuasive--or insolent--compulsion of salesmen; all these combine to
make our feet ugly and painful.



SUFFRAGE


I became an advocate of full suffrage for women as soon as I was old
enough to understand the value of democratic government, to see that a
true democracy requires the intelligent participation of all the people,
and that women are people.  With further knowledge I advocate woman
suffrage on two grounds: first because a dependent and servile womanhood
is an immovable obstacle to race development; second because the major
defects of our civilization are clearly traceable to the degradation of
the female and the unbalanced predominance of the male, which unnatural
relation is responsible for the social evil, for the predatory and
combative elements in our economic processes, and for that colossal
mingling of folly, waste, and horror, that wholly masculine
phenomenon--war.



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK


AS TO PURPOSE:


_What is The Forerunner?_  It is a monthly magazine, publishing stories
short and serial, article and essay; drama, verse, satire and sermon;
dialogue, fable and fantasy, comment and review.  It is written entirely
by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

_What is it For?_  It is to stimulate thought: to arouse hope, courage
and impatience; to offer practical suggestions and solutions, to voice
the strong assurance of better living, here, now, in our own hands to
make.

_What is it about?_  It is about people, principles, and the questions
of every-day life; the personal and public problems of to-day.  It gives
a clear, consistent view of human life and how to live it.

_Is it a Woman's magazine?_  It will treat all three phases of our
existence--male, female and human.  It will discuss Man, in his true
place in life; Woman, the Unknown Power; the  Child, the most important
citizen.

_Is it a Socialist Magazine?_  It is a magazine for humanity, and
humanity is social.  It holds that Socialism, the economic theory, is
part of our gradual Socialization, and that the duty of conscious
humanity is to promote Socialization.

_Why is it published?_  It is published to express ideas which need a
special medium; and in the belief that there are enough persons
interested in those ideas to justify the undertaking.


AS TO ADVERTISING:


We have long heard that "A pleased customer is the best advertiser."
The Forerunner offers to its advertisers and readers the benefit of this
authority.  In its advertising department, under the above heading, will
be described articles personally known and used.  So far as individual
experience and approval carry weight, and clear truthful description
command attention, the advertising pages of The Forerunner will be
useful to both dealer and buyer.  If advertisers prefer to use their own
statements The Forerunner will publish them if it believes them to be
true.


AS TO CONTENTS:


The main feature of the first year is a new book on a new subject with a
new name:--

_"Our Androcentric Culture."_  this is a study of the historic effect on
normal human development of a too exclusively masculine civilization.
It shows what man, the male, has done to the world: and what woman, the
more human, may do to change it.

_"What Diantha Did."_  This is a serial novel.  It shows the course of
true love running very crookedly--as it so often does--among the
obstructions and difficulties of the housekeeping problem--and solves
that problem.  (NOT by co-operation.)

Among the short articles will appear:

"Private Morality and Public Immorality."
"The Beauty Women Have Lost"
"Our Overworked Instincts."
"The Nun in the Kitchen."
"Genius: Domestic and Maternal."
"A Small God and a Large Goddess."
"Animals in Cities."
"How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money."
"Prize Children"
"Kitchen-Mindedness"
"Parlor-Mindedness"
"Nursery-Mindedness"

There will be short stories and other entertaining matter in each issue.
 The department of "Personal Problems" does not discuss etiquette,
fashions or the removal of freckles.  Foolish questions will not be
answered, unless at peril of the asker.


AS TO VALUE:

If you take this magazine one year you will have:


One complete novel . . . By C. P. Gilman
One new book . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve short stories . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more short articles . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more new poems . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve Short Sermons . . . By C. P. Gilman
Besides "Comment and Review" . . . By C. P. Gilman
"Personal Problems" . . . By C. P. Gilman
And many other things . . . By C. P. Gilman

DON'T YOU THINK IT'S WORTH A DOLLAR?


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________



[Advertisement]


TO RENT


A Summer Cottage
on Lake Champlain
Near the Adirondacks


This is a six-room two-story cottage, natural wood finish, unplastered,
on two and a half acres of land, 600 feet on the lake, with an old apple
orchard and many other trees.  It has on two sides covered piazzas,
outside blinds, open fireplaces in two rooms; and new white enameled
open plumbing, with hot and cold water.  It is about a mile and a half
from Essex Village, and about one-quarter of a mile from the post
office, at the Crater Club, an exclusive summer colony.  Access by boat
and train.

I have not seen this cottage, but I've seen plans, elevations and
photographs of it, and of views from it.  It stands on a bluff, close to
the lake, the Green Mountains far in the east, and the Adirondacks some
twelve miles to the west.  The people who own it will answer further
questions and state facts fully on request, both advantages and
disadvantages.

The list of furnishings is accurate and circumstantial, as follows:


INVENTORY OF CONTENTS OF COTTAGE


LIVING ROOM


Mahogany sofa, small mahogany table
Marble-topped table and "Crowning of Esther"
4 rosewood chairs, steamer chair
Whatnot, wall-bracket, books, basket
Mahogany table, small round 3-legged
Long mantel mirror, gilt frame
3 oil paintings, 3 engravings
Rustic seat (filled with wood)
Old-fashioned heating stove, crated
Candle-lantern, 2 Japanese trays
Door-scraper, woodbasket
Tongs-holder, hearth brush
Child's garden tools
2 sofa cushions
Various small ornaments


KITCHEN


Ironing Table, stand, wax, bosom board
Tin pail, dipper, basin
1 new broom, 1 old broom
Tool box, tools, nails, saw, hatchet
Hammock, barrel hammock, tie ropes
Soap rack, dustpan, scrap basket
Folding hat rack, ladder
Carving set, 6 knives (very old)
Coffee pot, toaster, egg whip, egg beater
5 large white china plates
5 medium and 6 small ditto
6 demi tasse and saucers, same
2 tea cups, 6 saucers, same
2 egg stands, green; 2 sugar bowls
1 butterfly cup and saucer
6 glasses, 1 lemon squeezer
1 mechanical red-glass lamp
2 reading lamps, 3 small hand lamps
3 small bracket lamps, 1 shade
White shades at all windows


GREEN BEDROOM


Green bedstead (three-quarter)
2 mattresses, 2 pillows, madras cover
Green bureau; green washstand
Green table; green rocking chair
Oak chair; 2 pictures; 1 chamber


LARGE EAST BEDROOM


Oak bedstead (double)
Oak bureau, oak washstand
2 mattresses, 2 feather beds, 1 bolster
2 pillows, madras spread
1 box cot, 1 mattress, straw pillow
2 chairs, 2 towel racks
Bureau cover, pen cushion, etc.
3 pictures


SOUTHWEST BEDROOM
Black walnut single bedstead
1 hair mattress and bolster
1 pillow, 1 feather bed, 1 madras spread
Bureau (mirror broken), 2 towel racks
Mahogany washstand, mirror
Small 3-legged table
3 rosewood chairs
Bureau cover, pin cushion, etc.
Shoebag on wall
Oil painting, on copper
Brass stair rods, in closet


NORTHWEST BEDROOM

2 mahogany bureaus, empty trunk
Portable bath-tub, clothes basket
On shelves: 7 sheets, 7 pillow cases
3 table cloths, 10 doilies
4 towels, dish cloths and towels
Bureau and tray cloths
Curtains, enough for doors
Curtains for some windows


Apply to "Summer Cottage," care of The Forerunner or to John B. Burnham,
Agent, Essex, N.Y.





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 8
JUNE, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

Clothing is for five purposes: Decoration, Protection, Warmth, Modesty,
and Symbolism.  Can you explain yours?



THE PURITAN


"Where is God?" I cried.  "Let me hear!"
"I long for the voice of God!"
And I smote and trod
On all things clamoring near;
Small voices dear,
That wept and murmured and sung
Till my heart was wrung;
That shrieked, shrieked loud and clear,
As I with hammer and sword
Slew them in the name of the Lord.
Where is God?" I cried.  "Let me hear!"
But my ears were ringing yet
With cries I could not forget;
The blood was flowing still,
From the thing I could not kill;
A smothered sobbing cry
Filled all the red, wet earth, the cold, hard sky--
God came not near.

Then long I lived alone,
On the desolate land; a stone
On the thing I could not kill.
I bent to my hardened will
All things that lived below;
I strove to climb above,
To the land of living love
I had dreamed of long ago,
But I could not see--not know.
"O God!" I cried, "Come near!
Speak!  Let thy servant hear!
Have I not utterly slain
With tears of blood, with sweat of pain,
In this base heart of mine
All voices old and dear--to hear but Thine!
And if there struggleth still
The thing I could not kill,
Have I not put a stone
On its head?  O Thou alone
Whom I would follow and fear--
Speak!  Let Thy servant hear!"

Silent I lay, and weak;
Then did the darkness speak;
"Child of the World!  My love
Is beneath as well as above!
Thou art not always led
By a light that shines ahead!
But pushed by an impulse blind--
A mighty Power behind!
Lifted, as all things grow,
By forces from below!
Fear not for thy long mistake--
Listen!  And there shall wake
The voice that has found the way
From the beginning, upward ever, into the light of day!
Lo! I am with thee still--
The thing thou couldst not kill!



MAKING A LIVING


"There won't be any litigation and chicanery to help you out, young man.
 I've fixed that.  Here are the title deeds of your precious
country-place; you can sit in that hand-made hut of yours and make
poetry and crazy inventions the rest of your life!  The water's
good--and I guess you can live on the chestnuts!"

"Yes, sir," said Arnold Blake, rubbing his long chin dubiously.  "I
guess I can."

His father surveyed him with entire disgust.  "If you had wit enough you
might rebuild that old saw-mill and make a living off it!"

"Yes, sir," said Arnold again.  "I had thought of that."

"You had, had you?" sneered his father.  "Thought of it because it
rhymed, I bet you!  Hill and mill, eh?  Hut and nut, trees and breeze,
waterfall--beat-'em-all?  I'm something of a poet myself, you see!
Well,--there's your property.  And with what your Mother left you will
buy books and writing paper!  As for my property--that's going to Jack.
I've got the papers for that too.  Not being an idiot I've saved out
enough for myself--no Lear business for mine!  Well, boy--I'm sorry
you're a fool.  But you've got what you seem to like best."

"Yes, sir," said Arnold once more.  "I have, and I'm really much obliged
to you, Father, for not trying to make me take the business."

Then young John Blake, pattern and image of his father, came into
possession of large assets and began to use them in the only correct
way; to increase and multiply without end.

Then old John Blake, gazing with pride on his younger son, whose acumen
almost compensated him for the bitter disappointment of being father to
a poet; set forth for a season of rest and change.

"I'm going to see the world!  I never had time before!" quoth he; and
started off for Europe, Asia, and Africa.

Then Arnold Blake, whose eyes were the eyes of a poet, but whose mouth
had a touch of resemblance to his father's, betook himself to his Hill.

But the night before they separated, he and his brother both proposed to
Ella Sutherland.  John because he had made up his mind that it was the
proper time for him to marry, and this was the proper woman; and Arnold
because he couldn't help it.

John got to work first.  He was really very fond of Ella, and made hot
love to her.  It was a painful surprise to him to be refused.  He argued
with her.  He told her how much he loved her.

"There are others!" said Miss Ella.

He told her how rich he was.

"That isn't the point," said Ella.

He told her how rich he was going to be.

"I'm not for sale!" said Ella, "even on futures!"

Then he got angry and criticised her judgement.

"It's a pity, isn't it," she said, "for me to have such poor
judgment--and for you to have to abide by it!"

"I won't take your decision," said John.  "You're only a child yet.  In
two years' time you'll be wiser.  I'll ask you again then."

"All right," said Ella.  "I'll answer you again then."

John went away, angry, but determined.

Arnold was less categorical.

"I've no right to say a word," he began, and then said it.  Mostly he
dilated on her beauty and goodness and his overmastering affection for
her.

"Are you offering marriage?" she inquired, rather quizzically.

"Why yes--of course!" said he, "only--only I've nothing to offer."

"There's you!" said Ella.

"But that's so little!" said Arnold.  "O! if you will wait for me!--I
will work!--"

"What will you work at?" said Ella.

Arnold laughed.  Ella laughed.  "I love to camp out!" said she.

"Will you wait for me a year?" said Arnold.

"Ye-es," said Ella.  I'll even wait two--if I have to.  But no longer!"

"What will you do then?" asked Arnold miserably.

"Marry you," said Ella.

So Arnold went off to his Hill.

What was one hill among so many?  There they arose about him, far green,
farther blue, farthest purple, rolling away to the real peaks of the
Catskills.  This one had been part of his mother's father's land; a big
stretch, coming down to them from an old Dutch grant.  It ran out like a
promontory into the winding valley below; the valley that had been a
real river when the Catskills were real mountains.  There was some river
there yet, a little sulky stream, fretting most of the year in its
sunken stony bed, and losing its temper altogether when the spring
floods came.

Arnold did not care much for the river--he had a brook of his own; an
ideal brook, beginning with an over-flowing spring; and giving him three
waterfalls and a lake on his own land.  It was a very little lake and
handmade.  In one place his brook ran through a narrow valley or
valleyette--so small it was; and a few weeks of sturdy work had damned
the exit and made a lovely pool.  Arnold did that years ago, when he was
a great hulking brooding boy, and used to come up there with his mother
in summer; while his father stuck to the office and John went to Bar
Harbor with his chums.  Arnold could work hard even if he was a poet.

He quarried stone from his hill--as everyone did in those regions; and
built a small solid house, adding to it from year to year; that was a
growing joy as long as the dear mother lived.

This was high up, near the dark, clear pool of the spring; he had piped
the water into the house--for his mother's comfort.  It stood on a level
terrace, fronting south-westward; and every season he did more to make
it lovely.  There was a fine smooth lawn there now and flowering vines
and bushes; every pretty wild thing that would grow and bloom of itself
in that region, he collected about him.

That dear mother had delighted in all the plants and trees; she studied
about them and made observations, while he enjoyed them--and made poems.
 The chestnuts were their common pride.  This hill stood out among all
the others in the flowering time, like a great pompon, and the odor of
it was by no means attractive--unless you happened to like it, as they
did.

The chestnut crop was tremendous; and when Arnold found that not only
neighboring boys, but business expeditions from the city made a practice
of rifling his mountain garden, he raged for one season and acted the
next.  When the first frost dropped the great burrs, he was on hand,
with a posse of strong young fellows from the farms about.  They beat
and shook and harvested, and sack upon sack of glossy brown nuts were
piled on wagons and sent to market by the owner instead of the
depredator.

Then he and his mother made great plans, the eager boy full of ambition.
 He studied forestry and arboriculture; and grafted the big fat foreign
chestnut on his sturdy native stocks, while his father sneered and
scolded because he would not go into the office.

Now he was left to himself with his plans and hopes.  The dear mother
was gone, but the hill was there--and Ella might come some day; there
was a chance.

"What do you think of it?" he said to Patsy.  Patsy was not Irish.  He
was an Italian from Tuscany; a farmer and forester by birth and
breeding, a soldier by compulsion, an American citizen by choice.

"Fine!" said Patsy.  "Fine.  Ver' good.  You do well."

They went over the ground together.  "Could you build a little house
here?" said Arnold.  "Could you bring your wife?  Could she attend to my
house up there?--and could you keep hens and a cow and raise vegetables
on this patch here--enough for all of us?--you to own the house and
land--only you cannot sell it except to me?"

Then Patsy thanked his long neglected saints, imported his wife and
little ones, took his eldest daughter out of the box factory, and his
eldest son out of the printing office; and by the end of the summer they
were comfortably established and ready to attend to the chestnut crop.

Arnold worked as hard as his man.  Temporarily he hired other sturdy
Italians, mechanics of experience; and spent his little store of capital
in a way that would have made his father swear and his brother jeer at
him.

When the year was over he had not much money left, but he had by his
second waterfall a small electrical plant, with a printing office
attached; and by the third a solid little mill, its turbine wheel
running merrily in the ceaseless pour.  Millstones cost more money than
he thought, but there they were--brought up by night from the Hudson
River--that his neighbors might not laugh too soon.  Over the mill were
large light rooms, pleasant to work in; with the shade of mighty trees
upon the roof; and the sound of falling water in the sun.

By next summer this work was done, and the extra workmen gone.  Whereat
our poet refreshed himself with a visit to his Ella, putting in some
lazy weeks with her at Gloucester, happy and hopeful, but silent.

"How's the chestnut crop?" she asked him.

"Fine.  Ver' good," he answered.  "That's what Patsy says--and Patsy
knows."

She pursued her inquiries.  "Who cooks for you?  Who keeps your camp in
order?  Who washes your clothes?"

"Mrs. Patsy," said he.  "She's as good a cook as anybody need want."

"And how is the prospect?" asked Ella.

Arnold turned lazily over, where he lay on the sand at her feet, and
looked at her long and hungrily.  "The prospect," said he, "is divine."

Ella blushed and laughed and said he was a goose; but he kept on
looking.

He wouldn't tell her much, though.  "Don't, dear," he said when she
urged for information.  "It's too serious.  If I should fail--"

"You won't fail!" she protested.  "You can't fail!  And if you
do--why--as I told you before, I like to camp out!"

But when he tried to take some natural advantage of her friendliness she
teased him--said he was growing to look just like his father!  Which
made them both laugh.

Arnold returned and settled down to business.  He purchased stores of
pasteboard, of paper, of printers ink, and a little machine to fold
cartons.  Thus equipped he retired to his fastness, and set dark-eyed
Caterlina to work in a little box factory of his own; while clever
Guiseppe ran the printing press, and Mafalda pasted.  Cartons, piled
flat, do not take up much room, even in thousands.

Then Arnold loafed deliberately.

"Why not your Mr. Blake work no more?" inquired Mrs. Patsy of her
spouse.

"O he work--he work hard," replied Patsy.  "You women--you not
understand work!"

Mrs. Patsy tossed her head and answered in fluent Italian, so that her
husband presently preferred out of doors occupation; but in truth Arnold
Blake did not seem to do much that summer.  He loafed under his great
trees, regarding them lovingly; he loafed by his lonely upper waterfall,
with happy dreaming eyes; he loafed in his little blue lake--floating
face to the sky, care free and happy as a child.  And if he scribbled a
great deal--at any sudden moment when the fit seized him, why that was
only his weakness as a poet.

Toward the end of September, he invited an old college friend up to see
him; now a newspaper man--in the advertising department.  These two
seemed to have merry times together.  They fished and walked and
climbed, they talked much; and at night were heard roaring with laughter
by their hickory fire.

"Have you got any money left?" demanded his friend.

"About a thou--" said Arnold.  "And that's got to last me till next
spring, you know."

"Blow it in--blow in every cent--it'll pay you.  You can live through
the winter somehow.  How about transportation?"

"Got a nice electric dray--light and strong.  Runs down hill with the
load to tidewater, you see, and there's the old motorboat to take it
down.  Brings back supplies."

"Great!--It's simply great!  Now, you save enough to eat till spring and
give me the rest.  Send me your stuff, all of it! and as soon as you get
in a cent above expenses--send me that--I'll 'tend to the advertising!"

He did.  He had only $800 to begin with.  When the first profits began
to come in he used them better; and as they rolled up he still spent
them.  Arnold began to feel anxious, to want to save money; but his
friend replied: "You furnish the meal--I'll furnish the market!"  And he
did.

He began it in the subway in New York; that place of misery where eyes,
ears, nose, and common self-respect are all offended, and even an
advertisement is some relief.

"Hill" said the first hundred dollars, on a big blank space for a week.
"Mill" said the second.  "Hill Mill Meal," said the third.

The fourth was more explicit.

"When tired of every cereal
Try our new material--
 Hill Mill Meal."

The fifth--

"Ask your grocer if you feel
An interest in Hill Mill Meal.
 Samples free."

The sixth--
"A paradox!  Surprising!  True!
Made of chestnuts but brand new!
 Hill Mill Meal."

And the seventh--

"Solomon said it couldn't be done,
There wasn't a new thing under the sun--
 He never ate Hill Mill Meal!"

Seven hundred dollars went in this one method only; and meanwhile
diligent young men in automobiles were making arrangements and leaving
circulars and samples with the grocer.  Anybody will take free samples
and everybody likes chestnuts.  Are they not the crown of luxury in
turkey stuffing?  The gem of the confection as _marron glaces_?  The
sure profit of the corner-merchant with his little charcoal stove, even
when they are half scorched and half cold?  Do we not all love them,
roast, or boiled--only they are so messy to peel.

Arnold's only secret was his process; but his permanent advantage was in
the fine quality of his nuts, and his exquisite care in manufacture.  In
dainty, neat, easily opened cartons (easily shut too, so they were not
left gaping to gather dust), he put upon the market a sort of samp,
chestnuts perfectly shelled and husked, roasted and ground, both coarse
and fine.  Good?  You stood and ate half a package out of your hand,
just tasting of it.  Then you sat down and ate the other half.

He made pocket-size cartons, filled with whole ones, crafty man!  And
they became "The Business Man's Lunch" forthwith.  A pocketful of roast
chestnuts--and no mess nor trouble!  And when they were boiled--well, we
all know how good boiled chestnuts are.  As to the meal, a new variety
of mush appeared, and gems, muffins, and pancakes that made old epicures
feel young again in the joys of a fresh taste, and gave America new
standing in the eyes of France.

The orders rolled in and the poetry rolled out.  The market for a new
food is as wide as the world; and Jim Chamberlin was mad to conquer it,
but Arnold explained to him that his total output was only so many
bushels a year.

"Nonsense!" said Jim.  "You're a--a--well, a _poet_!  Come!  Use your
imagination!  Look at these hills about you--they could grow chestnuts
to the horizon!  Look at this valley, that rattling river, a bunch of
mills could run here!  You can support a fine population--a whole
village of people--there's no end to it, I tell you!"

"And where would my privacy be then and the beauty of the place?" asked
Arnold, "I love this green island of chestnut trees, and the winding
empty valley, just freckled with a few farms.  I'd hate to support a
village!"

"But you can be a Millionaire!" said Jim.

"I don't want to be a Millionaire," Arnold cheerfully replied.

Jim gazed at him, opening and shutting his mouth in silence.
"You--confounded old--_poet_!" he burst forth at last.

"I can't help that," said Arnold.

"You'd better ask Miss Sutherland about it, I think," his friend drily
suggested.

"To be sure!  I had forgotten that--I will," the poet replied.

Then he invited her to come up and visit his Hill, met her at the train
with the smooth, swift, noiseless, smell-less electric car, and held her
hand in blissful silence as they rolled up the valley road.  They wound
more slowly up his graded avenue, green-arched by chestnut boughs.

He showed her the bit of meadowy inlet where the mill stood, by the
heavy lower fall; the broad bright packing rooms above, where the busy
Italian boys and girls chattered gaily as they worked.  He showed her
the second fall, with his little low-humming electric plant; a bluestone
building, vine-covered, lovely, a tiny temple to the flower-god.

"It does our printing," said Arnold, "gives us light, heat and
telephones.  And runs the cars."

Then he showed her the shaded reaches of his lake, still, starred with
lilies, lying dark under the curving boughs of water maples, doubling
the sheer height of flower-crowned cliffs.

She held his hand tighter as they wound upward, circling the crown of
the hill that she might see the splendid range of outlook; and swinging
smoothly down a little and out on the green stretch before the house.

Ella gasped with delight.  Gray, rough and harmonious, hung with
woodbine and wildgrape, broad-porched and wide-windowed, it faced the
setting sun.  She stood looking, looking, over the green miles of
tumbling hills, to the blue billowy far-off peaks swimming in soft
light.

"There's the house," said Arnold, "furnished--there's a view room built
on--for you, dear; I did it myself.  There's the hill--and the little
lake and one waterfall all for us!  And the spring, and the garden, and
some very nice Italians.  And it will earn--my Hill and Mill, about
three or four thousand dollars a year--above _all_ expenses!"

"How perfectly splendid!" said Ella.  "But there's one thing you've left
out!"

"What's that?" he asked, a little dashed.

"_You_!" she answered.  "Arnold Blake!  My Poet!"

"Oh, I forgot," he added, after some long still moments.  "I ought to
ask you about this first.  Jim Chamberlain says I can cover all these
hills with chestnuts, fill this valley with people, string that little
river with a row of mills, make breakfast for all the world--and be a
Millionaire.  Shall I?"

"For goodness sake--_No_!" said Ella.  "Millionaire, indeed?  And spoil
the most perfect piece of living I ever saw or heard of!"

Then there was a period of bliss, indeed there was enough to last
indefinitely.

But one pleasure they missed.  They never saw even the astonished face,
much less the highly irritated mind, of old John Blake, when he first
returned from his two years of travel.  The worst of it was he had eaten
the stuff all the way home-and liked it!  They told him it was Chestnut
Meal--but that meant nothing to him.  Then he began to find the jingling
advertisements in every magazine; things that ran in his head and
annoyed him.

"When corn or rice no more are nice,
 When oatmeal seems to pall,
When cream of wheat's no longer sweet
 And you abhor them all--"

"I do abhor them all!" the old man would vow, and take up a newspaper,
only to read:

 "Better than any food that grows
 Upon or in the ground,
Strong, pure and sweet
And good to eat
 Our tree-born nuts are found."

"Bah!" said Mr. Blake, and tried another, which only showed him:

"Good for mother, good for brother,
 Good for child;
As for father--well, rather!
 He's just wild."

He was.  But the truth never dawned upon him till he came to this one:

"About my hut
There grew a nut
 Nutritious;
I could but feel
'Twould make a meal
 Delicious.

I had a Hill,
I built a Mill
 Upon it.
And hour by hour
I sought for power
 To run it.

To burn my trees
Or try the breeze
 Seemed crazy;
To use my arm
Had little charm--
 I'm lazy!

The nuts are here,
But coal!--Quite dear
 We find it!
We have the stuff.
Where's power enough
 To grind it?

What force to find
My nuts to grind?
 I've found it!
The Water-fall
Could beat 'em all--
 And ground it!

PETER POETICUS."

"Confound your impudence!" he wrote to his son.  "And confound your
poetic stupidity in not making a Big Business now you've got a start!
But I understand you do make a living, and I'm thankful for that."

*

Arnold and Ella, watching the sunset from their hammock, laughed softly
together, and lived.



TEN SUGGESTIONS


This is a sermon.

Its purpose is to point out the need of a clearer conception of right
and wrong, based on knowledge.

Its text is from Ecclesiastes I, 13, "And I gave my heart to seek and
search out by wisdom concerning all things that are done under heaven;
this sore travail hath God given to the sons of man to be exercised
therewith."

(Let me remark here that I had my sermon in mind before I looked for the
text; but a more expressive and beautifully apposite one I never saw!)

The Preacher of old is right; this sore travail was laid upon us, a most
useful exercise; but we have lazily evaded it and taken other people's
judgment as to our duties.

That would-be Empire Builder, Moses, legislated for his people with an
unlimited explicitness that reflects small credit on their power to
search out by wisdom.

His cut and dried rules went down to most delicate selection of ovine
vicera for the sacrifice--"the fat and the rump, and the fat that
covereth the inwards and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys";
and into careful dietetics, which would cut out from our food list the
hare and rabbit, the lobster, the crab, the turtle, the clam, oyster and
scallop, indeed all shellfish.

The "fowls that creep, going upon all four," whatever they may be, are
also considered an abomination; but locusts, bald locusts, and
grasshoppers are recommended by name.  Even in clothing we are carefully
forbidden to use a garment of linen and woolen, yet among our pious
Puritan ancestors "linsey-woolsey" was a very common and useful cloth.

All these secondary Mosaic directions have long since been relegated to
their place in archaeology; at least by the Christian churches, but the
ten commandments are still held as coming direct from God; and form the
main basis of our ethics.  Yet while tacitly accepted they are not
studied, and few people have remarked how the pressure of social
development has changed their weight and relative value.

At first they stood, imposing and alike, an even row, to break anyone of
which was held an equal sin.  Few persons now would hold disrespect to a
patently disrespectable parent as wrong as murder; or a failure to
"remember the Sabbath" as great a sin as adultery.  Experience has
taught us something, and those who have undertaken that sore travail--to
seek and search out by wisdom--have found that some things are much more
wrong than others--and why.

I met once a very pious man; dark, gloomy, violently virtuous.  He
looked like one of Cromwell's deacons; but was in fact a southerner and
an Episcopalian.  Mention was made of an enlightened jury, somewhere in
the west, who had acquitted a man who stole bread for his starving
children.

"Good!" said I; "good! we are at last learning to discriminate in our
judgment of right and wrong."

He glowered at me forbiddingly.  "There is no room for judgment," he
said; as if he were Fate itself.  "There is a Commandment which says,
'Thou shalt not steal!'"

"Do you mean that all the Commandments stand equally?" I inquired.
"That we must hold all of the same importance, without qualification,
and to break any is an equal sin?"

"I do!" he said, with solemn assurance.

I meditated a little, and then asked, "Did you not say to me the other
day that if the negroes ever tried to assert social equality, you would
be among the first to shoulder your gun and put them in their place?"

"I would!" he admitted proudly.

"But," said I, "is there not a commandment which says, 'Thou shalt not
kill?'"

He was silent.  He was much annoyed, and saw no way out of his morass of
contradiction.  Then I offered what looked like a plank, a
stepping-stone to safety.  "Surely," said I, "there is some room for
judgment.  The later and smaller laws and regulations give many
directions for killing.  All through ancient Hebraic history it was
frequently a special mandate, the people being distinctly commanded to
slay and destroy, sometimes even to kill women, children and the unborn.
 And to-day--even a Christian man, in the exercise of legal justice, in
defence of his life, his family, his country,--surely he has a right to
kill!  Do you not think there are times when it is right to kill?"

With a long breath of relief he agreed.

"Then why may it not be sometimes right to commit adultery?"

The conversation lapsed.  He knew the two offenses were not in the same
category.  He knew that the reasons adultery is wrong, and killing is
wrong are older than Hebrew history, and rest on observed facts.  It
would be a hardy thinker who would defend adultery; but we all know--to
quote Ecclesiastes again that "There is a time to kill and a time to
heal."

It may be that that set of ten applied with beautiful precision to the
special vices of that people and that time; but there is room for many
more needed ones to-day.  There is no commandment against gambling, for
instance; one of the most universal and indefensible evils.  Gambling
does no one good; the winner of unearned money is corrupted and the
loser both corrupted and deprived.  Gambling undermines all habits of
industry and thrift; it unsettles our reliance on care, patience,
thoroughness, ability, and tempts us to rely on chance.  It is an
unmitigated social evil, but goes unforbidden by the Mosaic code, which
was so careful about which kind of fat to sacrifice and how much
uncleaner a girl baby was than a boy.

Speaking of social evil, _the_ social evil is not referred to.  Adultery
is an offence to be sure, dangerous and destructive to family and social
life; but prostitution is a greater evil; far more common--and goes
unmentioned; unless in the original it meant the same thing.

Lying is not referred to.  Of course some say that bearing false witness
means lying; but surely malicious perjury is a special crime, distinctly
described, and not the same thing as mere misrepresentation.

Another of the blackest sins known to man, always so recognized and
punished, goes without notice in this list:--treason.  To betray one's
country--what could be worse!  Is it not visibly wickeder than to play
ball on Sunday?

On the positive side our whole code of ethics, Hebrew and Christian,
fails to mention the main duty of life--to do your best work.  This is
the one constant social service; and its reverse is a constant social
injury.

The old ethics is wholly personal, the new ethics (still unwritten) is
social first--personal later.  In the old list we find, on a par with
adultery, theft and murder, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain."  Does this mean common swearing?  Is it as wrong to
say 'damn' as to commit murder?

No, we do know better than that.  We know that in those days, when lying
was so universal a habit that no one thought of prohibiting it, the two
most evil extremes were flat perjury with intent to harm, and the solemn
invocation of God's name to bind a bargain or seal a vow, afterward
broken.  Both these were carefully forbidden.  No one thought of
believing anything unless it was sworn to--and if they broke their oath
there was no reliance anywhere.  To compel a slippery people to keep
faith--that was good ethics; and then most necessary.

We do not run our business that way now; we do greater evil in new
ways--and there is no commandment to forbid us.  If that one read, "Thou
shalt not break faith nor cheat," it would have applied equally well
now.

The very first one is a curious proof of the then belief in many gods.
Jehovah does not say, "I am the only God," He says, "Thou shalt have no
other gods before me."  That there were others is admitted, but it is
forbidden to run after them.

Nowadays we do not care enough even for our own idea of God--to say
nothing of other people's!  And look at all that careful objection to
images and likenesses, and idol worship generally.  The Jews forebore
painting and sculpture for many centuries because of that prohibition.
Now everyone with a kodak breaks it.  The growth of true religious
feeling, as well as scientific thought, makes it impossible for
civilized peoples to make images and worship them, as did those
ingenious old Moabites and Midianites, Jebuzites and Perrizites,
Hittites and Haggathites.

The rigorous prohibition of coveting has always puzzled me--to covet is
such a private feeling.  And if you keep it to yourself, what harm does
it do?  You may spend your life wishing you had your neighbor's large
red automobile; but he is none the poorer.  Of course if one sits up
nights to covet; or does it daytimes, by the hour, to the exclusion of
other business; it would interfere with industry and injure the health.
Can it be that the ancient Hebrews were that covetous?

Now suppose we do in good earnest give our hearts to seek and search out
all things that are done under heaven, to classify and study them, to
find which are most injurious and which are most beneficial, and base
thereon a farther code of ethics--by no means excluding the old.

The two great Christian laws will stand solidly.  The absolute and all
absorbing love of God and the love of the neighbor which is much the
same thing--are good general directions.  But in daily living; in
confronting that ceaseless array of "all things that are done under
heaven," the average person cannot stop to think out just how this game
of bridge or that horse-race interferes with love of God or man.  We
need good hard honest scientific study; sore travail, which God hath
given to the sons of men, to be exercised therewith; and a further code
of ethics, not claimed as directly handed down from Heaven, but proven
by plain facts of common experience.  We do not need to imitate or
parody the authoritative utterance of any priesthood; we want an
exposition which a bright child can understand and a practical man
respect.

We have succeeded before now in establishing elaborate codes of
conduct--yes and enforcing them, without any better sanction than habit,
prejudice, tradition.  A schoolboy has his notion of right behavior, not
traceable to Hebrew or Christian ethics; so has the grown man, putting
his quaint ideas of "honor" and "sportsmanship" far beyond any religious
teaching.  Our scorn of the tell-tale and the coward is not based on the
Bible, but on experience; our inhuman cruelty to "the woman who has
sinned" is based on mere ignorance and falsehood.

Take that fatuous "unwritten law" which allows a man to murder another
man and the wife who has offended what he calls "his honor."  There is
nothing about that honor of his in old or new testament.  It is a notion
of his own, which overrides, "Thou shalt not kill," as easily as "lying
like a gentleman" overrides, "Thou shalt not bear false witness."

Since we have shown such simple capacity to invent and enforce codes of
ethics, of questionable value, why not exercise our ingenuity in making
some better ones?  We know more now.

As a matter of fact we do not want commands, we want instructions; we
want to know why things are wrong, which are the most wrong, and what
are their respective consequences.  But if a distinct set of
prohibitions is preferred it is quite possible to make some that would
fit our present day conditions more closely than the Hebraic list.

It would be an interesting thing to have earnest people give their minds
to this and seek and search out for themselves a new light on everyday
ethics.  As a starter here is a tentative list to think about; open to
alteration and addition by anyone.

And on what authority are these presented? some will ask.  Not on
"authority" at all; but on law, natural law, the right and wrong
indicated being long since known to us.  And are these set
presumptuously in the place of the Divine Command? will be tremblingly
inquired.  By no means.  The Ten stand as before--these are auxiliary
and merely suggestive of study.

1.  Thou shalt learn that human love is a natural law and obey it as the
main condition of life: the service of man is the worship of God.

2.  Thou shalt learn that the first duty of human life is to find thy
work and do it; for by labor ye live and grow and in it is worship,
pride and joy.

3.  Thou shalt keep an open mind and use it, welcoming new knowledge and
new truth and giving them to all.

4.  Thou shalt maintain liberty and justice for everyone.

5.  Thou shalt maintain thy health and thy chastity.  Temperance and
purity are required of all men.

6.  Thou shalt not lie, break faith or cheat.

7.  Thou shalt not gamble, nor live idly on the labor of others, nor by
any usury.

8.  Thou shalt not steal; nor take from one another save in fair
exchange or as a free gift.

9.  Thou shalt not do unnecessary hurt to any living thing.

10.  Thou shalt not worship the past nor be content with the present,
for growth is the law of life.



THE MALINGERER


Exempt!  She "does not have to work!"
 So might one talk
Defending long, bedridden ease,
Weak yielding ankles, flaccid knees,
 With, "I don't have to walk!"

Not have to work.  Why not?  Who gave
 Free pass to you?
You're housed and fed and taught and dressed
By age-long labor of the rest--
 Work other people do!

What do you give in honest pay
 For clothes and food?
Then as a shield, defence, excuse,
She offers her exclusive use--
 Her function--Motherhood!

Is motherhood a trade you make
 A living by?
And does the wealth you so may use,
Squander, accumulate, abuse,
 Show motherhood as high?

Or does the motherhood of those
 Whose toil endures,
The farmers' and mechanics' wives,
Hard working servants all their lives--
 Deserve less price than yours?

We're not exempt!  Man's world runs on,
 Motherless, wild;
Our servitude and long duress,
Our shameless, harem idleness,
 Both fail to serve the child.



GENIUS, DOMESTIC AND MATERNAL


Most of us believe the human race to be the highest form of life--so
far.  Not all of us know why.  Because we do not properly realize the
causes of our superiority and swift advance, we do not take advantage of
them as we should.

Among various causes of human supremacy, none counts more than our
social gift of genius, the special power that is given to some more than
others, as part of social specialization.  In social life, which is
organic, we do not find each one doing the same work, but some,
especially fitted for one thing, doing that thing for the service of the
others.  No creature approaches us in the degree of our specialization,
and the crowning power of individual genius.

Because of this power we, as a whole, have benefited by the "genius for
mechanics," for invention, for discovery, for administration, and all
the commoner lines of work, as well as in the fine arts and professions.
 The great surgeon is a genius as well as the great painter or poet, and
the world profits by the mighty works of these specialized servants.

For the development of genius we must allow it to specialize, of course.
 The genius of Beethoven would have done us little good if he had passed
his life as a bookkeeper or dealer in ironware.  The greatest of poets
could produce little poetry if he worked twelve hours a day in a rolling
mill.  Genius may overcome some forms of opposition, but it must be
allowed to do the work it has a genius for--or none will be manifested.

We can easily see what a loss it would have been to the world if all
forms of genius had been checked and smothered; if we had no better
poetry than the average man writes when he is in love, no better surgery
than each of us could perform if he had to, no better music than the
tunes we make up to amuse ourselves, no better machinery than each of us
is capable of inventing.  We know full well the limitation of the
average mind.

Now, suppose we had no better guide than that, no specialization at all,
no great financiers, no great administrators, no great astronomers or
architects, no great anything--simply the average mind, doing everything
for itself without any help from others.  A nice, flat, low-grade world
we would have!  Think of the houses, each of them "the house that Jack
built," and not a building on earth bigger or better than Jack alone
could make!  No sciences, no arts, no skilled trades (one cannot develop
much special skill while doing everything for oneself); no teachers and
leaders of any sort--just the strength and ingenuity of each one of us,
trying to meet his own needs by his own efforts.

This would be stark savagery, not civilization.

All this is as true of women as it is of men; women also are human
beings, and members of society.  Women have capacity for specialization,
for strong preference and high ability in certain kinds of work.  But
since a man's world has viewed women only as females, since their
feminine functions were practically uniform, and since everything they
did was considered a feminine function, therefore women have not been
allowed to specialize and develop genius.  All women were required to do
the same work (a) "keep house"; (b) "rear children."

These things we have at no time viewed as arts, trades, sciences or
professions; they were considered as feminine functions, and to be
performed by "instinct."  Instinct is hereditary habit.  It is developed
by the repeated action of identical conditions.  It is a fine thing, for
animals, who have nothing else.

In humanity, instinct disappears in proportion as reason develops.  Our
conditions vary, even more and rapidly, and we have to have something
much more rapid and alterable than instinct.  No great man runs a
business by instinct; he learns how.  For the performance of any social
service of importance, three powers are required.  First, special
ability or genius; second, education; third, experience.  When we are
served by special ability, education and experience, we are well served.
 Any human business left without these is left at the bottom of the
ladder.

That is where we find the two great branches of human service left to
women, the domestic and the maternal.  These universal services, of most
vital importance not only to our individual lives but to our social
development, are left to be performed by the average mind, by the
average woman, by instinct.

Our shoemaking is done by a shoemaker, our blacksmithing by a
blacksmith, our doctoring by a doctor; but our cooking is done not by a
cook, but by the woman a man happens to marry.  She may, by rare chance,
have some genius for cooking; but even if she does, there is no
education and experience, save such as she may get from a cook book and
a lifetime of catering to one family.  Quite aside from cooking, the
management of our daily living is a form of social service which should
be given by genius, education, and experience; and, like the cooking, it
is performed by any pretty girl a man secures in marriage.

This vast field of comfort or discomfort, ease or disease, happiness or
unhappiness, is cut off from the uplifting influence of specialization.

But it is in the tasks and cares we call "maternal" that our strange
restriction of normal development does most damage.  We have lumped
under their large and generous term all the things done to the little
child--by his mother.  What his father does for him is not so limited.

A child needs a house to live in--but his father does not have to build
it.  A child needs shoes, hats, furniture, dishes, toys--his father does
not have to make them.  A child needs, above all things,
instruction--his father does not have to give it.

No, the fathers, humanly specialized, developing great skill and making
constant progress, give to the world's children human advantages.  A
partly civilized state, comparative peace, such and such religions and
systems of education, such and such fruits of the industry, trade,
commerce of the time, and the mighty works of genius; all these men give
to children, not individually, as parents, but collectively, as human
beings.  The father who, as a savage, could give his children only a
father's services, now gives them the services of carpenters and masons,
farmers and graziers, doctors and lawyers, painters and glaziers,
butchers and bakers, soldiers and sailors--all the multiplied abilities
of modern specialization; while the mother is "only mother" still.

There are three exceptions: that most ancient division of labor which
provided the nurse, the next oldest which gave the servant, and the very
recent one which has lifted the world so wonderfully, the teacher.  The
first two are still unspecialized.  As any woman is supposed to be a
competent mother, so any woman is supposed to be a competent nursemaid
or housemaid.  The teacher, however, has to learn his business, is a
skilled professional, and accomplishes much.

Teaching is a form of specialized motherhood.  It gives "the mother
love"--an attribute of all female animals toward their own young--a
chance to grow to social form as a general love of children, and through
specialization, training, experience, it makes this love far more
useful.  The teacher is to some degree a social mother, and the
advantage of this social motherhood is so great that it would seem
impossible to question it.  Motherhood is common to all races of
humanity, down to the Bushmen, as well as to beasts and birds.
Education is found only with us; and in proportion to our stage of
social progress.  Where there is no education but the mother's--no
progress.  Where the teacher comes, and in proportion to the quantity
and quality of teachers, so advances civilization.  In Africa there are
mothers, prolific and affectionate; in China, in India, everywhere.  But
the nations with the most and best education are those which lead the
world.

Similarly in domestic service.  Everywhere on earth, to the lowest
savages, we find the individual woman serving the individual man.  "Home
cooking" varies with the home; from the oil-lamp of the Eskimo or
brazier of the Oriental, up to the more elaborate stoves and ranges of
to-day; but the art of cooking has grown through the men cooks, who made
it a business, and gave to this valuable form of social service the
advantages of genius, training and experience.

The whole people share in the development of architecture, of electric
transportation and communication, of science and invention.  But no such
development is possible to the general public, in these basic
necessities of child care and house care, for the obvious reason above
stated, that these tasks are left to the unspecialized, untrained,
unexperienced average woman.

The child should have from birth the advantages of civilization.  The
home should universally share in the progress of the age.  To some
extent this now takes place, as far as the advance in child-culture can
spread and filter downward to the average mother, through the darkness
of ignorance and the obstacles of prejudice, and as far as public
statutes can enforce upon the private home the sanitary requirements of
the age.  But this is a slow and pitifully small advance; we need
genius, for our children; genius to insure the health and happiness of
our daily lives.

Motherhood pure and simple, the bearing, nursing, loving and providing
for a child, is a feminine function, and should be common to all women.
But that "providing" does not have to be done in person.  The mother has
long since deputed to the father the two main lines of child
care--defence and maintenance.  She has allowed her responsibility to
shift in this matter on the ground that he could do it better than she
could.

In instruction she has accepted the services of the school, and of the
music-teacher, dancing-teacher, and other specialists; in case of
illness, she relies on the doctor; in daily use, she is glad to
patronize the shoemaker and hatter, seamstress and tailor.  Yet in the
position of nurse and teacher to the baby, she admits no assistance
except a servant.  But the first four or five years of a child's life
are of preeminent importance.  Here above all is where he needs the
advantage of genius, training and experience, and is given but ignorant
affection and hired labor.

Some, to-day, driven to the wall by glaring facts such as these, that
babies die most of preventable diseases, and that their death rate is
greatest while they are most absolutely in their mother's care, do admit
the need of improvement.  But they say, "The mother should engage this
specialist to help her in the home," or, "The mother must be taught."

If all normal women are to be mothers, as they should, how are any
specialists to be hired in private homes?  A young nursemaid cannot
reach the heights of training and experience needed.  As to teaching the
mother--_who is to teach her?_

Who understands this work?  No one!  And no one ever will until the
natural genius for child culture of some women is improved by training,
strengthened and deepened by experience, and recognized as social
service.  Such women should be mothers themselves, of course, They would
be too few, by the laws of specialization, to be hired as private
nurses, and too expensive, if they were not too few.  The great
Specialist in Child Culture should be as highly honored and paid as a
college president--more so; no place on earth is more important.

The average mother is not, and never can be, an eminent specialist, any
more than the average father can be.  Averages do not attain genius.
Our children need genius in their service.  "Where are we to get it?"
demand the carpers and doubters, clinging to their rocky fastnesses of
tradition and habit like so many limpets.

It is here already.

Some women have a natural genius for the care and training of babies and
little children.  Some women have a natural genius for household
management.  All this wealth of genius is now lost to the world except
in so far as it is advantageous to one family.

And here, by a paradox not surprising, it io often disadvantageous.  A
woman capable of smoothly administering a large hotel may be extremely
wearing as a private housekeeper.  Napoleon, as a drill sergeant, would
have been hard to bear.

A woman with the real human love for children, the capacity for detail
in their management, the profound interest in educational processes,
which would make her a beneficent angel if she had the care of hundreds,
may make her a positive danger if she has to focus all that capacity on
two or three.

(To be concluded.)



PRISONERS


A MAN IN PRISON.


His cell is small.

His cell is dark.

His cell is cold.

His labor is monotonous and hard.

He is cut off from the light of day, from freedom of movement, from the
meeting of friends, from all amusement and pleasure and variety.

His hard labor is the least of his troubles--without it he could not
support life.  What he most suffers from is the monotony--the
confinement--from being in prison.

He longs for his wife.  He longs for his children.  He longs for his
friends.

But first and last and always; highest and deepest and broadest, with
all his body and soul and mind he longs for Freedom!


A WOMAN IN PRISON.


Her cell is small.

Her cell is dark.

Her cell is cold.

Her labor is monotonous and hard.

She is cut off from the light of day, from freedom of movement, from the
meeting of friends, from all amusement and pleasure and variety.

Her hard labor is the least of her troubles--without it she could not
support life.  What she most suffers from is the monotony--the
confinement--from being in prison.

She longs for her husband.  She longs for her children.  She longs for
her friends.

But first and last and always; highest and deepest and broadest, with
all her body and soul and mind she longs for Freedom!


THE MAN OF ALL WORK.


A man is doing all the housework of one family.  He loves this family.
It is his family.

He loves his home.

He does not hate his work; but he does get tired of it.

He has to sleep at home all night, and he would prefer to go away from
it in the morning; to go out into the air; to join his friends; to go to
the shop, the office, the mill, the mine; to work with other men at more
varied tasks.

He loves his children; and wishes to do his duty as a father, but he has
them with him by night as well as by day; and even a father's patience
sometimes gives out.  Also he has to do the housework.  And even a
father, with all his love and strength cannot be a cook, a teacher, and
a nurse at the same time.

Sometimes the cooking suffers, but more often it is the teaching or
nursing or both--for his wife is rather exacting in the matter of food.

He has a kind wife and they are happy together.

He is proud of his children and they love him.

But when he was a young man he had a strange ambition--he wanted to Be
Somebody--to Do Something--to be independent, to take hold of the
world's work and help.

His children say, "We need you, Father--you cannot be spared--your duty
is here!"

His wife says, "I need you, Husband!  You cannot be spared.  I like to
feel that you are here with the children--keeping up our Home--your duty
is here."

And the Voice of the Priest, and the Voice of the Past and the Voice of
Common Prejudice all say:

"The duty of a father is to his children.  The duty of a husband is to
his wife.  Somebody must do the housework!  Your duty is here!"

Yet the man is not satisfied.


THE WOMAN OF ALL WORK.


? ? ? ? ?



MAY LEAVES


My whole heart grieves
 To feel the thrashing winds of March
On the young May leaves--
The cold dry dust winds of March
 On the tender, fresh May leaves.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER VIII.

See, "Locked Inside," January No.


Behind the straight purple backs and smooth purple legs on the box
before them, Madam Weatherstone and Mrs. Weatherstone rolled home
silently, a silence of thunderous portent.  Another purple person opened
the door for them, and when Madam Weatherstone said, "We will have tea
on the terrace," it was brought them by a fourth.

"I was astonished at your attitude, Viva," began the old lady, at
length.  "Of course it was Mrs. Dankshire's fault in the first place,
but to encourage that,--outrageous person!  How could you do it!"

Young Mrs. Weatherstone emptied her exquisite cup and set it down.

"A sudden access of courage, I suppose," she said.  "I was astonished at
myself."

"I wholly disagree with you!" replied her mother-in-law.  "Never in my
life have I heard such nonsense.  Talk like that would be dangerous, if
it were not absurd!  It would destroy the home!  It would strike at the
roots of the family."

Viva eyed her quietly, trying to bear in mind the weight of a tradition,
the habits of a lifetime, the effect of long years of uninterrupted
worship of household gods.

"It doesn't seem so to me," she said slowly, "I was much interested and
impressed.  She is evidently a young woman of knowledge and experience,
and put her case well.  It has quite waked me up."

"It has quite upset you!" was the reply.  "You'll be ill after this, I
am sure.  Hadn't you better go and lie down now?  I'll have some dinner
sent to you."

"Thank you," said Viva, rising and walking to the edge of the broad
terrace.  "You are very kind.  No.  I do not wish to lie down.  I
haven't felt so thoroughly awake in--" she drew a pink cluster of
oleander against her cheek and thought a moment--"in several years."
There was a new look about her certainly.

"Nervous excitement," her mother-in-law replied.  "You're not like
yourself at all to-night.  You'll certainly be ill to-morrow!"

Viva turned at this and again astonished the old lady by serenely
kissing her.  "Not at all!" she said gaily.  "I'm going to be well
to-morrow.  You will see!"

She went to her room, drew a chair to the wide west window with the far
off view and sat herself down to think.  Diantha's assured poise, her
clear reasoning, her courage, her common sense; and something of
tenderness and consecration she discerned also, had touched deep chords
in this woman's nature.  It was like the sound of far doors opening,
windows thrown up, the jingle of bridles and clatter of hoofs, keen
bugle notes.  A sense of hope, of power, of new enthusiasm, rose in her.

Orchardina Society, eagerly observing "young Mrs. Weatherstone" from her
first appearance, had always classified her as "delicate."  Beside the
firm features and high color of the matron-in-office, this pale quiet
slender woman looked like a meek and transient visitor.  But her white
forehead was broad under its soft-hanging eaves of hair, and her chin,
though lacking in prognathous prominence or bull-dog breadth, had a
certain depth which gave hope to the physiognomist.

She was strangely roused and stirred by the afternoon's events.  "I'm
like that man in 'Phantastes'," she thought contemptuously, "who stayed
so long in that dungeon because it didn't occur to him to open the door!
 Why don't I--?" she rose and walked slowly up and down, her hands
behind her.  "I will!" she said at last.

Then she dressed for dinner, revolving in her mind certain suspicions
long suppressed, but now flaming out in clear conviction in the light of
Diantha's words.  "Sleeping in, indeed!" she murmured to herself.  "And
nobody doing anything!"

She looked herself in the eye in the long mirror.  Her gown was an
impressive one, her hair coiled high, a gold band ringed it like a
crown.  A clear red lit her checks.

She rang.  Little Ilda, the newest maid, appeared, gazing at her in shy
admiration.  Mrs. Weatherstone looked at her with new eyes.  "Have you
been here long?" she asked.  "What is your name?"

"No, ma'am," said the child--she was scarce more.  "Only a week and two
days.  My name is Ilda."

"Who engaged you?"

"Mrs. Halsey, ma'am."

"Ah," said Mrs. Weatherstone, musing to herself, "and I engaged Mrs.
Halsey!"  "Do you like it here?" she continued kindly.

"Oh yes, ma'am!" said Ilda.  "That is--" she stopped, blushed, and
continued bravely.  "I like to work for you, ma'am."

"Thank you, Ilda.  Will you ask Mrs. Halsey to come to me--at once,
please."

Ilda went, more impressed than ever with the desirability of her new
place, and mistress.

As she was about to pass the door of Mr. Matthew Weatherstone, that
young gentleman stepped out and intercepted her.  "Whither away so fast,
my dear?" he amiably inquired.

"Please let one pass, sir!  I'm on an errand.  Please, sir?"

"You must give me a kiss first!" said he--and since there seemed no
escape and she was in haste, she submitted.  He took six--and she ran
away half crying.

Mrs. Halsey, little accustomed to take orders from her real mistress,
and resting comfortably in her room, had half a mind to send an excuse.

"I'm not dressed," she said to the maid.

"Well she is!" replied Ilda, "dressed splendid.  She said 'at once,
please.'"

"A pretty time o' day!" said the housekeeper with some asperity, hastily
buttoning her gown; and she presently appeared, somewhat heated, before
Mrs. Weatherstone.

That lady was sitting, cool and gracious, her long ivory paper-cutter
between the pages of a new magazine.

"In how short a time could you pack, Mrs. Halsey?" she inquired.

"Pack, ma'am?  I'm not accustomed to doing packing.  I'll send one of
the maids.  Is it your things, ma'am?"

"No," said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "It is yours I refer to.  I wish you to
pack your things and leave the house--in an hour.  One of the maids can
help you, if necessary.  Anything you cannot take can be sent after you.
 Here is a check for the following month's wages."

Mrs. Halsey was nearly a head taller than her employer, a stout showy
woman, handsome enough, red-lipped, and with a moist and crafty eye.
This was so sudden a misadventure that she forgot her usual caution.
"You've no right to turn me off in a minute like this!" she burst forth.
 "I'll leave it to Madam Weatherstone!"

"If you will look at the terms on which I engaged you, Mrs. Halsey, you
will find that a month's warning, or a month's wages, was specified.
Here are the wages--as to the warning, that has been given for some
months past!"

"By whom, Ma'am?"

"By yourself, Mrs. Halsey--I think you understand me.  Oscar will take
your things as soon as they are ready."

Mrs. Halsey met her steady eye a moment--saw more than she cared to
face--and left the room.

She took care, however, to carry some letters to Madam Weatherstone, and
meekly announced her discharge; also, by some coincidence, she met Mr.
Matthew in the hall upstairs, and weepingly confided her grievance to
him, meeting immediate consolation, both sentimental and practical.

When hurried servants were sent to find their young mistress they
reported that she must have gone out, and in truth she had; out on her
own roof, where she sat quite still, though shivering a little now and
then from the new excitement, until dinner time.

This meal, in the mind of Madam Weatherstone, was the crowning factor of
daily life; and, on state occasions, of social life.  In her cosmogony
the central sun was a round mahogany table; all other details of
housekeeping revolved about it in varying orbits.  To serve an endless
series of dignified delicious meals, notably dinners, was, in her eyes,
the chief end of woman; the most high purpose of the home.

Therefore, though angry and astounded, she appeared promptly when the
meal was announced; and when her daughter-in-law, serene and royally
attired, took her place as usual, no emotion was allowed to appear
before the purple footman who attended.

"I understood you were out, Viva," she said politely.

"I was," replied Viva, with equal decorum.  "It is charming outside at
this time in the evening--don't you think so?"

Young Matthew was gloomy and irritable throughout the length and breadth
of the meal; and when they were left with their coffee in the drawing
room, he broke out, "What's this I hear about Mrs. Halsey being fired
without notice?"

"That is what I wish to know, Viva," said the grandmother.  "The poor
woman is greatly distressed.  Is there not some mistake?"

"It's a damn shame," said Matthew.

The younger lady glanced from one to the other, and wondered to see how
little she minded it.  "The door was there all the time!" she thought to
herself, as she looked her stepson in the eye and said, "Hardly
drawing-room language, Matthew.  Your grandmother is present!"

He stared at her in dumb amazement, so she went on, "No, there is no
mistake at all.  I discharged Mrs. Halsey about an hour before dinner.
The terms of the engagement were a month's warning or a month's wages.
I gave her the wages."

"But! but!" Madam Weatherstone was genuinely confused by this sudden
inexplicable, yet perfectly polite piece of what she still felt to be in
the nature of 'interference' and 'presumption.'  "I have had no fault to
find with her."

"I have, you see," said her daughter-in-law smiling.  "I found her
unsatisfactory and shall replace her with something better presently.
How about a little music, Matthew?  Won't you start the victrolla?"

Matthew wouldn't.  He was going out; went out with the word.  Madam
Weatherstone didn't wish to hear it--had a headache--must go to her
room--went to her room forthwith.  There was a tension in the
athmosphere that would have wrung tears from Viva Weatherstone a week
ago, yes, twenty-four hours ago.

As it was she rose to her feet, stretching herself to her full height,
and walked the length of the great empty room.  She even laughed a
little.  "It's open!" said she, and ordered the car.  While waiting for
it she chatted with Mrs. Porne awhile over the all-convenient telephone.

*

Diantha sat at her window, watching the big soft, brilliant moon behind
the eucalyptus trees.  After the close of the strenuous meeting, she had
withdrawn from the crowd of excited women anxious to shake her hand and
engage her on the spot, had asked time to consider a number of good
opportunities offered, and had survived the cold and angry glances of
the now smaller but far more united Home and Culture Club.  She declined
to talk to the reporters, and took refuge first in an open car.  This
proved very unsatisfactory, owing to her sudden prominence.  Two
persistent newspaper men swung themselves upon the car also and insisted
on addressing her.

"Excuse me, gentlemen," she said, "I am not acquainted with you."

They eagerly produced their cards--and said they were "newspaper men."

"I see," said Diantha, "But you are still men?  And gentlemen, I
suppose?  I am a woman, and I do not wish to talk with you."

"Miss Bell Declines to Be Interviewed," wrote the reporters, and spent
themselves on her personal appearance, being favorably impressed
thereby.

But Miss Bell got off at the next corner and took a short cut to the
house where she had rented a room.  Reporters were waiting there, two
being women.

Diantha politely but firmly declined to see them and started for the
stairs; but they merely stood in front of her and asked questions.  The
girl's blood surged to her cheeks; she smiled grimly, kept absolute
silence, brushed through them and went swiftly to her room, locking the
door after her.

The reporters described her appearance--unfavorably this time; and they
described the house--also unfavorably.  They said that "A group of
adoring-eyed young men stood about the doorway as the flushed heroine of
the afternoon made her brusque entrance."  These adorers consisted of
the landlady's Johnny, aged thirteen, and two satellites of his, still
younger.  They _did_ look at Diantha admiringly; and she _was_ a little
hurried in her entrance--truth must be maintained.

Too irritated and tired to go out for dinner, she ate an orange or two,
lay down awhile, and then eased her mind by writing a long letter to
Ross and telling him all about it.  That is, she told him most of it,
all the pleasant things, all the funny things; leaving out about the
reporters, because she was too angry to be just, she told herself.  She
wrote and wrote, becoming peaceful as the quiet moments passed, and a
sense grew upon her of the strong, lasting love that was waiting so
patiently.

"Dearest," her swift pen flew along, "I really feel much encouraged.  An
impression has been made.  One or two men spoke to me afterward; the
young minister, who said such nice things; and one older man, who looked
prosperous and reliable.  'When you begin any such business as you have
outlined, you may count on me, Miss Bell,' he said, and gave me his
card.  He's a lawyer--P. L. Wiscomb; nice man, I should think.  Another
big, sheepish-looking man said, 'And me, Miss Bell.'  His name is
Thaddler; his wife is very disagreeable.  Some of the women are
favorably impressed, but the old-fashioned kind--my!  'If hate killed
men, Brother Lawrence!'--but it don't."

She wrote herself into a good humor, and dwelt at considerable length on
the pleasant episode of the minister and young Mrs. Weatherstone's
remarks.  "I liked her," she wrote.  "She's a nice woman--even if she is
rich."

There was a knock at her door.  "Lady to see you, Miss."

"I cannot see anyone," said Diantha; "you must excuse me."

"Beg pardon, Miss, but it's not a reporter; it's--."  The landlady
stretched her lean neck around the door edge and whispered hoarsely,
"It's young Mrs. Weatherstone!"

Diantha rose to her feet, a little bewildered.  "I'll be right down,"
she said.  But a voice broke in from the hall, "I beg your pardon, Miss
Bell, but I took the liberty of coming up; may I come in?"

She came in, and the landlady perforce went out.  Mrs. Weatherstone held
Diantha's hand warmly, and looked into her eyes.  "I was a schoolmate of
Ellen Porne," she told the girl.  "We are dear friends still; and so I
feel that I know you better than you think.  You have done beautiful
work for Mrs. Porne; now I want you to do to it for me.  I need you."

"Won't you sit down?" said Diantha.

"You, too," said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "Now I want you to come to
me--right away.  You have done me so much good already.  I was just a
New England bred school teacher myself at first, so we're even that far.
 Then you took a step up--and I took a step down."

Diantha was a little slow in understanding the quick fervor of this new
friend; a trifle suspicious, even; being a cautious soul, and somewhat
overstrung, perhaps.  Her visitor, bright-eyed and eager, went on.  "I
gave up school teaching and married a fortune.  You have given it up to
do a more needed work.  I think you are wonderful.  Now, I know this
seems queer to you, but I want to tell you about it.  I feel sure you'll
understand.  At home, Madam Weatherstone has had everything in charge
for years and years, and I've been too lazy or too weak, or too
indifferent, to do anything.  I didn't care, somehow.  All the machinery
of living, and no _living_--no good of it all!  Yet there didn't seem to
be anything else to do.  Now you have waked me all up--your paper this
afternoon--what Mr. Eltwood said--the way those poor, dull, blind women
took it.  And yet I was just as dull and blind myself!  Well, I begin to
see things now.  I can't tell you all at once what a difference it has
made; but I have a very definite proposition to make to you.  Will you
come and be my housekeeper, now--right away--at a hundred dollars a
month?"

Diantha opened her eyes wide and looked at the eager lady as if she
suspected her nervous balance.

"The other one got a thousand a year--you are worth more.  Now, don't
decline, please.  Let me tell you about it.  I can see that you have
plans ahead, for this business; but it can't hurt you much to put them
off six months, say.  Meantime, you could be practicing.  Our place at
Santa Ulrica is almost as big as this one; there are lots of servants
and a great, weary maze of accounts to be kept, and it wouldn't be bad
practice for you--now, would it?"

Diantha's troubled eyes lit up.  "No--you are right there," she said.
"If I could do it!"

"You'll have to do just that sort of thing when you are running your
business, won't you?" her visitor went on.  "And the summer's not a good
time to start a thing like that, is it?"

Diantha meditated.  "No, I wasn't going to.  I was going to start
somewhere--take a cottage, a dozen girls or so--and furnish labor by the
day to the other cottages."

"Well, you might be able to run that on the side," said Mrs.
Weatherstone.  "And you could train my girls, get in new ones if you
like; it doesn't seem to me it would conflict.  But to speak to you
quite frankly, Miss Bell, I want you in the house for my own sake.  You
do me good."

They discussed the matter for some time, Diantha objecting mainly to the
suddenness of it all.  "I'm a slow thinker," she said, "and this is
so--so attractive that I'm suspicious of it.  I had the other thing all
planned--the girls practically engaged."

"Where were you thinking of going?" asked Mrs. Weatherstone.

"To Santa Ulrica."

"Exactly!  Well, you shall have your cottage and our girls and give them
part time.  Or--how many have you arranged with?"

"Only six have made definite engagements yet."

"What kind?"

"Two laundresses, a cook and three second maids; all good ones."

"Excellent!  Now, I tell you what to do.  I will engage all those girls.
 I'm making a change at the house, for various reasons.  You bring them
to me as soon as you like; but you I want at once.  I wish you'd come
home with me to-night!  Why don't you?"

Diantha's scanty baggage was all in sight.  She looked around for an
excuse.  Mrs. Weatherstone stood up laughing.

"Put the new address in the letter," she said, mischievously, "and come
along!"

*

And the purple chauffeur, his disapproving back ineffectual in the
darkness, rolled them home.



THE ROOM AT THE TOP


There is room at the top?
Ah yes!  Were you ever there?
Do you know what they bear
Whose struggle does not stop
Till they reach the room at the top?

Think you first of the way,
How long from the bottom round,--
From the safe, warm, common ground
In the light of the common day--
'Tis a long way.  A dark way.

And think of the fight.
It is not so hard to stand
And strive off the broad free land;
But to climb in the wind and night,
And fight,--and climb,--and fight!

And the top when you enter in!
Ah! the fog!  The frost!  The dark!
And the hateful voices--hark!
O the comfort that you win!
Yes, there's room at the top.  Come in!



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


VIII.

EDUCATION.


The origin of education is maternal.  The mother animal is seen to teach
her young what she knows of life, its gains and losses; and, whether
consciously done or not, this is education.  In our human life,
education, even in its present state, is the most important process.
Without it we could not maintain ourselves, much less dominate and
improve conditions as we do; and when education is what it should be,
our power will increase far beyond present hopes.

In lower animals, speaking generally, the powers of the race must be
lodged in each individual.  No gain of personal experience is of avail
to the others.  No advantages remain, save those physically transmitted.
 The narrow limits of personal gain and personal inheritance rigidly hem
in sub-human progress.  With us, what one learns may be taught to the
others.  Our life is social, collective.  Our gain is for all, and
profits us in proportion as we extend it to all.  As the human soul
develops in us, we become able to grasp more fully our common needs and
advantages; and with this growth has come the extension of education to
the people as a whole.  Social functions are developed under natural
laws, like physical ones, and may be studied similarly.

In the evolution of this basic social function, what has been the effect
of wholly masculine influence?

The original process, instruction of individual child by individual
mother, has been largely neglected in our man-made world.  That was
considered as a subsidiary sex-function of the woman, and as such, left
to her "instinct."  This is the main reason why we show such great
progress in education for older children, and especially for youths, and
so little comparatively in that given to little ones.

We have had on the one side the natural current of maternal education,
with its first assistant, the nursemaid, and its second, the
"dame-school"; and on the other the influence of the dominant class,
organized in university, college, and public school, slowly filtering
downward.

Educational forces are many.  The child is born into certain conditions,
physical and psychic, and "educated" thereby.  He grows up into social,
political and economic conditions, and is further modified by them.  All
these conditions, so far, have been of androcentric character; but what
we call education as a special social process is what the child is
deliberately taught and subjected to; and it is here we may see the same
dominant influence so clearly.

This conscious education was, for long, given to boys alone, the girls
being left to maternal influence, each to learn what her mother knew,
and no more.  This very clear instance of the masculine theory is
glaring enough by itself to rest a case on.  It shows how absolute was
the assumption that the world was composed of men, and men alone were to
be fitted for it.  Women were no part of the world, and needed no
training for its uses.  As females they were born and not made; as human
beings they were only servants, trained as such by their servant
mothers.

This system of education we are outgrowing more swiftly with each year.
The growing humanness of women, and its recognition, is forcing an equal
education for boy and girl.  When this demand was first made, by women
of unusual calibre, and by men sufficiently human to overlook
sex-prejudice, how was it met?  What was the attitude of woman's
"natural protector" when she began to ask some share in human life?

Under the universal assumption that men alone were humanity, that the
world was masculine and for men only, the efforts of the women were met
as a deliberate attempt to "unsex" themselves and become men.  To be a
woman was to be ignorant, uneducated; to be wise, educated, was to be a
man.  Women were not men, visibly; therefore they could not be educated,
and ought not to want to be.

Under this androcentric prejudice, the equal extension of education to
women was opposed at every step, and is still opposed by many.  Seeing
in women only sex, and not humanness, they would confine her exclusively
to feminine interests.  This is the masculine view, _par excellence_.
In spite of it, the human development of women, which so splendidly
characterizes our age, has gone on; and now both woman's colleges and
those for both sexes offer "the higher education" to our girls, as well
as the lower grades in school and kindergarten.

In the special professional training, the same opposition was
experienced, even more rancorous and cruel.  One would think that on the
entrance of a few straggling and necessarily inferior feminine beginners
into a trade or profession, those in possession would extend to them the
right hand of fellowship, as comrades, extra assistance as beginners,
and special courtesy as women.

The contrary occurred.  Women were barred out, discriminated against,
taken advantage of, as competitors; and as women they have had to meet
special danger and offence instead of special courtesy.  An
unforgettable instance of this lies in the attitude of the medical
colleges toward women students.  The men, strong enough, one would
think, in numbers, in knowledge, in established precedent, to be
generous, opposed the newcomers first with absolute refusal; then, when
the patient, persistent applicants did get inside, both students and
teachers met them not only with unkindness and unfairness, but with a
weapon ingeniously well chosen, and most discreditable--namely,
obscenity.  Grave professors, in lecture and clinic, as well as grinning
students, used offensive language, and played offensive tricks, to drive
the women out--a most androcentric performance.

Remember that the essential masculine attitude is one of opposition, of
combat; his desire is obtained by first overcoming a competitor; and
then see how this dominant masculinity stands out where it has no
possible use or benefit--in the field of education.  All along the line,
man, long master of a subject sex, fought every step of woman toward
mental equality.  Nevertheless, since modern man has become human enough
to be just, he has at last let her have a share in the advantages of
education; and she has proven her full power to appreciate and use these
advantages.

Then to-day rises a new cry against "women in education."  Here is Mr.
Barrett Wendell, of Harvard, solemnly claiming that teaching women
weakens the intellect of the teacher, and every now and then bursts out
a frantic sputter of alarm over the "feminization" of our schools.  It
is true that the majority of teachers are now women.  It is true that
they do have an influence on growing children.  It would even seem to be
true that that is largely what women are for.

But the male assumes his influence to be normal, human, and the female
influence as wholly a matter of sex; therefore, where women teach boys,
the boys become "effeminate"--a grievous fall.  When men teach girls, do
the girls become -----?  Here again we lack the analogue.  Never has it
occurred to the androcentric mind to conceive of such a thing as being
too masculine.  There is no such word!  It is odd to notice that which
ever way the woman is placed, she is supposed to exert this degrading
influence; if the teacher, she effeminizes her pupils; if the pupil, she
effeminizes her teachers.

Now let us shake ourselves free, if only for a moment, from the
androcentric habit of mind.

As a matter of sex, the female is the more important.  Her share of the
processes which sex distinction serves is by far the greater.  To be
feminine--if one were nothing else, is a far more extensive and
dignified office than to be masculine--and nothing else.

But as a matter of humanity the male of our species is at present far
ahead of the female.  By this superior humanness, his knowledge, his
skill, his experience, his organization and specialization, he makes and
manages the world.  All this is human, not male.  All this is as open to
the woman as the man by nature, but has been denied her during our
androcentric culture.

But even if, in a purely human process, such as education, she does
bring her special feminine characteristics to bear, what are they, and
what are the results?

We can see the masculine influence everywhere still dominant and
superior.  There is the first spur, Desire, the base of the reward
system, the incentive of self-interest, the attitude which says, "Why
should I make an effort unless it will give me pleasure?" with its
concomitant laziness, unwillingness to work without payment.  There is
the second spur, Combat, the competitive system, which sets one against
another, and finds pleasure not in learning, not exercising the mind,
but in getting ahead of one's fellows.  Under these two wholly masculine
influences we have made the educational process a joy to the few who
successfully attain, and a weary effort, with failure and contumely
attached, to all the others.  This may be a good method in
sex-competition, but is wholly out of place and mischievous in
education.  Its prevalence shows the injurious masculization of this
noble social process.

What might we look for in a distinctly feminine influence?  What are
these much-dreaded feminine characteristics?

The maternal ones, of course.  The sex instincts of the male are of a
preliminary nature, leading merely to the union preceding parenthood.
The sex instincts of the female cover a far larger field, spending
themselves most fully in the lasting love, the ceaseless service, the
ingenuity and courage of efficient motherhood.  To feminize education
would be to make it more motherly.  The mother does not rear her
children by a system of prizes to be longed for and pursued; nor does
she set them to compete with one another, giving to the conquering child
what he needs, and to the vanquished, blame and deprivation.  That would
be "unfeminine."

Motherhood does all it knows to give to each child what is most needed,
to teach all to their fullest capacity, to affectionately and
efficiently develop the whole of them.

But this is not what is meant by those who fear so much the influence of
women.  Accustomed to a wholly male standard of living, to masculine
ideals, virtues, methods and conditions, they say--and say with some
justice--that feminine methods and ideals would be destructive to what
they call "manliness."  For instance, education to-day is closely
interwoven with games and sports, all of an excessively masculine
nature.  "The education of a boy is carried on largely on the
playground!" say the objectors to women teachers.  Women cannot join
them there; therefore, they cannot educate them.

What games are these in which women cannot join?  There are forms of
fighting, of course, violent and fierce, modern modifications of the
instinct of sex-combat.  It is quite true that women are not adapted, or
inclined, to baseball or football or any violent game.  They are
perfectly competent to take part in all normal athletic development, the
human range of agility and skill is open to them, as everyone knows who
has been to the circus; but they are not built for physical combat; nor
do they find ceaseless pleasure in throwing, hitting or kicking things.

But is it true that these strenuous games have the educational value
attributed to them?  It seems like blasphemy to question it.  The whole
range of male teachers, male pupils, male critics and spectators, are
loud in their admiration for the "manliness" developed by the craft,
courage, co-ordinative power and general "sportsmanship" developed by
the game of football, for instance; that a few young men are killed and
many maimed, is nothing in comparison to these advantages.

Let us review the threefold distinction on which this whole study rests,
between masculine, feminine and human.  Grant that woman, being
feminine, cannot emulate man in being masculine--and does not want to.
Grant that the masculine qualities have their use and value, as well as
feminine ones.  There still remain the human qualities shared by both,
owned by neither, most important of all.  Education is a human process,
and should develop human qualities--not sex qualities.  Surely our boys
are sufficiently masculine, without needing a special education to make
them more so.

The error lies here.  A strictly masculine world, proud of its own sex
and despising the other, seeing nothing in the world but sex, either
male or female, has "viewed with alarm" the steady and rapid growth of
humanness.  Here, for instance, is a boy visibly tending to be an
artist, a musician, a scientific discoverer.  Here is another boy not
particularly clever in any line, nor ambitious for any special work,
though he means in a general way to "succeed"; he is, however, a big,
husky fellow, a good fighter, mischievous as a monkey, and strong in the
virtues covered by the word "sportsmanship."  This boy we call "a fine
manly fellow."

We are quite right.  He is.  He is distinctly and excessively male, at
the expense of his humanness.  He may make a more prepotent sire than
the other, though even that is not certain; he may, and probably will,
appeal more strongly to the excessively feminine girl, who has even less
humanness than he; but he is not therefore a better citizen.

The advance of civilization calls for human qualities, in both men and
women.  Our educational system is thwarted and hindered, not as Prof.
Wendell and his life would have us believe, by "feminization," but by an
overweening masculization.

Their position is a simple one.  "We are men.  Men are human beings.
Women are only women.  This is a man's world.  To get on in it you must
do it man-fashion--i.e., fight, and overcome the others.  Being
civilized, in part, we must arrange a sort of "civilized warfare," and
learn to play the game, the old crude, fierce male game of combat, and
we must educate our boys thereto."  No wonder education was denied to
women.  No wonder their influence is dreaded by an ultra-masculine
culture.

It will change the system in time.  It will gradually establish an equal
place in life for the feminine characteristics, so long belittled and
derided, and give pre-eminent dignity to the human power.

Physical culture, for both boys and girls, will be part of such a
modified system.  All things that both can do together will be accepted
as human; but what either boys or girls have to retire apart to practice
will be frankly called masculine and feminine, and not encouraged in
children.

The most important qualities are the human ones, and will be so named
and honored.  Courage is a human quality, not a sex-quality.  What is
commonly called courage in male animals is mere belligerence, the
fighting instinct.  To meet an adversary of his own sort is a universal
masculine trait; two father cats may fight fiercely each other, but both
will run from a dog as quickly as a mother cat.  She has courage enough,
however, in defence of her kittens.

What this world most needs to-day in both men and women, is the power to
recognize our public conditions; to see the relative importance of
measures; to learn the processes of constructive citizenship.  We need
an education which shall give its facts in the order of their
importance; morals and manners based on these facts; and train our
personal powers with careful selection, so that each may best serve the
community.

At present, in the larger processes of extra-scholastic education, the
advantage is still with the boy.  From infancy we make the gross mistake
of accentuating sex in our children, by dress and all its limitations,
by special teaching of what is "ladylike" and "manly."  The boy is
allowed a freedom of experience far beyond the girl.  He learns more of
his town and city, more of machinery, more of life, passing on from
father to son the truths as well as traditions of sex superiority.

All this is changing before our eyes, with the advancing humanness of
women.  Not yet, however, has their advance affected, to any large
extent, the base of all education; the experience of a child's first
years.  Here is where the limitations of women have checked race
progress most thoroughly.  Here hereditary influence was constantly
offset by the advance of the male.  Social selection did develop higher
types of men, though sex-selection reversed still insisted on primitive
types of women.  But the educative influence of these primitive women,
acting most exclusively on the most susceptible years of life, has been
a serious deterrent to race progress.

Here is the dominant male, largely humanized, yet still measuring life
from male standards.  He sees women only as a sex.  (Note here the
criticism of Europeans on American women.  "Your women are so sexless!"
they say, meaning merely that our women have human qualities as well as
feminine.)  And children he considers as part and parcel of the same
domain, both inferior classes, "women and children."

I recall in Rimmer's beautiful red chalk studies, certain profiles of
man, woman and child, and careful explanation that the proportion of the
woman's face and head were far more akin to the child than to the man.
What Mr. Rimmer should have shown, and could have, by profuse
illustration, was that the faces of boy and girl differ but slightly,
and the faces of old men and women differ as little, sometimes not at
all; while the face of the woman approximates the human more closely
than that of the man; while the child, representing race more than sex,
is naturally more akin to her than to him.  The male reserves more
primitive qualities, the hairiness, the more pugnacious jaw; the female
is nearer to the higher human types.

An ultra-male selection has chosen women for their femininity first, and
next for qualities of submissiveness and patient service bred by long
ages of servility.

This servile womanhood, or the idler and more excessively feminine type,
has never appreciated the real power and place of the mother, and has
never been able to grasp or to carry out any worthy system of education
for little children.  Any experienced teacher, man or woman, will own
how rare it is to find a mother capable of a dispassionate appreciation
of educative values.  Books in infant education and child culture
generally are read by teachers more than mothers, so our public
libraries prove.  The mother-instinct, quite suitable and sufficient in
animals, is by no means equal to the requirements of civilized life.
Animal motherhood furnishes a fresh wave of devotion for each new birth;
primitive human motherhood extends that passionate tenderness over the
growing family for a longer period; but neither can carry education
beyond its rudiments.

So accustomed are we to our world-old method of entrusting the first
years of the child to the action of untaught, unbridled mother-instinct,
that suggestions as to a better education for babies are received with
the frank derision of massed ignorance.

That powerful and brilliant writer, Mrs. Josephine Daskam Bacon, among
others has lent her able pen to ridicule and obstruct the gradual
awakening of human intelligence in mothers, the recognition that babies
are no exception to the rest of us in being better off for competent
care and service.  It seems delightfully absurd to these reactionaries
that ages of human progress should be of any benefit to babies, save,
indeed, as their more human fathers, specialized and organized, are able
to provide them with better homes and a better world to grow up in.  The
idea that mothers, more human, should specialize and organize as well,
and extend to their babies these supreme advantages, is made a laughing
stock.

It is easy and profitable to laugh with the majority; but in the
judgment of history, those who do so, hold unenviable positions.  The
time is coming when the human mother will recognize the educative
possibilities of early childhood, learn that the ability to rightly
teach little children is rare and precious, and be proud and glad to
avail themselves of it.

We shall then see a development of the most valuable human qualities in
our children's minds such as would now seem wildly Utopian.  We shall
learn from wide and long experience to anticipate and provide for the
steps of the unfolding mind, and train it, through carefully prearranged
experiences, to a power of judgment, of self-control, of social
perception, now utterly unthought of.

Such an education would begin at birth; yes, far before it, in the
standards of a conscious human motherhood.  It would require a quite
different status of wifehood, womanhood, girlhood.  It would be wholly
impossible if we were never to outgrow our androcentric culture.



COMMENT AND REVIEW


With the May issue of the American Magazine closes the first set of
papers on "The American Woman," by Miss Ida Tarbell.  She has to a high
degree the historian's power to collate facts and so marshall them as to
give a clear picture of the time and scenes in question.  I always read
her work with admiration and respect, also with enjoyment, personal and
professional.  The strong, far-seeing mind at work; the direct style;
and the value of the subject matter, place this writer high among our
present day teachers.

For these reasons I was wholly unprepared for the painful shock caused
by reading the opening page in the March number of these articles.
Preceding issues had treated of the rise of the Equal Suffrage movement
in this country; while not wholly sympathetic, these were fair, and ably
treated.

The March number begins: "What was the American Woman doing in the '40's
and '50's that she went on her way so serenely while a few of her sex
struggled and suffered to gain for her what they believed to be her
rights?"  And she goes on to show for what reason she kept out of the
Woman's Rights Movement, "reasons, on the whole, simple and noble."

Here are the reasons.

"She was too much occupied with preserving and developing the great
traditions of life she had inherited and accepted. . . . She was firmly
convinced that these traditions were the best the world had so far
developed, not merely for women, but for society.  She did not deny that
women had not the full opportunity they should have; but as she saw it,
no more did men.  She saw civil and educational and social changes going
on about her.  She feared their coming too fast rather than too slow.

"And it was no unworthy thing that she was doing.  Take that part of her
life so often spoken of with contempt--her social life.  Those who would
pass society by as a frivolous and unworthy institution are those who
have never learned its real functions--who confuse the selfish business
of amusement with the serious task of providing _an intimate circle for
the free exchange of ideals and of service,_ for stimulus and enjoyment.

"It is through society that _the quickening of mind and heart best comes
about--that the nature is aroused, the fancy heightened.  It is the very
foundation of civilization--society.  The church and state work through
it.  Morals are made and unmade in it.  Ideas find life or death
there."_

The italics are mine.

For so clear-headed a woman as Miss Tarbell to commit herself to
statements like these was a keen disappointment to a sincere admirer.  I
have quoted at length that there may be no mistake as to her meaning.
The "society" referred to is unmistakably that business of exchanging
entertainments which most of us do pass by as "a frivolous and unworthy
institution;" but which some find the sufficient occupation of a
lifetime.

That human intercourse is profoundly important no one will deny; we know
that contact and exchange does quicken the mind and heart, does give
stimulus and enjoyment.  It is even true in a large sociological sense
that human intercourse is the foundation of civilization.  But to call
"society" the foundation of civilization does seem like putting a very
long train of carts before the horse.

Women who work for suffrage, like other women, and men also, need to
meet other people, need relaxation, need the stimulus of contact with
differing minds, and get it.  Being a suffragist is not like being a
leper--or a pauper--or excommunicated.  There is nothing about the
belief itself to cut off the believer from her kind, and make it
impossible to invite her to dinner.

"Society" is of course averse to meeting persons who talk seriously of
important things.  We are all taught as children that religion and
politics must not be discussed in society--and the cause of woman
suffrage is often both.

"The selfish business of amusement" is so predominant in "society" that
amusing people are the preferred guests; and if some earnest and
noteworthy person is drawn into "society" as a temporary exhibit, he is
expected to be amusing if he can, and not talk "shop."

It may be admitted at once that Miss Tarbell's main contention is true.
It was of course because most women were so occupied in "preserving and
developing the great traditions of life" that they could not open their
minds to new convictions.  They were of course suspicious of change, so
is the mass of people at all times, in proportion to their ignorance.
The deadening effect of a ceaseless round of housework keeps most women
from grasping general issues of importance; and the deadening effect of
a ceaseless round of entertainments does the same thing to the few who
represent "society."  But to have that "society" presented to us as a
noble soul-satisfying rightfully exclusive occupation, is a shock.

If it is a natural, simple right form of meeting together it is in no
way forbidding to woman suffragists.  If it is the "round of gaieties"
to which our newspapers give columns--how does it accomplish all those
invaluable achievements Miss Tarbell enumerates?

What are the occupations of "society?"  Its members are always getting
together in expensive clothes, to visit and receive, to eat and drink,
to ride and drive, to dance and play games, to go to the opera; and to
travel from town to country, from beach to mountain, from land to land,
to repeat these things or to hire some one to invent new ones.  But
these pleasures cannot be in themselves the foundation of civilization!
The "exchange of ideals and service" alleged to take place in "society"
must be in conversation!  It is by this medium that we get our minds and
hearts quickened--our natures aroused--our fancy heightened--that the
ideas find life and death, and morals are made and unmade.

During which process of "society" does the conversation which promotes
the exchange of ideals and service best come about?  Is it in the talk
of women who are "paying calls?"  Is it in the talk at a "tea" or
reception?  Is it in the talk at a luncheon or a dinner?  Is it in the
talk over the card-table, or while dancing?  Is it in talk at the
horse-show or opera?  (The pressure of ideas in society is so great that
its members do converse at the opera.)

Surely it cannot be "society" which Miss Tarbell means!  She must mean
human intercourse--the meeting of congenial minds.  But no; that is open
to the suffragist as well as to any; and no one ever called it a
frivolous and unworthy institution.

The meaning is clear enough, but the claims made are to say the least
unconvincing.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


My own, partly personal and partly professional.

Q. Why don't people send questions to this department?

A. 1. Because it does not interest them.

A. 2. Because they have no problems.

A. 3. Because they see no reason to expect satisfactory answers.

A. 4. Because they do not understand that questions are asked for.

Now if any of the first three answers are correct, there is nothing to
be said--and no use for this department.

But if its the last--herein it is stated that the purpose of this
department is to seriously discuss real "personal problems" such as do
arise in most lives; and to which neither the minister nor Ruth Ashmore
do justice.

It is not proposed to furnish absolute wisdom; only comparative.

One question was considered in the January issue; and a very earnest
letter of inquiry was answered at great length for this number but
proved too long--will appear in July.

What has always been a problem to me is how people can be alive and take
so little interest in the performance.

Here is Life--Death--and a discussable Immortality.  Here is Love--of
all kinds and sizes.  Here is Happiness--so big that you can't swallow
it; and Pain--an unlimited assortment.

Here are Things Going On--all kinds of things.

And here are we--making button holes in the back parlor--breaking our
heads in a sham fight in the back yard!

Question.  Why don't people wake up and LIVE!  World-size?

Answer ..........................

Some of you send an answer!



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK


AS TO PURPOSE:


_What is The Forerunner?_  It is a monthly magazine, publishing stories
short and serial, article and essay; drama, verse, satire and sermon;
dialogue, fable and fantasy, comment and review.  It is written entirely
by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

_What is it For?_  It is to stimulate thought: to arouse hope, courage
and impatience; to offer practical suggestions and solutions, to voice
the strong assurance of better living, here, now, in our own hands to
make.

_What is it about?_  It is about people, principles, and the questions
of every-day life; the personal and public problems of to-day.  It gives
a clear, consistent view of human life and how to live it.

_Is it a Woman's magazine?_  It will treat all three phases of our
existence--male, female and human.  It will discuss Man, in his true
place in life; Woman, the Unknown Power; the  Child, the most important
citizen.

_Is it a Socialist Magazine?_  It is a magazine for humanity, and
humanity is social.  It holds that Socialism, the economic theory, is
part of our gradual Socialization, and that the duty of conscious
humanity is to promote Socialization.

_Why is it published?_  It is published to express ideas which need a
special medium; and in the belief that there are enough persons
interested in those ideas to justify the undertaking.


AS TO ADVERTISING:


We have long heard that "A pleased customer is the best advertiser."
The Forerunner offers to its advertisers and readers the benefit of this
authority.  In its advertising department, under the above heading, will
be described articles personally known and used.  So far as individual
experience and approval carry weight, and clear truthful description
command attention, the advertising pages of The Forerunner will be
useful to both dealer and buyer.  If advertisers prefer to use their own
statements The Forerunner will publish them if it believes them to be
true.


AS TO CONTENTS:


The main feature of the first year is a new book on a new subject with a
new name:--

_"Our Androcentric Culture."_  this is a study of the historic effect on
normal human development of a too exclusively masculine civilization.
It shows what man, the male, has done to the world: and what woman, the
more human, may do to change it.

_"What Diantha Did."_  This is a serial novel.  It shows the course of
true love running very crookedly--as it so often does--among the
obstructions and difficulties of the housekeeping problem--and solves
that problem.  (NOT by co-operation.)

Among the short articles will appear:

"Private Morality and Public Immorality."
"The Beauty Women Have Lost"
"Our Overworked Instincts."
"The Nun in the Kitchen."
"Genius: Domestic and Maternal."
"A Small God and a Large Goddess."
"Animals in Cities."
"How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money."
"Prize Children"
"Kitchen-Mindedness"
"Parlor-Mindedness"
"Nursery-Mindedness"

There will be short stories and other entertaining matter in each issue.
 The department of "Personal Problems" does not discuss etiquette,
fashions or the removal of freckles.  Foolish questions will not be
answered, unless at peril of the asker.


AS TO VALUE:

If you take this magazine one year you will have:


One complete novel . . . By C. P. Gilman
One new book . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve short stories . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more short articles . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more new poems . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve Short Sermons . . . By C. P. Gilman
Besides "Comment and Review" . . . By C. P. Gilman
"Personal Problems" . . . By C. P. Gilman
And many other things . . . By C. P. Gilman

DON'T YOU THINK IT'S WORTH A DOLLAR?


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 9
JULY, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

Genus Homo is superior to all other animal species.
Granted.  The superiority is due to some things--and in spite of others.




THE BAWLING WORLD

A SESTINA.


Be not impatient with the bawling world!--
The clatter of wild newsmongers, the cry
Of those in pulpits, the incessant speech
From many platforms, and the various prayers
Of tale-tellers all striving for our ears,
And poets that wait and gibber--they have cause.

For all this noise there is a natural cause,
Most natural of all that move the world,
The one that first assails a mother's ears
When loud a lusty infant learns to cry,
An inarticulate insistent prayer
But serving that first need as well as speech.

Reason and love combine to give us speech,
But this loud outcry has a simpler cause,
The same that prompts the roaming jackal's prayer
And fills the forests of the untamed world
With one long, jarring hungry piteous cry--
Such cry as still attacks our weary ears.

We long for human music in our ears,
For the clear joy of well-considered speech,
And the true poet's soul-uplifting cry
To lead us forward, striving for the cause
Of liberty and light for all the world--
And hear but this confused insensate prayer.

Vainly we seek to fly this ceaseless prayer--
To find some silent spot--to stop our ears:--
There is no place in all the groaning world
Where we can live apart from human speech:
and we, while speech is governed by this cause,
Are infants "with no language but a cry."

It is for food that all live creatures cry,
For food the sparrow's or the lion's prayer,
And need of food is the continuing cause,
Of all this deafening tumult in our ears.
Had we our food secure--!  Then human speech
Might make mild music, and a wiser world!

*

Poor hungry world!  No wonder that you cry;
Elaborate speech reduced to primal prayer:
To save our ears let us remove the cause!



A COINCIDENCE


"O that!  It was a fortunate coincidence, wasn't it?  All things work
together for good with those who love the Lord, you know, and Emma
Ordway is the most outrageously Christian woman I ever knew.  It did
look that Autumn as if there was no way out of it, but things do happen,
sometimes.

I dropped in rather late one afternoon to have a cup of tea with Emma,
hoping against hope that Mirabella Vlack wouldn't be on hand; but she
was, of course, and gobbling.  There never was such a woman for candy
and all manner of sweet stuff.  I can remember her at school, with those
large innocent eyes, and that wide mouth, eating Emma's nicest tidbits
even then.

Emma loves sweets but she loves her friends better, and never gets
anything for herself unless there is more than enough for everybody.
She is very fond of a particular kind of fudge I make, has been fond of
it for thirty years, and I love to make it for her once in a while, but
after Mirabella came--I might as well have made it for her to begin
with.

I devised the idea of bringing it in separate boxes, one for each, but
bless you!  Mirabella kept hers in her room, and ate Emma's!

"O I've left mine up stairs!" she'd say; "Let me go up and get it;"--and
of course Emma wouldn't hear of such a thing.  Trust Emma!

I've loved that girl ever since she was a girl, in spite of her
preternatural unselfishness.  And I've always hated those Vlack girls,
both of them, Mirabella the most.  At least I think so when I'm with
her.  When I'm with Arabella I'm not so sure.  She married a man named
Sibthorpe, just rich.

They were both there that afternoon, the Vlack girls I mean, and
disagreeing as usual.  Arabella was lean and hard and rigorously well
dressed, she meant to have her way in this world and generally got it.
Mirabella was thick and soft.  Her face was draped puffily upon its
unseen bones, and of an unwholesome color because of indigestion.  She
was the type that suggests cushioned upholstery, whereas Arabella's
construction was evident.

"You don't look well, Mirabella," said she.

"I am well," replied her sister, "Quite well I assure you."

Mirabella was at that time some kind of a holy thoughtist.  She had
tried every variety of doctor, keeping them only as long as they did not
charge too much, and let her eat what she pleased; which necessitated
frequent change.

Mrs. Montrose smiled diplomatically, remarking "What a comfort these
wonderful new faiths are!"  She was one of Emma's old friends, and was
urging her to go out to California with them and spend the winter.  She
dilated on the heavenly beauty and sweetness of the place till it almost
made my mouth water, and Emma!--she loved travel better than anything,
and California was one of the few places she had not seen.

Then that Vlack girl began to perform.  "Why don't you go, Emma?" she
said.  "I'm not able to travel myself," (she wouldn't admit she was
pointedly left out), "but that's no reason you should miss such a
delightful opportunity.  I can be housekeeper for you in your absence."
This proposition had been tried once.  All Emma's old servants left, and
she had to come back in the middle of her trip, and re-organize the
household.

Thus Mirabella, looking saintly and cheerful.  And Emma--I could have
shaken her soundly where she sat--Emma smiled bravely at Mrs. Montrose
and thanked her warmly; she'd love it above all things, but there were
many reasons why she couldn't leave home that winter.  And we both knew
there was only one, a huge thing in petticoats sitting gobbling there.

One or two other old friends dropped in, but they didn't stay long; they
never did any more, and hardly any men came now.  As I sat there
drinking my pale tea I heard these people asking Emma why she didn't do
this any more, and why she didn't come to that any more, and Emma just
as dignified and nice as you please, telling all sorts of perforated
paper fibs to explain and decline.  One can't be perfect, and nobody
could be as absolutely kind and gracious and universally beloved as Emma
if she always told the plain truth.

I'd brought in my last protege that day, Dr. Lucy Barnes, a small quaint
person, with more knowledge of her profession than her looks would
indicate.  She was a very wise little creature altogether.  I had been
studying chemistry with her, just for fun.  You never know when yon may
want to know a thing.

It was fine to see Dr. Lucy put her finger on Mirabella's weakness.

There that great cuckoo sat and discoursed on the symptoms she used to
have, and would have now if it wasn't for "science"; and there I sat and
watched Emma, and I declare she seemed to age visibly before my eyes.

Was I to keep quiet and let one of the nicest women that ever breathed
be worn into her grave by that--Incubus?  Even if she hadn't been a
friend of mine, even if she hadn't been too good for this world, it
would have been a shame.  As it was the outrage cried to heaven.--and
nobody could do anything.

Here was Emma, a widow, and in her own house; you couldn't coerce her.
And she could afford it, as far as money went, you couldn't interfere
that way.  She had been so happy!  She'd got over being a widow--I mean
got used to it, and was finding her own feet.  Her children were all
married and reasonably happy, except the youngest, who was unreasonably
happy; but time would make that all right.  The Emma really began to
enjoy life.  Her health was good; she'd kept her looks wonderfully; and
all the vivid interests of her girlhood cropped up again.  She began to
study things; to go to lectures and courses of lectures; to travel every
year to a new place; to see her old friends and make new ones.  She
never liked to keep house, but Emma was so idiotically unselfish that
she never would enjoy herself as long as there was anybody at home to
give up to.

And then came Mirabella Vlack.

She came for a visit, at least she called one day with her air of
saintly patience, and a miserable story of her loneliness and
unhappiness, and how she couldn't bear to be dependent on
Arabella--Arabella was so unsympathetic!--and that misguided Emma
invited her to visit her for awhile.

That was five years ago.  Five years!  And here she sat, gobbling, forty
pounds fatter and the soul of amiability, while Emma grew old.

Of course we all remonstrated--after it was too late.

Emma had a right to her own visitors--nobody ever dreamed that the thing
was permanent, and nobody could break down that adamantine wall of
Christian virtue she suffered behind, not owning that she suffered.

It was a problem.

But I love problems, human problems, better even than problems in
chemistry, and they are fascinating enough.

First I tried Arabella.  She said she regretted that poor Mirabella
would not come to her loving arms.  You see Mirabella had tried them,
for about a year after her husband died, and preferred Emma's.

"It really doesn't look well," said Arabella.  "Here am I alone in these
great halls, and there is my only sister preferring to live with a
comparative stranger!  Her duty is to live with me, where I can take
care of her."

Not much progress here.  Mirabella did not want to be taken care of by a
fault-finding older sister--not while Emma was in reach.  It paid, too.
Her insurance money kept her in clothes, and she could save a good deal,
having no living expenses.  As long as she preferred living with Emma
Ordway, and Emma let her--what could anybody do?

It was getting well along in November, miserable weather.

Emma had a cough that hung on for weeks and weeks, she couldn't seem to
gather herself together and throw it off, and Mirabella all the time
assuring her that she had no cough at all!

Certain things began to seem very clear to me.

One was the duty of a sister, of two sisters.  One was the need of a
change of climate for my Emma.

One was that ever opening field of human possibilities which it has been
the increasing joy of my lifetime to study.

I carried two boxes of my delectable fudge to those ladies quite
regularly, a plain white one for Emma, a pretty colored one for the
Incubus.

"Are you sure it is good for you?" I asked Mirabella; "I love to make it
and have it appreciated, but does your Doctor think it is good for you?"

Strong in her latest faith she proudly declared she could eat anything.
She could--visibly.  So she took me up short on this point, and ate
several to demonstrate immunity--out of Emma's box.

Nevertheless, in spite of all demonstration she seemed to grow
somewhat--queasy--shall we say? --and drove poor Emma almost to tears
trying to please her in the matter of meals.

Then I began to take them both out to ride in my motor, and to call
quite frequently on Arabella; they couldn't well help it, you see, when
I stopped the car and hopped out.  "Mrs. Sibthorpe's sister" I'd always
say to the butler or maid, and she'd always act as if she owned the
house--that is if Arabella was out.

Then I had a good talk with Emma's old doctor, and he quite frightened
her.

"You ought to close up the house," he said, "and spend the winter in a
warm climate.  You need complete rest and change, for a long time, a
year at least," he told her.  I urged her to go.

"Do make a change," I begged.  "Here's Mrs. Sibthorpe perfectly willing
to keep Mirabella--she'd be just as well off there; and you do really
need a rest."

Emma smiled that saintly smile of hers, and said, "Of course, if
Mirabella would go to her sister's awhile I could leave?  But I can't
ask her to go."

I could.  I did.  I put it to her fair and square,--the state of Emma's
health, her real need to break up housekeeping, and how Arabella was
just waiting for her to come there.  But what's the use of talking to
that kind?  Emma wasn't sick, couldn't be sick, nobody could.  At that
very moment she paused suddenly, laid a fat hand on a fat side with an
expression that certainly looked like pain; but she changed it for one
of lofty and determined faith, and seemed to feel better.  It made her
cross though, as near it as she ever gets.  She'd have been rude I
think, but she likes my motor, to say nothing of my fudge.

I took them both out to ride that very afternoon, and Dr. Lucy with us.

Emma, foolish thing, insisted on sitting with the driver, and Mirabella
made for her pet corner at once.  I put Dr. Lucy in the middle, and
encouraged Mirabella in her favorite backsliding, the discussion of her
symptoms--the symptoms she used to have--or would have now if she gave
way to "error."

Dr. Lucy was ingeniously sympathetic.  She made no pretence of taking up
the new view, but was perfectly polite about it.

"Judging from what you tell me", she said, "and from my own point of
view, I should say that you had a quite serious digestive trouble; that
you had a good deal of pain now and then; and were quite likely to have
a sudden and perhaps serious attack.  But that is all nonsense to you I
suppose."

"Of course it is!" said Mirabella, turning a shade paler.

We were running smoothly down the to avenue where Arabella lived.

"Here's something to cheer you up," I said, producing my two boxes of
fudge.  One I passed around in front to Emma; she couldn't share it with
us.  The other I gave Mirabella.

She fell upon it at once; perfunctorily offering some to Dr. Lucy, who
declined; and to me.  I took one for politeness's sake, and casually put
it in my pocket.

We had just about reached Mrs. Sibthorpe's gate when Mirabella gave in.

"Oh I have such a terrible pain!" said she.  "Oh Dr. Lucy!  What shall I
do?"

"Shall I take you down to your healer?" I suggested; but Mirabella was
feeling very badly indeed.

"I think I'd better go in here a moment," she said; and in five minutes
we had her in bed in what used to be her room.

Dr. Lucy seemed averse to prescribe.

"I have no right to interfere with your faith, Mrs. Vlack," she said.
"I have medicines which I think would relieve you, but you do not
believe in them.  I think you should summon your--practitioner, at
once."

"Oh Dr. Lucy!" gasped poor Mirabella, whose aspect was that of a small
boy in an August orchard.  "Don't leave me!  Oh do something for me
quick!"

"Will you do just what I say?"

"I will!  I will; I'll do _anything_!" said Mirabella, curling up in as
small a heap as was possible to her proportions, and Dr. Lucy took the
case.

We waited in the big bald parlors till she came down to tell us what was
wrong.  Emma seemed very anxious, but then Emma is a preternatural
saint.

Arabella came home and made a great todo.  "So fortunate that she was
near my door!" she said.  "Oh my poor sister!  I am so glad she has a
real doctor!"

The real doctor came down after a while.  "She is practically out of
pain," she said, "and resting quietly.  But she is extremely weak, and
ought not to be moved for a long time."

"She shall not be!" said Arabella fervently.  "My own sister!  I am so
thankful she came to me in her hour of need!"

I took Emma away.  "Let's pick up Mrs. Montrose," I said.  "She's tired
out with packing--the air will do her good."

She was glad to come.  We all sat back comfortably in the big seat and
had a fine ride; and then Mrs. Montrose had us both come in and take
dinner with her.  Emma ate better than I'd seen her in months, and
before she went home it was settled that she leave with Mrs. Montrose on
Tuesday.

Dear Emma!  She was as pleased as a child.  I ran about with her, doing
a little shopping.  "Don't bother with anything," I said, "You can get
things out there.  Maybe you'll go on to Japan next spring with the
James's."

"If we could sell the house I would!" said Emma.  She brisked and
sparkled--the years fell off from her--she started off looking fairly
girlish in her hope and enthusiasm.

I drew a long sigh of relief.

Mr. MacAvelly has some real estate interests.

The house was sold before Mirabella was out of bed.



SHARES


To those who in leisure may meet
 Comes Summer, green, fragrant and fair,
 With roses and stars in her hair;
Summer, as motherhood sweet.
 To us, in the waste of the street,
 No Summer, only--The Heat!

To those of the fortunate fold
 Comes Winter, snow-clean and ice-bright,
 With joy for the day and the night,
Winter, as fatherhood bold.
 To us, without silver or gold,
 No Winter, only--The Cold!



GENIUS, DOMESTIC AND MATERNAL.  II.


Consider the mighty influence of Dr. Arnold, of Emma Willard; and think
of that all lost to the world, and concentrated relentlessly on a few
little Arnolds and Willards alone!

The children of such genius can healthfully share in its benefits but
not healthily monopolize them.

Our appreciation of this study is hampered by the limitation of little
exercised minds.  Most of us accept things as they are--cannot easily
imagine them different, and fear any change as evil.

There was a time when there wasn't a school or a schoolhouse on earth;
people may yet be found who see no need of them.  To build places for
children to spend part of the day in--away from their mothers--and be
cared for by specialists!--Horrible!

The same feeling meets us now when it is suggested that places should be
built for the babies to spend part of the day in--away from their
mothers--and be cared for by specialists!--Horrible!  Up hops in every
mind those twin bugaboos, the Infant Hospital and the Orphan Asylum.
That is all the average mind can think of as an "institution" for
babies.

Think of the kindergarten.  Think of the day-nursery.  Multiply and
magnify these a thousand fold; make them beautiful, comfortable,
hygienic, safe and sweet and near--one for every twenty or thirty
families perhaps; and put in each, not a casual young kindergarten
apprentice or hired nurse; but Genius, Training and Experience.  Then
you can "teach the mothers," for at last there can be gathered a body of
facts, real knowledge, on the subject of child culture; and it can take
its place in modern progress.

Every mother whose baby spent its day hours in such care would take home
new knowledge and new standards to aid her there; and the one mother out
of twenty or thirty who cared most about it would be in that baby house
herself--she is the Genius.  Not anybody's hired "nursemaid," but a
nurse-mother, a teacher-mother, a Human Mother at last.

The same opening confronts us when we squirm so helplessly in what we
call "the domestic problem."  That problem is "How can every woman carry
on the same trade equally well?"

Answer--She can't.

All women do not like to "keep house;" and there is no reason why all
men, and all children, as well as the women, should suffer in health,
comfort and peace of mind under their mal-administration.  We need the
Expert, the Specialist, the Genius, here too.

Thousands of discontented women are doing very imperfectly what hundreds
could do well and enjoy.

Thousands of men are paying unnecessary bills, eating what we may
politely call "unnecessary food," and putting up with the discontented
woman.  Thousands of children are growing up as best they can under
inexpert mothers and inexpert housekeepers.  Thousands of unnecessary
deaths, invalids, and miserable lives; millions and millions of dollars
wasted; and all this for the simple lack of society's first
law--Specialization.

Here are all these unspecialized housekeepers wriggling miserably with
their unspecialized servants; and others--the vast majority,
remember--"doing their own work" in a crude and ineffectual manner; and
there is not even a standard whereby to judge our shortcomings!  We have
never known anything better, and the average mind cannot imagine
anything better than it has ever known.

(When we have expert Childculture, we shall cultivate the imagination!)

"Do you want us to give up our homes?" cries the Average Mind.  "Must we
live in hotels, eat in restaurants?"

No, dear Average Mind.

Every family should have its own home; and it ought to be a real home,
with a real garden.  Among the homes and gardens should stand the
baby-house with its baby-gardens; and quite apart from these fair homes
should stand the Workshops.  The Cleaning Establishment, the
Laundry--the Cookshop; the Service Bureau; each and all in charge of its
Genius--its special person who likes that kind of work and does it well.

The home, quiet, sweet and kitchenless, will be visited by swift skilled
cleaners to keep it up to the highest sanitary standards; the dishes
will come in filled with fresh, hot food, and go out in the same
receptacle, for proper cleansing; the whole labor of "housekeeping" will
be removed from the home, and the woman will begin to enjoy it as a man
does.  The man also will enjoy it more.  It will be cleaner, quieter,
more sanitary, more beautiful and comfortable, and far less expensive.

And what of the average woman?

She will cease to exist.  She will become specialized as every civilized
person must be.  She will not be a woman less, but a human being more.
And in these special lines of genius, domestic and maternal, she will
lift the whole world forward with amazing speed.  The health, the
brain-power, the peace of mind, of all our citizens will be increased by
the work of the Mother-Genius and maintained by the Domestic Genius.

Have you never known one of those born mothers, with perhaps some
training as a kindergartner added; who loves to be with children and
whom children love to be with?  She is healthy and happy in her work,
and the children she cares for grow up with fewer tears, with better
constitutions, with strong young hearts and clear brains to meet life's
problems.

Have you never compared such a mother and such children with those we
see commonly about us?  The mother, nervous, irritable, unfit for her
work and not happy in it; a discontented person, her energies both
exhausted and unused.  What she wastes in uncongenial effort she might
spend joyfully in work she was fit for.

Have you never seen the sullen misery, the horrible impotent rage, the
fretful unhappiness of mishandled children?  Not orphans; and not
"neglected"; not physically starved or beaten; but treated with such
brutal clumsiness that their childhood is clouded and their whole lives
embittered and weakened by the experience?

Are we so blinded by the beautiful ideal of motherhood as it should be,
that we continually overlook the limitations of motherhood as it is?

Again have you not seen the home of homes; where the cleanliness is
perfect, the quiet and harmony a joy to the soul; where beauty and peace
are linked with economy and wisdom?  There are such--but they are not
common.

As in the other case, our ideals blind us to the facts.  Most homes are
sadly imperfect; enjoyed by their inmates because they are used to
them--and have known no better.  What we have so far failed to see is
humanity's right to the best; in these departments of life, as well as
others.

As we live now, the ever-growing weight of our just demands for a higher
order of home falling on the ever more inadequate shoulders of the
Average Woman, both Motherhood and the home are imperilled.  We are
horribly frightened when we see our poor Average Woman shrink from
maternity, and [illegible] at housework.  We preach at her and scold her
and flatter her and woo her, and, if we could, we would force her back
into her old place, child-bearer and burden-hearer, the helpless servant
of the world.

All this terror is wasted.  It is not child-bearing--within reason--that
the girl of to-day so dreads.  It is the life-long task of
child-rearing, for which she begins at last to realize she is unfit.  An
utterly ignorant woman has no such terror, she bears profusely, rears as
she can, and buries as she must.  Better one well-born and well-trained,
than the incapable six survivors of the unnecessary twelve.

It is not home-life that our girls shrink from; men and women alike, we
love and need a home; it is the housework, and the house management,
which are no more alluring to a rational woman than to a rational man.
"I love ocean travel," says Mrs. Porne, "but that's no reason I should
wish to be either a captain or a stoker!"

Why not respect this new attitude of our women; study it, try to
understand it; see if there is not some reason for it--and some way to
change conditions.

Suppose a young woman stands, happy and successful, in her chosen
profession.  Suppose a young man offers her marriage.  Suppose that this
meant to her all that life held before--plus Love!  Plus a Home
Together!  Plus Children!  Children they both would love, both would
provide for, both would work for; but to whom neither would be a living
sacrifice--and an ineffectual sacrifice at that.

Children are not improved in proportion to their mother's immolation.
The father's love, the mother's love, the sheltering care of both, and
all due association, they need, but in the detailed services and
education of their lives, they need Genius.

And the Home--that should mean to her precisely what it means to him.
Peace, comfort, joy and pride; seclusion; mutual companionship; rest,
beautiful privacy and rest--not a workshop.

What we need in this matter is not noisy objurgations and adjurations on
the part of men; and not the reluctant submission, or angry refusal, of
women--forced to take so much needless bitter with life's sweetest joy;
but a rational facing of the question by the women themselves.  It is
their business--as much so as the most obdurate mossback can
protest--but collectively, not individually.

Let them collect then!  Let them organize and specialize--the two go
together.  Let them develop Genius--and use it; heaven knows it is
needed!



IMPROVED METHODS OF HABIT CULTURE


Most of us recognize that common force, "the power of habit."  Most of
us have been rigorously, often painfully, almost always annoyingly,
trained into what our parents and guardians considered good habits.
Most of us know something of the insidious nature of "bad habits"--how
easily they slip in, how hard they are to eject.

But few of us know the distinct pleasure of voluntary habit culture, by
modern methods.

ln my youth an improving book was prepared for children concerning a
Peasant and a Camel.  The Peasant was depicted as having a Hut, and a
Fireside, and as loafing lazily in its warm glow.  Then, in the crack of
the door, appeared the appealing nose of a Camel--might he warm that
nose?  The lazy Peasant wouldn't take the trouble to get up and shut him
out.  The appealing nose became an insinuating neck, then intrusive
shoulders, and presently we have a whole camel lying by the fire, and
the peasant, now alarmed and enraged, vainly belaboring the tough hind
quarters of the huge beast which lay in his place.

I was a child of a painfully logical mind, and this story failed of its
due effect on me because of certain discrepancies.  A. Peasants (in my
limited reading) belonged with asses and oxen--not with Camels.  Camels
had Arab companions--Bedouins--turbaned Blacks--not Peasants.  I did not
understand the intrusion of this solitary camel into a peasant country.
B. Why should the Camel want to come into the hut?  Camels are not
house-beasts, surely.  And to lie by the fire;--cats and dogs like
firesides, and crickets, but in my pictures of the Ship of the Desert I
never had seen this overmastering desire to get warm.  And if it was in
sooth a cold country--then in the name of all nursery reasonableness,
how came the camel there?

Furthermore, if he was a stray camel, a camel escaped from a circus and
seeking the only human companionship he could discover,--in that case
such an unusual apparition would have scared the laziest of Peasants
into prompt resistance.  Moreover, a Hut, to my mind, was necessarily a
small building, with but a modest portal; and camels are tall bony
beasts, not physically able to slink and crawl.  How could the beast get
in!

Beyond these criticisms I was filled with contempt at the
resourcelessness of the Peasant, who found no better means of ejecting
the intruder than to beat him where he felt it the least.  It seemed to
me a poor story on the face of it, though I did not then know how these
things are made up out of whole cloth, as it were, and foisted upon
children.

In later years, I found that it was sometimes desirable to catch and
tame one's own camels.  Certain characteristics were assuredly more
desirable than others, and seemed open to attainment if one but knew
how.  I experimented with processes, and worked out a method; simple,
easy, safe and sure.  Safe--unless overdone.  It is not well to overdo
anything, and if our young people should develop a morbid desire to
acquire too many virtues at once, this method would be a strain on the
nervous system!  Short of such excess, there is no danger involved.

Here is the Subject; up for moral examination; as if for physical
examination in a gymnasium.  Self-measurements are taken--this is a
wholly personal method.  Many of us, indeed most of us, are willing to
acquire good habits of our own choosing and by our own efforts who would
strenuously object to outside management!  Very well.  The subject
decides which Bad Habit He or She wishes to check, or, which Good Habit
to develop.

I will take as an illustrative instance a Combination effort: to check
the habit of Thoughtless Speech, and substitute the habit of Conscious
Control.  Common indeed are the offences of the unbridled tongue; and in
youth they are especially prevalent.

"Why don't you think before you speak?" demands the Irate Parent; but
has not the faintest idea of the reason--patent though it be to any
practical psychologist.

Here is the reason:

Reflex action is earlier established than voluntary action.  In a child
most activity is reflex--unconscious.  It may be complex, modified by
many contradictory stimuli, but whatever else modifies it, a clear
personal determination seldom does.

Most of us carry this simple early state of mind through life.  We speak
according to present impulse, provocation, and state of mind; and
afterward are sorry for it.  When we are called upon to "think before we
speak", a distinct psychological process is required.  We have to
establish a new connection between the speech center and the center of
volition.  To hold the knife in the right hand and carve is easy; to
hold it in the left is hard, for most of us, merely because the
controlling impulse has always been sent to the muscles of the right
arm.  To learn to cut with the left is an extra effort, but can be done
if necessary.  It is merely a matter of repetition of command, properly
measured.

So with our Subject.

"You speak thoughtlessly, do you?  You say things you wish you hadn't?
You'd like to be able to use your judgement beforehand instead of
afterward when it's too late?"  Very well.

First Step.--Make up your mind that you _will_ think before you speak.
This "making up one's mind," as we so lightly call it, is in itself a
distinct act.  Suppose you have to get up at five, and have no alarm
clock nor anyone to waken you.  You "make up your mind," hard, that you
must wake up at five; you rouse yourself from coming sleep with the
renewed intense determination to wake up at five; your last waking
thought is "I must wake up at five!"--and you do wake up at five.  You
set an alarm inside--and it worked.  After a while, the need continuing,
you always wake up at five--no trouble at all--and a good deal of
trouble to break the habit when you want to.  When the mind is "made up"
it is apt to stay.

Second Step.--Dismiss the matter from your mind.  You may not think of
your determination again for a month--but at last you do.

Third Step.--When your determination reappears to you, welcome it
easily.  Do not scold because it was so long in coming.  Do not lament
its lateness.  Just say, "Ah!  Here you are!  I knew you'd come!"  Then
_drive it in._  That is, make up your mind again--harder than before,
and again dismiss it completely.  You will remember it again in less
time--say in a fortnight.  Then you can welcome it more cordially,
feeling already that the game is yours: and drive it in again with good
will.

Presently it reappears--in a week maybe.  "Hurrah!" you say, wasting
never a spark of energy on lamenting the delay; this is a natural
process and takes time, and once more you make up your mind.  Presently
you will think of it oftener and oftener, daily perhaps; the idea of
control will flutter nearer and nearer to the moment of expression, but
always too soon--when you are not about to say anything, or too
late--after you have said it.

Do not waste energy in fretting over this delay; just renew your
determination as often as it pops into your head--"I _will_ think
_before_ I speak."

By and by you do so.  You remember _in time._  Your brother aggravates
you--your mother is swearing--your father is too severe--your girl
friends tempt you to unwise confidences--but--you remember!

Then, for the first time, a new nerve connection is established.  From
the center of volition a little pulse of power goes down; the unruly
member is checked in mid-career, and you decide what you shall or shall
not say!

Very well.  The miracle is wrought, you think.  You have attained.  Wait
a bit.

Fourth Step.--_Turn off the power._  Don't think of it again that day.
But to-morrow it will come again; use it twice; next day four times,
perhaps; but go slowly.

Here is the formula:

1st.  Make up your mind.

2nd.  Release the spring.

3rd.  Remake as often as you think of it cheerfully, always releasing
the spring.

4th.  When you have at last established connection;

Do it as often as you think of it;--

Stop _before_ you are tired.

The last direction is the patentable secret of this process.

Always before we have been taught to strive unceasingly for our virtues;
and to reproach ourselves bitterly if we "back-slide."  When we learn
more of our mental machinery we shall feel differently about
back-sliding.  When you are learning the typewriter or the bicycle or
the use of skates, you do not gain by practicing day and night.
Practice--_and rest;_ that is the trick.

After you have learned your new virtue, it will not tire you to practice
it; but while you are learning, go slow.

If you essay to hold your arm out straight; and hold it there till
muscle and nerve are utterly exhausted, you have gone backward rather
than forward in establishing the habit.  But if you deliberately pour
nerve force along that arm for a while, holding it out as you choose;
and then withdraw the nerve force, release the pressure, discontinue the
determination, drop the arm, _because you choose,_ and _before you are
tired_--then you can repeatedly hold it out a little longer until you
have mastered the useless art.

Don't waste nerve force on foolish and unnecessary things--physical or
moral; but invest it, carefully, without losing an ounce, in the gradual
and easy acquisition of whatever new habits You, as the Conscious
Master, desire to develop in your organism.



O FAITHFUL CLAY!


O faithful clay of ancient brain!
 Deep graven with tradition dim,
Hard baked with time and glazed with pain,
On your blind page man reads again
 What else were lost to him.

Blessed the day when art was found
 To carve and paint, to print and write,
So may we store past memory's bound,
Make our heaped knowledge common ground.
 So may the brain go light.

Oh wondrous power of brain released,
 Kindled--alive--set free;
Knowledge possessed; desire increased;
We enter life's continual feast
 To see--to see--to see!



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER IX.

"SLEEPING IN."


Men have marched in armies, fleets have borne them,
 Left their homes new countries to subdue;
Young men seeking fortune wide have wandered--
 We have something new.

Armies of young maidens cross our oceans;
 Leave their mother's love, their father's care;
Maidens, young and helpless, widely wander,
 Burdens new to bear.

Strange the land and language, laws and customs;
 Ignorant and all alone they come;
Maidens young and helpless, serving strangers,
 Thus we keep the Home.

When on earth was safety for young maidens
 Far from mother's love and father's care?
We preserve The Home, and call it sacred--
 Burdens new they bear.


The sun had gone down on Madam Weatherstone's wrath, and risen to find
it unabated.  With condensed disapprobation written on every well-cut
feature, she came to the coldly gleaming breakfast table.

That Mrs. Halsey was undoubtedly gone, she had to admit; yet so far
failed to find the exact words of reproof for a woman of independent
means discharging her own housekeeper when it pleased her.

Young Mathew unexpectedly appeared at breakfast, perhaps in anticipation
of a sort of Roman holiday in which his usually late and apologetic
stepmother would furnish the amusement.  They were both surprised to
find her there before them, looking uncommonly fresh in crisp, sheer
white, with deep-toned violets in her belt.

She ate with every appearance of enjoyment, chatting amiably about the
lovely morning--the flowers, the garden and the gardeners; her efforts
ill seconded, however.

"Shall I attend to the orders this morning?" asked Madam Weatherstone
with an air of noble patience.

"O no, thank you!" replied Viva.  "I have engaged a new housekeeper."

"A new housekeeper!  When?"  The old lady was shaken by this
inconceivable promptness.

"Last night," said her daughter-in-law, looking calmly across the table,
her color rising a little.

"And when is she coming, if I may ask?"

"She has come.  I have been with her an hour already this morning."

Young Mathew smiled.  This was amusing, though not what he had expected.
 "How extremely alert and businesslike!" he said lazily.  "It's becoming
to you--to get up early!"

"You can't have got much of a person--at a minute's notice," said his
grandmother.  "Or perhaps you have been planning this for some time?"

"No," said Viva.  "I have wanted to get rid of Mrs. Halsey for some
time, but the new one I found yesterday."

"What's her name?" inquired Mathew.

"Bell--Miss Diantha Bell," she answered, looking as calm as if
announcing the day of the week, but inwardly dreading the result
somewhat.  Like most of such terrors it was overestimated.

There was a little pause--rather an intense little pause; and
then--"Isn't that the girl who set 'em all by the ears yesterday?" asked
the young man, pointing to the morning paper.  "They say she's a
good-looker."

Madam Weatherstone rose from the table in some agitation.  "I must say I
am very sorry, Viva, that you should have been so--precipitate!  This
young woman cannot be competent to manage a house like this--to say
nothing of her scandalous ideas.  Mrs. Halsey was--to my mind--perfectly
satisfactory.  I shall miss her very much."  She swept out with an
unanswerable air.

"So shall I," muttered Mat, under his breath, as he strolled after her;
"unless the new one's equally amiable."

Viva Weatherstone watched them go, and stood awhile looking after the
well-built, well-dressed, well-mannered but far from well-behaved young
man.

"I don't _know_," she said to herself, "but I do feel--think--imagine--a
good deal.  I'm sure I hope not!  Anyway--it's new life to have that
girl in the house."

That girl had undertaken what she described to Ross as "a large order--a
very large order."

"It's the hardest thing I ever undertook," she wrote him, "but I think I
can do it; and it will be a tremendous help.  Mrs. Weatherstone's a
brick--a perfect brick!  She seems to have been very unhappy--for ever
so long--and to have submitted to her domineering old mother-in-law just
because she didn't care enough to resist.  Now she's got waked up all of
a sudden--she says it was my paper at the club--more likely my awful
example, I think! and she fired her old housekeeper--I don't know what
for--and rushed me in.

"So here I am.  The salary is good, the work is excellent training, and
I guess I can hold the place.  But the old lady is a terror, and the
young man--how you would despise that Johnny!"

The home letters she now received were rather amusing.  Ross, sternly
patient, saw little difference in her position.  "I hope you will enjoy
your new work," he wrote, "but personally I should prefer that you did
not--so you might give it up and come home sooner.  I miss you as you
can well imagine.  Even when you were here life was hard enough--but
now!--

"I had a half offer for the store the other day, but it fell through.
If I could sell that incubus and put the money into a ranch--fruit,
hens, anything--then we could all live on it; more cheaply, I think; and
I could find time for some research work I have in mind.  You remember
that guinea-pig experiment I want so to try?"

Diantha remembered and smiled sadly.  She was not much interested in
guinea-pigs and their potential capacities, but she was interested in
her lover and his happiness.  "Ranch," she said thoughtfully; "that's
not a bad idea."

Her mother wrote the same patient loving letters, perfunctorily hopeful.
 Her father wrote none--"A woman's business--this letter-writin'," he
always held; and George, after one scornful upbraiding, had "washed his
hands of her" with some sense of relief.  He didn't like to write
letters either.

But Susie kept up a lively correspondence.  She was attached to her
sister, as to all her immediate relatives and surroundings; and while
she utterly disapproved of Diantha's undertaking, a sense of sisterly
duty, to say nothing of affection, prompted her to many letters.  It did
not, however, always make these agreeable reading.

"Mother's pretty well, and the girl she's got now does nicely--that
first one turned out to be a failure.  Father's as cranky as ever.  We
are all well here and the baby (this was a brand new baby Diantha had
not seen) is just a Darling!  You ought to be here, you unnatural Aunt!
Gerald doesn't ever speak of you--but I do just the same.  You hear from
the Wardens, of course.  Mrs. Warden's got neuralgia or something; keeps
them all busy.  They are much excited over this new place of yours--you
ought to hear them go on!  It appears that Madam Weatherstone is a
connection of theirs--one of the F. F. V's, I guess, and they think
she's something wonderful.  And to have _you_ working _there!_--well,
you can just see how they'd feel; and I don't blame them.  It's no use
arguing with you--but I should think you'd have enough of this
disgraceful foolishness by this time and come home!"

Diantha tried to be very philosophic over her home letters; but they
were far from stimulating.  "It's no use arguing with poor Susie!" she
decided.  "Susie thinks the sun rises and sets between kitchen, nursery
and parlor!

"Mother can't see the good of it yet, but she will later--Mother's all
right.

"I'm awfully sorry the Wardens feel so--and make Ross unhappy--but of
course I knew they would.  It can't be helped.  It's just a question of
time and work."

And she went to work.

*

Mrs. Porne called on her friend most promptly, with a natural eagerness
and curiosity.

"How does it work?  Do you like her as much as you thought?  Do tell me
about it, Viva.  You look like another woman already!"

"I certainly feel like one," Viva answered.  "I've seen slaves in
housework, and I've seen what we fondly call 'Queens' in housework; but
I never saw brains in it before."

Mrs. Porne sighed.  "Isn't it just wonderful--the way she does things!
Dear me!  We do miss her!  She trained that Swede for us--and she does
pretty well--but not like 'Miss Bell'!  I wish there were a hundred of
her!"

"If there were a hundred thousand she wouldn't go round!" answered Mrs.
Weatherstone.  "How selfish we are!  _That_ is the kind of woman we all
want in our homes--and fuss because we can't have them."

"Edgar says he quite agrees with her views," Mrs. Porne went on.
"Skilled labor by the day--food sent in--.  He says if she cooked it he
wouldn't care if it came all the way from Alaska!  She certainly can
cook!  I wish she'd set up her business--the sooner the better."

Mrs. Weatherstone nodded her head firmly.  "She will.  She's planning.
This was really an interruption--her coming here, but I think it will be
a help--she's not had experience in large management before, but she
takes hold splendidly.  She's found a dozen 'leaks' in our household
already."

"Mrs. Thaddler's simply furious, I hear," said the visitor.  "Mrs. Ree
was in this morning and told me all about it.  Poor Mrs. Ree!  The home
is church and state to her; that paper of Miss Bell's she regards as
simple blasphemy."

They both laughed as that stormy meeting rose before them.

"I was so proud of you, Viva, standing up for her as you did.  How did
you ever dare?"

"Why I got my courage from the girl herself.  She was--superb!  Talk of
blasphemy!  Why I've committed _lese majeste_ and regicide and the
Unpardonable Sin since that meeting!"  And she told her friend of her
brief passage at arms with Mrs. Halsey.  "I never liked the woman," she
continued; "and some of the things Miss Bell said set me thinking.  I
don't believe we half know what's going on in our houses."

"Well, Mrs. Thaddler's so outraged by 'this scandalous attack upon the
sanctities of the home' that she's going about saying all sorts of
things about Miss Bell.  O look--I do believe that's her car!"

Even as they spoke a toneless voice announced, "Mr. and Mrs. Thaddler,"
and Madam Weatherstone presently appeared to greet these visitors.

"I think you are trying a dangerous experiment!" said Mrs. Thaddler to
her young hostess.  "A very dangerous experiment!  Bringing that young
iconoclast into your home!"

Mr. Thaddler, stout and sulky, sat as far away as he could and talked to
Mrs. Porne.  "I'd like to try that same experiment myself," said he to
her.  "You tried it some time, I understand?"

"Indeed we did--and would still if we had the chance," she replied.  "We
think her a very exceptional young woman."

Mr. Thaddler chuckled.  "She is that!" he agreed.  "Gad!  How she did
set things humming!  They're humming yet--at our house!"

He glanced rather rancorously at his wife, and Mrs. Porne wished, as she
often had before, that Mr. Thaddler wore more clothing over his domestic
afflictions.

"Scandalous!" Mrs. Thaddler was saying to Madam Weatherstone.  "Simply
scandalous!  Never in my life did I hear such absurd--such
outrageous--charges against the sanctities of the home!"

"There you have it!" said Mr. Thaddler, under his breath.  "Sanctity of
the fiddlesticks!  There was a lot of truth in what that girl said!"
Then he looked rather sheepish and flushed a little--which was needless;
easing his collar with a fat finger.

Madam Weatherstone and Mrs. Thaddler were at one on this subject; but
found it hard to agree even so, no love being lost between them; and the
former gave evidence of more satisfaction than distress at this
"dangerous experiment" in the house of her friends.  Viva sat silent,
but with a look of watchful intelligence that delighted Mrs. Porne.

"It has done her good already," she said to herself.  "Bless that girl!"

Mr. Thaddler went home disappointed in the real object of his call--he
had hoped to see the Dangerous Experiment again.  But his wife was well
pleased.

"They will rue it!" she announced.  "Madam Weatherstone is ashamed of
her daughter-in-law--I can see that!  _She_ looks cool enough.  I don't
know what's got into her!"

"Some of that young woman's good cooking," her husband suggested.

"That young woman is not there as cook!" she replied tartly.  "What she
_is_ there for we shall see later!  Mark my words!"

Mr. Thaddler chuckled softly.  "I'll mark 'em!" he said.

Diantha had her hands full.  Needless to say her sudden entrance was
resented by the corps of servants accustomed to the old regime.  She had
the keys; she explored, studied, inventoried, examined the accounts,
worked out careful tables and estimates.  "I wish Mother were here!" she
said to herself.  "She's a regular genius for accounts.  I _can_ do
it--but it's no joke."

She brought the results to her employer at the end of the week.  "This
is tentative," she said, "and I've allowed margins because I'm new to a
business of this size.  But here's what this house ought to cost you--at
the outside, and here's what it does cost you now."

Mrs. Weatherstone was impressed.  "Aren't you a little--spectacular?"
she suggested.

Diantha went over it carefully; the number of rooms, the number of
servants, the hours of labor, the amount of food and other supplies
required.

"This is only preparatory, of course," she said.  "I'll have to check it
off each month.  If I may do the ordering and keep all the accounts I
can show you exactly in a month, or two at most."

"How about the servants?" asked Mrs. Weatherstone.

There was much to say here, questions of competence, of impertinence, of
personal excellence with "incompatibility of temper."  Diantha was given
a free hand, with full liberty to experiment, and met the opportunity
with her usual energy.

She soon discharged the unsatisfactory ones, and substituted the girls
she had selected for her summer's experiment, gradually adding others,
till the household was fairly harmonious, and far more efficient and
economical.  A few changes were made among the men also.

By the time the family moved down to Santa Ulrica, there was quite a new
spirit in the household.  Mrs. Weatherstone fully approved of the Girls'
Club Diantha had started at Mrs. Porne's; and it went on merrily in the
larger quarters of the great "cottage" on the cliff.

"I'm very glad I came to you, Mrs. Weatherstone," said the girl.  "You
were quite right about the experience; I did need it--and I'm getting
it!"

She was getting some of which she made no mention.

As she won and held the confidence of her subordinates, and the growing
list of club members, she learned their personal stories; what had
befallen them in other families, and what they liked and disliked in
their present places.

"The men are not so bad," explained Catharine Kelly, at a club meeting,
meaning the men servants; "they respect an honest girl if she respects
herself; but it's the young masters--and sometimes the old ones!"

"It's all nonsense," protested Mrs. James, widowed cook of long
standing.  "I've worked out for twenty-five years, and I never met no
such goings on!"

Little Ilda looked at Mrs. James' severe face and giggled.

"I've heard of it," said Molly Connors, "I've a cousin that's workin' in
New York; and she's had to leave two good places on account of their
misbehavin' theirselves.  She's a fine girl, but too good-lookin'."

Diantha studied types, questioned them, drew them out, adjusted facts to
theories and theories to facts.  She found the weakness of the whole
position to lie in the utter ignorance and helplessness of the
individual servant.  "If they were only organized," she thought--"and
knew their own power!--Well; there's plenty of time."

As her acquaintance increased, and as Mrs. Weatherstone's interest in
her plans increased also, she started the small summer experiment she
had planned, for furnishing labor by the day.  Mrs. James was an
excellent cook, though most unpleasant to work with.  She was quite able
to see that getting up frequent lunches at three dollars, and dinners at
five dollars, made a better income than ten dollars a week even with
several days unoccupied.

A group of younger women, under Diantha's sympathetic encouragement,
agreed to take a small cottage together, with Mrs. James as a species of
chaperone; and to go out in twos and threes as chambermaids and
waitresses at 25 cents an hour.  Two of them could set in perfect order
one of the small beach cottage in an hour's time; and the occupants,
already crowded for room, were quite willing to pay a little more in
cash "not to have a servant around."  Most of them took their meals out
in any case.

It was a modest attempt, elastic and easily alterable and based on the
special conditions of a shore resort: Mrs. Weatherstone's known interest
gave it social backing; and many ladies who heartily disapproved of
Diantha's theories found themselves quite willing to profit by this very
practical local solution of the "servant question."

The "club girls" became very popular.  Across the deep hot sand they
ploughed, and clattered along the warping boardwalks, in merry pairs and
groups, finding the work far more varied and amusing than the endless
repetition in one household.  They had pleasant evenings too, with
plenty of callers, albeit somewhat checked and chilled by rigorous Mrs.
James.

"It is both foolish and wicked!" said Madam Weatherstone to her
daughter-in-law, "Exposing a group of silly girls to such danger and
temptations!  I understand there is singing and laughing going on at
that house until half-past ten at night."

"Yes, there is," Viva admitted.  "Mrs. James insists that they shall all
be in bed at eleven--which is very wise.  I'm glad they have good
times--there's safety in numbers, you know."

"There will be a scandal in this community before long!" said the old
lady solemnly.  "And it grieves me to think that this household will be
responsible for it!"

Diantha heard all this from the linen room while Madam Weatherstone
buttonholed her daughter-in-law in the hall; and in truth the old lady
meant that she should hear what she said.

"She's right, I'm afraid!" said Diantha to herself--"there will be a
scandal if I'm not mighty careful and this household will be responsible
for it!"

Even as she spoke she caught Ilda's childish giggle in the lower hall,
and looking over the railing saw her airily dusting the big Chinese
vases and coquetting with young Mr. Mathew.

Later on, Diantha tried seriously to rouse her conscience and her common
sense.  "Don't you see, child, that it can't do you anything but harm?
You can't carry on with a man like that as you can with one of your own
friends.  He is not to be trusted.  One nice girl I had here simply left
the place--he annoyed her so."

Ilda was a little sulky.  She had been quite a queen in the small
Norwegian village she was born in.  Young men were young men--and they
might even--perhaps!  This severe young housekeeper didn't know
everything.  Maybe she was jealous!

So Ilda was rather unconvinced, though apparently submissive, and
Diantha kept a careful eye upon her.  She saw to it that Ilda's room had
a bolt as well as key in the door, and kept the room next to it empty;
frequently using it herself, unknown to anyone.  "I hate to turn the
child off," she said to herself, conscientiously revolving the matter.
"She isn't doing a thing more than most girls do--she's only a little
fool.  And he's not doing anything I can complain of--yet."

But she worried over it a good deal, and Mrs. Weatherstone noticed it.

"Doesn't your pet club house go well, 'Miss Bell?'  You seem troubled
about something."

"I am," Diantha admitted.  "I believe I'll have to tell you about
it--but I hate to.  Perhaps if you'll come and look I shan't have to say
much."

She led her to a window that looked on the garden, the rich, vivid,
flower-crowded garden of Southern California by the sea.  Little Ilda,
in a fresh black frock and snowy, frilly cap and apron, ran out to get a
rose; and while she sniffed and dallied they saw Mr. Mathew saunter out
and join her.

The girl was not as severe with him as she ought to have been--that was
evident; but it was also evident that she was frightened and furious
when he suddenly held her fast and kissed her with much satisfaction.
As soon as her arms were free she gave him a slap that sounded smartly
even at that distance; and ran crying into the house.

"She's foolish, I admit," said Diantha,--"but she doesn't realize her
danger at all.  I've tried to make her.  And now I'm more worried than
ever.  It seems rather hard to discharge her--she needs care."

"I'll speak to that young man myself," said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "I'll
speak to his grandmother too!"

"O--would you?" urged Diantha.  "She wouldn't believe anything except
that the girl 'led him on'--you know that.  But I have an idea that we
could convince her--if you're willing to do something rather
melodramatic--and I think we'd better do it to-night!"

"What's that?" asked her employer; and Diantha explained.  It was
melodramatic, but promised to be extremely convincing.

"Do you think he'd dare! under my roof?" hotly demanded Madam
Weatherstone.

"I'm very much afraid it wouldn't be the first time," Diantha
reluctantly assured her.  "It's no use being horrified.  But if we could
only make _sure_--"

"If we could only make his grandmother sure!" cried Madam Weatherstone.
"That would save me a deal of trouble and misunderstanding.  See here--I
think I can manage it--what makes you think it's to-night?"

"I can't be absolutely certain--" Diantha explained; and told her the
reasons she had.

"It does look so," her employer admitted.  "We'll try it at any rate."

Urging her mother-in-law's presence on the ground of needing her
experienced advice, Mrs. Weatherstone brought the august lady to the
room next to Ilda's late that evening, the housekeeper in attendance.

"We mustn't wake the servants," she said in an elaborate whisper.  "They
need sleep, poor things!  But I want to consult you about these
communicating doors and the locksmith is coming in the morning.--you see
this opens from this side."  She turned the oiled key softly in the
lock.  "Now Miss Bell thinks they ought to be left so--so that the girls
can visit one another if they like--what do you think?"

"I think you are absurd to bring me to the top floor, at this time of
night, for a thing like this!" said the old lady.  "They should be
permanently locked, to my mind!  There's no question about it."

Viva, still in low tones, discussed this point further; introduced the
subject of wall-paper or hard finish; pointed out from the window a tall
eucalyptus which she thought needed heading; did what she could to keep
her mother-in-law on the spot; and presently her efforts were rewarded.

A sound of muffled speech came from the next room--a man's voice dimly
heard.  Madam Weatherstone raised her head like a warhorse.

"What's this!  What's this!" she said in a fierce whisper.

Viva laid a hand on her arm.  "Sh!" said she.  "Let us make sure!" and
she softly unlatched the door.

A brilliant moon flooded the small chamber.  They could see little Ilda,
huddled in the bedclothes, staring at her door from which the key had
fallen.  Another key was being inserted--turned--but the bolt held.

"Come and open it, young lady!" said a careful voice outside.

"Go away!  Go away!" begged the girl, low and breathlessly.  "Oh how
_can_ you!  Go away quick!"

"Indeed, I won't!" said the voice.  "You come and open it."

"Go away," she cried, in a soft but frantic voice.  "I--I'll scream!"

"Scream away!" he answered.  "I'll just say I came up to see what the
screaming's about, that's all.  You open the door--if you don't want
anybody to know I'm here!  I won't hurt you any--I just want to talk to
you a minute."

Madam Weatherstone was speechless with horror, her daughter-in-law
listened with set lips.  Diantha looked from one to the other, and at
the frightened child before them who was now close to the terrible door.

"O please!--_please!_ go away!" she cried in desperation.  "O what shall
I do!  What shall I do!"

"You can't do anything," he answered cheerfully.  "And I'm coming in
anyhow.  You'd better keep still about this for your own sake.  Stand
from under!"  Madam Weatherstone marched into the room.  Ilda, with a
little cry, fled out of it to Diantha.

There was a jump, a scramble, two knuckly hands appeared, a long leg was
put through the transom, two legs wildly wriggling, a descending body,
and there stood before them, flushed, dishevelled, his coat up to his
ears--Mat Weatherstone.

He did not notice the stern rigidity of the figure which stood between
him and the moonlight, but clasped it warmly to his heart.--"Now I've
got you, Ducky!" cried he, pressing all too affectionate kisses upon the
face of his grandmother.

Young Mrs. Weatherstone turned on the light.

It was an embarrassing position for the gentleman.

He had expected to find a helpless cowering girl; afraid to cry out
because her case would be lost if she did; begging piteously that he
would leave her; wholly at his mercy.

What he did find was so inexplicable as to reduce him to gibbering
astonishment.  There stood his imposing grandmother, so overwhelmed with
amazement that her trenchant sentences failed her completely; his
stepmother, wearing an expression that almost suggested delight in his
discomfiture; and Diantha, as grim as Rhadamanthus.

Poor little Ilda burst into wild sobs and choking explanations, clinging
to Diantha's hand.  "If I'd only listened to you!" she said.  "You told
me he was bad!  I never thought he'd do such an awful thing!"

Young Mathew fumbled at the door.  He had locked it outside in his
efforts with the pass-key.  He was red, red to his ears--very red, but
there was no escape.  He faced them--there was no good in facing the
door.

They all stood aside and let him pass--a wordless gauntlet.

Diantha took the weeping Ilda to her room for the night.  Madam
Weatherstone and Mrs. Weatherstone went down together.

"She must have encouraged him!" the older lady finally burst forth.

"She did not encourage him to enter her room, as you saw and heard,"
said Viva with repressed intensity.

"He's only a boy!" said his grandmother.

"She is only a child, a helpless child, a foreigner, away from home,
untaught, unprotected," Viva answered swiftly; adding with quiet
sarcasm--"Save for the shelter of the home!"

They parted in silence.



WE EAT AT HOME

RONDEAU


We eat at home; we do not care
Of what insanitary fare;
 So long as Mother makes the pie,
 Content we live, content we die,
And proudly our dyspepsia bear.

Straight from our furred forefather's lair
The instinct comes of feeding there;
 And still unmoved by progress high
  We eat at home.

In wasteful ignorance we buy
Alone; alone our food we fry;
 What though a tenfold cost we bear,
 The doctor's bill, the dentist's chair?
Still without ever asking why
  We eat at home.



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


IX.

"SOCIETY" AND "FASHION"


Among our many naive misbeliefs is the current fallacy that "society" is
made by women; and that women are responsible for that peculiar social
manifestation called "fashion."

Men and women alike accept this notion; the serious essayist and
philosopher, as well as the novelist and paragrapher, reflect it in
their pages.  The force of inertia acts in the domain of psychics as
well as physics; any idea pushed into the popular mind with considerable
force will keep on going until some opposing force--or the slow
resistance of friction--stops it at last.

"Society" consists mostly of women.  Women carry on most of its
processes, therefore women are its makers and masters, they are
responsible for it, that is the general belief.

We might as well hold women responsible for harems--or prisoners for
jails.  To be helplessly confined to a given place or condition does not
prove that one has chosen it; much less made it.

No; in an androcentric culture "society," like every other social
relation, is dominated by the male and arranged for his convenience.
There are, of course, modifications due to the presence of the other
sex; where there are more women than men there are inevitable results of
their influence; but the character and conditions of the whole
performance are dictated by men.

Social intercourse is the prime condition of human life.  To meet, to
mingle, to know one another, to exchange, not only definite ideas,
facts, and feelings, but to experience that vague general stimulus and
enlarged power that comes of contact--all this is essential to our
happiness as well as to our progress.

This grand desideratum has always been monopolized by men as far as
possible.  What intercourse was allowed to women has been rigidly hemmed
its by man-made conventions.  Women accept these conventions, repeat
them, enforce them upon their daughters; but they originate with men.

The feet of the little Chinese girl are bound by her mother and her
nurse--but it is not for woman's pleasure that this crippling torture
was invented.  The Oriental veil is worn by women, but it is not for any
need of theirs that veils were decreed them.

When we look at society in its earlier form we find that the public
house has always been with us.  It is as old almost as the private
house; the need for association is as human as the need for privacy.
But the public house was--and is--for men only.  The woman was kept as
far as possible at home.  Her female nature was supposed to delimit her
life satisfactorily, and her human stature was completely ignored.

Under the pressure of that human nature she has always rebelled at the
social restrictions which surrounded her; and from the women of older
lands gathered at the well, or in the market place, to our own women on
the church steps or in the sewing circle, they have ceaselessly
struggled for the social intercourse which was as much a law of their
being as of man's.

When we come to the modern special field that we call "society," we find
it to consist of a carefully arranged set of processes and places
wherein women may meet one another and meet men.  These vary, of course,
with race, country, class, and period; from the clean licence of our
western customs to the strict chaperonage of older lands; but free as it
is in America, even here there are bounds.

Men associate without any limit but that of inclination and financial
capacity.  Even class distinction only works one way--the low-class man
may not mingle with high-class women; but the high-class man may--and
does--mingle with low-class women.  It is his society--may not a man do
what he will with his own?

Caste distinctions, as have been ably shown by Prof. Lester F. Ward, are
relics of race distinction; the subordinate caste was once a subordinate
race; and while mating, upward, was always forbidden to the subject
race; mating, downward, was always practiced by the master race.

The elaborate shading of "the color line" in slavery days, from pure
black up through mulatto, quadroon, octoroon, quinteroon, griffada,
mustafee, mustee, and sang d'or--to white again; was not through white
mothers--but white fathers; never too exclusive in their tastes.  Even
in slavery, the worst horrors were strictly androcentric.

"Society" is strictly guarded--that is its women are.  As always, the
main tabu is on the woman.  Consider carefully the relation between
"society" and the growing girl.  She must, of course, marry; and her
education, manners, character, must of course be pleasing to the
prospective wooer.  That which is desirable in young girls means,
naturally, that which is desirable to men.  Of all cultivated
accomplishments the first is "innocence."  Beauty may or may not be
forthcoming; but "innocence" is "the chief charm of girlhood."

Why?  What good does it do _her?_  Her whole life's success is made to
depend on her marrying; her health and happiness depends on her marrying
the right man.  The more "innocent" she is, the less she knows, the
easier it is for the wrong man to get her.

As is so feelingly described in "The Sorrows of Amelia," in "The Ladies'
Literary Cabinet," a magazine taken by my grandmother; "The only foible
which the delicate Amelia possessed was an unsuspecting breast to lavish
esteem.  Unversed in the secret villanies of a base degenerate world,
she ever imagined all mankind to be as spotless as herself.  Alas for
Amelia!  This fatal credulity was the source of all her misfortunes."
It was.  It is yet.

Just face the facts with new eyes--look at it as if you had never seen
"society" before; and observe the position of its "Queen."

Here is Woman.  Let us grant that Motherhood is her chief purpose.  (As
a female it is.  As a human being she has others!)  Marriage is our way
of safeguarding motherhood; of ensuring "support" and "protection" to
the wife and children.

"Society" is very largely used as a means to bring together young
people, to promote marriage.  If "society" is made and governed by women
we should naturally look to see its restrictions and encouragements such
as would put a premium on successful maternity and protect women--and
their children--from the evils of ill-regulated fatherhood.

Do we find this?  By no means.

"Society" allows the man all liberty--all privilege--all license.  There
are certain offences which would exclude him; such as not paying
gambling debts, or being poor; but offences against womanhood--against
motherhood--do not exclude him.

How about the reverse?

If "society" is made by women, for women, surely a misstep by a
helplessly "innocent" girl, will not injure her standing!

But it does.  She is no longer "innocent."  She knows now.  She has lost
her market value and is thrown out of the shop.  Why not?  It is his
shop--not hers.  What women may and may not be, what they must and must
not do, all is measured from the masculine standard.

A really feminine "society" based on the needs and pleasures of women,
both as females and as human beings, would in the first place accord
them freedom and knowledge; the knowledge which is power.  It would not
show us "the queen of the ballroom" in the position of a wall-flower
unless favored by masculine invitation; unable to eat unless he brings
her something; unable to cross the floor without his arm.  Of all blind
stultified "royal sluggards" she is the archetype.  No, a feminine
society would grant _at least_ equality to women in this, their
so-called special field.

Its attitude toward men, however, would be rigidly critical.

Fancy a real Mrs. Grundy (up to date it has been a Mr., his whiskers hid
in capstrings) saying, "No, no, young man.  You won't do.  You've been
drinking.  The habit's growing on you.  You'll make a bad husband."

Or still more severely, "Out with you, sir!  You've forfeited your right
to marry!  Go into retirement for seven years, and when you come back
bring a doctor's certificate with you."

That sounds ridiculous, doesn't it--for "Society" to say?  It is
ridiculous, in a man's "society."

The required dress and decoration of "society"; the everlasting eating
and drinking of "society," the preferred amusements of "society," the
absolute requirements and absolute exclusions of "society," are of men,
by men, for men,--to paraphrase a threadbare quotation.  And then, upon
all that vast edifice of masculine influence, they turn upon women as
Adam did; and blame _them_ for severity with their fallen sisters!
"Women are so hard upon women!"

They have to be.  What man would "allow" his wife, his daughters, to
visit and associate with "the fallen"?  His esteem would be forfeited,
they would lose their "social position," the girl's chance of marrying
would be gone.

Men are not so stern.  They may visit the unfortunate women, to bring
them help, sympathy, re-establishment--or for other reasons; and it does
not forfeit their social position.  Why should it?  They make the
regulation.

Women are to-day, far more conspicuously than men, the exponents and
victims of that mysterious power we call "Fashion."  As shown in mere
helpless imitation of one another's idea, customs, methods, there is not
much difference; in patient acquiescence with prescribed models of
architecture, furniture, literature, or anything else; there is not much
difference; but in personal decoration there is a most conspicuous
difference.  Women do to-day submit to more grotesque ugliness and
absurdity than men; and there are plenty of good reasons for it.
Confining our brief study of fashion to fashion in dress, let us observe
why it is that women wear these fine clothes at all; and why they change
them as they do.

First, and very clearly, the human female carries the weight of sex
decoration, solely because of her economic dependence on the male.  She
alone in nature adds to the burdens of maternity, which she was meant
for, this unnatural burden of ornament, which she was not meant for.
Every other female in the world is sufficiently attractive to the male
without trimmings.  He carries the trimmings, sparing no expense of
spreading antlers or trailing plumes; no monstrosity of crest and
wattles, to win her favor.

She is only temporarily interested in him.  The rest of the time she is
getting her own living, and caring for her own young.  But our women get
their bread from their husbands, and every other social need.  The woman
depends on the man for her position in life, as well as the necessities
of existence.  For herself and for her children she must win and hold
him who is the source of all supplies.  Therefore she is forced to add
to her own natural attractions this "dance of the seven veils," of the
seventeen gowns, of the seventy-seven hats of gay delirium.

There are many who think in one syllable, who say, "women don't dress to
please men--they dress to please themselves--and to outshine other
women."  To these I would suggest a visit to some summer shore resort
during the week and extending over Saturday night.  The women have all
the week to please themselves and outshine one another; but their array
on Saturday seems to indicate the approach of some new force or
attraction.

If all this does not satisfy I would then call their attention to the
well-known fact that the young damsel previous to marriage spends far
more time and ingenuity in decoration than she does afterward.  This has
long been observed and deprecated by those who write Advice to Wives, on
the ground that this difference is displeasing to the husband--that she
loses her influence over him; which is true.  But since his own
"society," knowing his weakness, has tied him to her by law; why should
she keep up what is after all an unnatural exertion?

That excellent magazine "Good Housekeeping" has been running for some
months a rhymed and illustrated story of "Miss Melissa Clarissa McRae,"
an extremely dainty and well-dressed stenographer, who captured and
married a fastidious young man, her employer, by the force of her
artificial attractions--and then lost his love after marriage by a
sudden unaccountable slovenliness--the same old story.

If this in not enough, let me instance further the attitude toward
"Fashion" of that class of women who live most openly and directly upon
the favor of men.  These know their business.  To continually attract
the vagrant fancy of the male, nature's born "variant," they must not
only pile on artificial charms, but change them constantly.  They do.
From the leaders of this profession comes a steady stream of changing
fashions; the more extreme and bizarre, the more successful--and because
they are successful they are imitated.

If men did not like changes in fashion be assured these professional
men-pleasers would not change them, but since Nature's Variant tires of
any face in favor of a new one, the lady who would hold her sway and
cannot change her face (except in color) must needs change her hat and
gown.

But the Arbiter, the Ruling Cause, he who not only by choice demands,
but as a business manufactures and supplies this amazing stream of
fashions; again like Adam blames the woman--for accepting what he both
demands and supplies.

A further proof, if more were needed, is shown in this; that in exact
proportion as women grow independent, educated, wise and free, do they
become less submissive to men-made fashions.  Was this improvement
hailed with sympathy and admiration--crowned with masculine favor?

The attitude of men toward those women who have so far presumed to
"unsex themselves" is known to all.  They like women to be foolish,
changeable, always newly attractive; and while women must "attract" for
a living--why they do, that's all.

It is a pity.  It is humiliating to any far-seeing woman to have to
recognize this glaring proof of the dependent, degraded position of her
sex; and it ought to be humiliating to men to see the results of their
mastery.  These crazily decorated little creatures do not represent
womanhood.

When the artist uses the woman as the type of every highest ideal; as
Justice, Liberty, Charity, Truth--he does not represent her trimmed.  In
any part of the world where women are even in part economically
independent there we find less of the absurdities of fashion.  Women who
work cannot be utterly absurd.

But the idle woman, the Queen of Society, who must please men within
their prescribed bounds; and those of the half-world, who must please
them at any cost--these are the vehicles of fashion.



ONLY AN HOUR


"One, two, three, four, five, six, seven," said the Second Hand, and
then he lost count.  "One, two, three, four, five--" It was no use.

"There is no end to it," said he, under his breath.  "Hundreds of times
I do it!  Thousands!  Millions!  A positive eternity--in constant
action.  What a thing Life is!"

The Minute Hand was very patient with him.  "My dear little Busybody,"
he said.  "Look at me and learn some dignity.  See, you have to make
those little jumps sixty times before I move!  Sixty times!"  And the
Minute Hand took a short step.  "There--now you begin again, while I
wait.  Watch me, take courage!  If you can count up to sixty you will
understand Life!"  And he took another short step.

The Hour Hand smiled.  He was too proud to talk with the Minute
Hand--considering him to have a Limited Intellect.  As for the Second
Hand, he did not acknowledge his existence.  "I am no microscopist!" he
would say if you pointed out that there was a Second Hand.

No, the Hour Hand did not converse, he Mused.  He mused much upon life,
as was natural.  "Twelve of them!" he thought to himself--"twelve of
these long long waits, these slow terrible advances.  And then twelve
more--before Life is over.  I can count.  I have an intellect.  I am not
afraid.  I can think around Life."  And he kept on thinking.

*

The man pulled out his watch and looked at it; yawned, took an easier
position on the car seat.  "Bah!" he said.  "Only an hour gone!--And I
can't get there till the day after to-morrow!"



COMMENT AND REVIEW


The first thing that struck me in reading this novel was the style.  Not
often, in a first publication, is this the main impression.

There is a delicate finished personal touch in Mrs. Schoonmaker's work,
that would indicate years of application.  Next I slowly gathered
interest in the story; not at once--it grew gradually--but later on,
when the characters were well placed and a grave danger threatened the
lives of several.

The flat, peaceful, limited life of rural Kentucky and its contented
inhabitants is drawn in soft assured touches--the reader feels the
sweetness and peace as well as the deadly dulness.

The picture of life among the studios of Paris hints at more than is
said, much more; indicating a philosophic judgment; yet withholding it.
There is a restraint, an economy of expression throughout; even where
the writer feels most strongly.

As to the heroine--her young life-struggle is part and parcel of that
universal stir and uprising among the women of to-day; so much of it
blind and undirected; so much wasted and lost in reaction; so much in
lines of true long-needed social evolution.  This girl's share in it
will be differently judged by different readers.  Many of our young
college women will sympathize with it most, I fancy.


THE ETERNAL FIRES
By Nancy Musselman Schoonmaker,
Broadway Pub. Co., N. Y.

*

Dr. Stanton Coit, prominent in ethical and social advance in England, is
a valuable supporter of the woman's movement.  His booklet, "Women in
Church and State," is a concise and impressive presentation of her
position in those great social bodies.  He treats of the militant
movement in England, its wise period of quiescence, and offers
reasonable suggestions as to further policy.

The attitude of the church toward women, from the miserable past up
through the changing present to the hopeful future, is given succinctly,
and the unfortunate reaction of a servile womanhood upon the church is
shown.

It is a clear presentation of the relation of woman to the state, in
politics, education, marriage and the home.

This booklet is for sale, in England, as one of the Ethical Message
Series, at 6d. net; and may be rebound for American circulation, at 15c.


WOMAN IN CHURCH AND STATE
By Stanton Coit, Ph.D.,
West London Ethical Society,
Queen's Road, Bayswater, England.

*

The ethical movement of the last twenty years is a strong proof of
humanity's natural bent toward the study and practice of that first of
sciences, the science of conduct.

How to behave, and Why, are universal questions; decided first by
conditions, then by instinct, then by custom and tradition, then by
religion, then by reason.  We are rapidly reaching the reasoning stage;
hence the popularity of ethics, and of such papers as The Ethical World.

We have ethical publications in this country, good ones, but it is
inspiring to get from other lands the vivid sense of that common
movement which so marks the uniting of the world.

Mere verbal language was necessary to the faintest human development;
written language, in the permanent form of books, established the long
roots of our historic life, with its sense of continuity; today the
multiplication of periodic literature, widely specialized, speaks our
social consciousness.  We no longer have to think alone, but the
smallest cult has its exponent, giving to each member the strength of
all.

In the issue of March 15th of this paper, Dr. Stanton Coit has an
article on "The Group Spirit," which treats sympathetically that marvel
of social dynamics, "the interpenetrating Third," appearing where two or
three are gathered together.

I should like to have discussed with Sir James Mackintosh, however, his
contention that moral principles are stationary.  They are not, but vary
from age to age in accordance with conditions.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


A friend and subscriber writes me thus:

"There are one or two questions I want to ask--not because I disagree,
but because I want to be able to meet objections.

"Those who believe in restricting "Woman's Sphere" to its present--no,
its former narrow boundaries may say,--"Yes, man is the only species
which keeps the female--or tries to--in the home and restricts her to
the strictly female functions and duties.  But it is just because man is
higher than the other animals, and because the period of infancy is so
much longer for human babies.  The animal mother bears her young,
nourishes them a short time, and is no longer needed.  The human mother
is something more than an agent of reproduction and a source of
nourishment.  By just so much as her motherhood is more and higher than
that of the ewe, it must take more of her time, her strength, her life.
How can a woman who is giving birth to a child every two or three years
for a period of ten years, for example, and "mothering," in the fullest
sense of the word, those children, find time or strength for anything
else?

"Then, too, what you call "Androcentric Culture" has existed by your own
statement practically ever since our historic period began--that is,
since man first advanced from savagery to human intelligence and
civilization.  Is it not fair to assume that a condition of affairs
non-existent among lower animals, but co-existent with the development
of the intelligence and civilization of mankind is a higher condition
than that found among the animals?"

Here we have five premises:

1.  Man is the only species which segregates the female to maternal
functions and duties.

2.  Man is higher than the other animals.

3.  The human period of infancy is longer.

4.  The human mother has to devote longer time to maternal cares.

5.  The Androcentric Culture is coexistent with the period of progress.

On these premises,two questions are based: On the first four:

A.  How can the human mother find time or strength for anything else?

On the fifth:

B.  Is not the Androcentric Culture evidence and conditions of our
superiority?

To clearly follow and answer this line of reasoning requires close
attention; but it is well worth doing; for this inquirer fairly puts the
general attitude of mind on this matter.

Premise one we may grant.  It is true as applied to all higher species.
There are some low ones where the female is a mere egg-layer; but with
those creatures the male is not much either.

Premises two and three we grant freely.

Premises three and four require consideration.

Is the existence of human infancy accompanied by a similar extension of
maternal cares?

Our Children are infants in the eyes of the law till they reach legal
majority; and in the arts, professions, and more complex businesses, a
boy of twenty-one is still an infant.

To bring a young animal up to the age where it can take care of itself
is a simple process and can be accomplished by the mother alone; but to
bring up a young human creature to the age where he or she can fitly
serve society is a complex process and cannot be performed by the mother
alone.  Our prolongation of infancy is a result of social progress, and
has to be met by social cares; is so met to some degree already.

The nurse and the teacher are social functionaries, performing the
duties of social motherhood.  The female savage can suckle her child and
teach her to prepare food, tan hides, make baskets and clothing, and
decorate them.  The male savage can teach his child to hunt and trap
game, to bear pain and privation, to put on warpaint and yell and dance,
to fight and kill.

But the civilized mother and father cannot teach their children all that
society requires of its citizens.  When trades went from father to son
they were so taught; and the level of progress in those trades was the
level of personal experience.  Our real progress has coincided with our
educational processes, in which suitable persons are selected to teach
children what society requires them to know, quite irrespective of their
parent's individual knowledge.  Should the learning of the world, the
discoveries and inventions, be limited to what each man can find out for
himself and teach his son?

No one expects the father's wisdom to be the limit of his son's
instruction; nor the mother's either.  She loves her child as much as
ever; and for its own sake is willing to have it learn of
music-teachers, dancing-teachers, and all the allied specialists of
school and college.

In all higher and more special cases, it is clear that the mother is not
required to parallel her attentions to our "period of infancy," but
perhaps it will still be contended that in the simpler and more
universal tasks of earlier years she is indispensable; and that these
years so overlap that she is practically confined to the home during her
whole period of child-bearing.

The answer to this is, first; that the simpler and more universal the
tasks the more there may be found capable of performing it.  As a matter
of fact we are so accustomed to take this view that we cheerfully
entrust the most delicate personal services of our babies to hired
persons of the lowest orders; as in our Southern States the proud white
mother gives her baby often to be suckled and always to be tended by a
black woman.

It is idle to talk of the indispensability of the mother's care in the
first years when any mother who can afford it is quite willing to share
or delegate that care to women admittedly inferior.  If the human race
has got on as well as it has with the care of its lower class children
solely ignorant mothers, and the care of its higher class children given
mainly by ignorant servants; why should we dread to have the care of all
children given mainly by high-class, skilled, educated, experienced
persons, of equal or superior grade to the parents?

The answer to this usually is the child needs the individual mother's
love and influence.  This is quite true.  The baby should be nourished
by his own mother--if she is healthy--and nothing can excuse her from
the loving cares of parentage.  But just as an ordinary unskilled
working woman loves and cares for her child--and yet does ten hours of
housework, to which no one objects; or just as an ordinary rich woman
loves and cares for her child--and yet does ten or twelve hours of
dancing, dining, riding, golfing, and bridge playing (to which no one
objects!)--so could a skilled working woman spend six or eight hours at
an appropriate trade, and still love and care for her child.  A normal
motherhood does not prevent the mother from suitable industry.  In other
words: The prolongation of human infancy does not demand an equal
prolongation of maternal services; but does demand specialized social
services.  When these services are properly given our children will be
far better cared for than now.

The best answer of all is simply this.  Almost all mothers do work, and
work hard, at house service; and are healthier than idle wholly
segregated women; yet there are many kinds of work far more compatible
with motherhood than cooking, scrubbing, sweeping, washing and ironing.

The fifth premise, and its accompanying question also calls for study.
It is true that our Androcentric Culture is co-existent with human
history and modern progress, with these qualifications:

Practically all our savages are decadent, and grossly androcentric.
Their language and customs prove an earlier and higher culture, in which
we may trace the matriarchate.  Among the less savage savages--as our
Pueblos--the women are comparatively independent and honored.

Almost all races have a "golden age" myth; faint traditions of a period
when things were better; which seems to coincide with this background of
matriarchal rule.  The farther back we go in our civilization the more
traces we find of woman's power and freedom, with goddesses, empresses,
and woman-favoring laws.

Again in our present Age, the most progressive and dominant races are
those whose women have most power and liberty; and in the feeblest and
most backward races we find women most ill-treated and enslaved.

The Teutons and Scandinavian stocks seem never to have had that period
of enslaved womanhood, that polygamous harem culture; their women never
went through that debasement; and their men have succeeded in preserving
the spirit of freedom which is inevitably lost by a race which has
servile women.  Thus while it is admitted that roughly speaking the
period of Androcentric Culture corresponds with the period of progress,
these considerations show that the coincidence is not perfect.  Even if
it were, there remains this satisfying rejoinder:

The lit space in our long life-story begins but a short time ago
compared with the real existence of human life on earth.  On the
conditions preceding history we know little save that they were
matriarchal as to culture and of an industrious, peaceful and friendly
nature.  Of the conditions brought about by the androcentric culture we
know much, however.

We have developed some degree of peace and prosperity; marked progress
in intelligence, learning, and specialized skill; immense material and
scientific development and increased wealth.

But we have also developed an array of diseases, follies, vices, and
crimes, which distinguish us from the other animals as markedly as does
our androcentric culture.

Not all of these disadvantages con be clearly traced to its door; but
these three are plainly due to it; prostitution, with all its
devastation of its ensuing diseases; drug habits of all sorts, as
alcohol, tobacco, opium--which are preponderantly masculine; and
warfare; with its loss of life and wealth; its cruelty and waste; its
foolish interference with true social processes.

If the matriarchal period can be shown to have produced worse evils than
these then it was a blessing to lose it.  If at all the splendid gains
we have made under man's rule can be traced to his separate influence
then we might say even these world injuries may be borne for the sake of
the benefits not otherwise obtainable.  But if it can be shown that real
progress is always paralleled by improvement in the conditions of women;
that the most valuable human qualities are found in women as well as
men; that these three worst evils of our present day are clearly of a
masculine nature and removable by the extension of feminine
influence--then our inquirer's last question is easily answered; the
existence of our androcentric culture during our period of modern
progress distinctly does not prove that it is a necessary condition of
that Progress.

*

A number of most interesting Personal Problems have come in this month,
but the length of the above, postponed from June, prevents due answers
in this issue.  This one had to be long, its questions were so general.

The earnest friend who asks as to the right attitude of a mother toward
her children, born and unborn, asks too much.  No explicit "answers" can
be given to such life-covering queries.  One may reply epigrammatically
(and unsatisfactorily) as this:

The first duty of a mother is to be a mother worth having.

The second duty of a mother is to select a father worth having.

The third duty of a mother is to bring up children worth having--and to
have children worth bringing up!

Motherhood is a personal process, Child-culture is a social process.

A vigorous well-placed wisely working woman should take her
child-bearing naturally, not make too much ado about it.  But
child-rearing--that is another matter.

We can advise as to one wanting a gardener, "Get a good one."

If there are none--then it is not time we made some?



[Advertisement]


Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman


Sent postpaid by

THE CHARLTON COMPANY
67 WALL STREET, NEW YORK


"Women and Economics"  $1.50

Since John Stuart Mill's essay there has been no book dealing with the
whole position of women to approach it in originality of conception and
brilliancy of exposition.--_London Chronicle._

A remarkable book.  A work on economics that has not a dull page--the
work of a woman about women that has not a flippant word.--_Boston
Transcript._

Will be widely read and discussed as the cleverest, fairest, most
forcible presentation of the view of the rapidly increasing group who
look with favor on the extension of industrial employment to
women.--_Political Science Quarterly._


"Concerning Children"  $1.25

WANTED:--A philanthropist, to give a copy to every English-speaking
parent.--_The Times,_ New York.

Should be read by every mother in the land.--_The Press,_ New York.

Wholesomely disturbing book that deserves to be read for its own
sake.--_Chicago Dial._


"In This Our World" (Poems)  $1.25

There is a joyous superabundance of life, of strength, of health, in
Mrs. Gilman's verse, which seems born of the glorious sunshine and rich
gardens of California.--_Washington Times._

The poet of women and for women, a new and prophetic voice in the world.
 Montaigne would have rejoiced in her.--_Mexican Herald._


"The Yellow Wall Paper"  $0.50

Worthy of a place beside some of the weird masterpieces of Hawthorne and
Poe.--_Literature._

As a short story it stands among the most powerful produced in
America.--_Chicago News._


"The Home"  $1.00

Indeed, Mrs. Gilman has not intended her book so much as a treatise for
scholars as a surgical operation on the popular mind.--_The Critic,_ New
York.

It is safe to say that no more stimulating arraignment has ever before
taken shape and that the argument of the book is noble, and, on the
whole, convincing.--_Congregationalist,_ Boston.


"Human Work"  $1.00

Charlotte Perkins Stetson Gilman has been writing a new book, entitled
"Human Work."  It is the best thing that Mrs. Gilman has done, and it is
meant to focus all of her previous work, so to speak.--_Tribune,_
Chicago.

In her latest volume, "Human Work," Charlotte Perkins Gilman places
herself among the foremost students and elucidators of the problem of
social economics.--"San Francisco Star._

It is impossible to overestimate the value of the insistence on the
social aspect of human affairs as Mrs. Gilman has outlined it.--_Public
Opinion._


IN PREPARATION:


"What Diantha Did" (A Novel)  $1.00

"The Man Made World": or, "Our Androcentric Culture"  $1.00


Orders taken for Bound Vols. THE FORERUNNER, $1.25



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK


AS TO PURPOSE:


_What is The Forerunner?_  It is a monthly magazine, publishing stories
short and serial, article and essay; drama, verse, satire and sermon;
dialogue, fable and fantasy, comment and review.  It is written entirely
by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

_What is it For?_  It is to stimulate thought: to arouse hope, courage
and impatience; to offer practical suggestions and solutions, to voice
the strong assurance of better living, here, now, in our own hands to
make.

_What is it about?_  It is about people, principles, and the questions
of every-day life; the personal and public problems of to-day.  It gives
a clear, consistent view of human life and how to live it.

_Is it a Woman's magazine?_  It will treat all three phases of our
existence--male, female and human.  It will discuss Man, in his true
place in life; Woman, the Unknown Power; the  Child, the most important
citizen.

_Is it a Socialist Magazine?_  It is a magazine for humanity, and
humanity is social.  It holds that Socialism, the economic theory, is
part of our gradual Socialization, and that the duty of conscious
humanity is to promote Socialization.

_Why is it published?_  It is published to express ideas which need a
special medium; and in the belief that there are enough persons
interested in those ideas to justify the undertaking.


AS TO ADVERTISING:


We have long heard that "A pleased customer is the best advertiser."
The Forerunner offers to its advertisers and readers the benefit of this
authority.  In its advertising department, under the above heading, will
be described articles personally known and used.  So far as individual
experience and approval carry weight, and clear truthful description
command attention, the advertising pages of The Forerunner will be
useful to both dealer and buyer.  If advertisers prefer to use their own
statements The Forerunner will publish them if it believes them to be
true.


AS TO CONTENTS:


The main feature of the first year is a new book on a new subject with a
new name:--

_"Our Androcentric Culture."_  this is a study of the historic effect on
normal human development of a too exclusively masculine civilization.
It shows what man, the male, has done to the world: and what woman, the
more human, may do to change it.

_"What Diantha Did."_  This is a serial novel.  It shows the course of
true love running very crookedly--as it so often does--among the
obstructions and difficulties of the housekeeping problem--and solves
that problem.  (NOT by co-operation.)

Among the short articles will appear:

"Private Morality and Public Immorality."
"The Beauty Women Have Lost"
"Our Overworked Instincts."
"The Nun in the Kitchen."
"Genius: Domestic and Maternal."
"A Small God and a Large Goddess."
"Animals in Cities."
"How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money."
"Prize Children"
"Kitchen-Mindedness"
"Parlor-Mindedness"
"Nursery-Mindedness"

There will be short stories and other entertaining matter in each issue.
 The department of "Personal Problems" does not discuss etiquette,
fashions or the removal of freckles.  Foolish questions will not be
answered, unless at peril of the asker.


AS TO VALUE:

If you take this magazine one year you will have:


One complete novel . . . By C. P. Gilman
One new book . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve short stories . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more short articles . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more new poems . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve Short Sermons . . . By C. P. Gilman
Besides "Comment and Review" . . . By C. P. Gilman
"Personal Problems" . . . By C. P. Gilman
And many other things . . . By C. P. Gilman

DON'T YOU THINK IT'S WORTH A DOLLAR?


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 10
AUGUST, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

Each mother, separately, owes a duty to her child.
Do not mothers, collectively, owe a duty to their children?  What is it?




THE EARTH'S ENTAIL


No matter how we cultivate the land,
 Taming the forest and the prairie free;
No matter how we irrigate the sand,
Making the desert blossom at command,
 We must always leave the borders of the sea;
  The immeasureable reaches
  Of the windy wave-wet beaches,
 The million-mile-long margin of the sea.

No matter how the engineers may toil,
 Nature's barriers and bulwarks to defy;
No matter how we excavate and spoil,
De-forest and denude and waste the soil,
 We must always leave the mountains looming high;
  No human effort changes,
  The horizon-rolling ranges
 Where the high hills heave and shoulder to the sky.

When a child may wander safely, east or west,
 When the peaceful nations gossip and agree.
When our homes are set in gardens all at rest,
And happy lives are long in work loved best,
 We can leave our labor and go free;
  Free to go and stand alone in,
  Free for each to find his own in.
 In the everlasting mountains and the sea.



THE COTTAGETTE


"Why not?" said Mr. Mathews "It is far too small for a house, too pretty
for a hut, too--unusual--for a cottage."

"Cottagette, by all means," said Lois, seating herself on a porch chair.
 "But it is larger than it looks, Mr. Mathews.  How do you like it,
Malda?"

I was delighted with it.  More than delighted.  Here this tiny shell of
fresh unpainted wood peeped out from under the trees, the only house in
sight except the distant white specks on far off farms, and the little
wandering village in the river-threaded valley.  It sat right on the
turf,--no road, no path even, and the dark woods shadowed the back
windows.

"How about meals?" asked Lois.

"Not two minutes walk," he assured her, and showed us a little furtive
path between the trees to the place where meals were furnished.

We discussed and examined and exclaimed, Lois holding her pongee skirts
close about her--she needn't have been so careful, there wasn't a speck
of dust,--and presently decided to take it.

Never did I know the real joy and peace of living, before that blessed
summer at "High Court."  It was a mountain place, easy enough to get to,
but strangely big and still and far away when you were there.

The working basis of the establishment was an eccentric woman named
Caswell, a sort of musical enthusiast, who had a summer school of music
and the "higher things."  Malicious persons, not able to obtain
accommodations there, called the place "High C."

I liked the music very well, and kept my thoughts to myself, both high
and low, but "The Cottagette" I loved unreservedly.  It was so little
and new and clean, smelling only of its fresh-planed boards--they hadn't
even stained it.

There was one big room and two little ones in the tiny thing, though
from the outside you wouldn't have believed it, it looked so small; but
small as it was it harbored a miracle--a real bathroom with water piped
from mountain springs.  Our windows opened into the green shadiness, the
soft brownness, the bird-inhabited quiet flower-starred woods.  But in
front we looked across whole counties--over a far-off river-into another
state.  Off and down and away--it was like sitting on the roof of
something--something very big.

The grass swept up to the door-step, to the walls--only it wasn't just
grass of course, but such a procession of flowers as I had never
imagined could grow in one place.

You had to go quite a way through the meadow, wearing your own narrow
faintly marked streak in the grass, to reach the town-connecting road
below.  But in the woods was a little path, clear and wide, by which we
went to meals.

For we ate with the highly thoughtful musicians, and highly musical
thinkers, in their central boarding-house nearby.  They didn't call it a
boarding-house, which is neither high nor musical; they called it "The
Calceolaria."  There was plenty of that growing about, and I didn't mind
what they called it so long as the food was good--which it was, and the
prices reasonable--which they were.

The people were extremely interesting--some of them at least; and all of
them were better than the average of summer boarders.

But if there hadn't been any interesting ones it didn't matter while
Ford Mathews was there.  He was a newspaper man, or rather an
ex-newspaper man, then becoming a writer for magazines, with books
ahead.

He had friends at High Court--he liked music--he liked the place--and he
liked us.  Lois liked him too, as was quite natural.  I'm sure I did.

He used to come up evenings and sit on the porch and talk.

He came daytimes and went on long walks with us.  He established his
workshop in a most attractive little cave not far beyond far beyond
us--the country there is full of rocky ledges and hollows, and sometimes
asked us over to an afternoon tea, made on a gipsy fire.

Lois was a good deal older than I, but not really old at all, and she
didn't look her thirty-five by ten years.  I never blamed her for not
mentioning it, and I wouldn't have done so, myself, on any account.  But
I felt that together we made a safe and reasonable household.  She
played beautifully, and there was a piano in our big room.  There were
pianos in several other little cottages about--but too far off for any
jar of sound.  When the wind was right we caught little wafts of music
now and then; but mostly it was still--blessedly still, about us.  And
yet that Calceolaria was only two minutes off--and with raincoats and
rubbers we never minded going to it.

We saw a good deal of Ford and I got interested in him, I couldn't help
it.  He was big.  Not extra big in pounds and inches, but a man with big
view and a grip--with purpose and real power.  He was going to do
things.  I thought he was doing them now, but he didn't--this was all
like cutting steps in the ice-wall, he said.  It had to be done, but the
road was long ahead.  And he took an interest in my work too, which is
unusual for a literary man.

Mine wasn't much.  I did embroidery and made designs.

It is such pretty work!  I like to draw from flowers and leaves and
things about me; conventionalize them sometimes, and sometimes paint
them just as they are,--in soft silk stitches.

All about up here were the lovely small things I needed; and not only
these, but the lovely big things that make one feel so strong and able
to do beautiful work.

Here was the friend I lived so happily with, and all this fairy land of
sun and shadow, the free immensity of our view, and the dainty comfort
of the Cottagette.  We never had to think of ordinary things till the
soft musical thrill of the Japanese gong stole through the trees, and we
trotted off to the Calceolaria.

I think Lois knew before I did.

We were old friends and trusted each other, and she had had experience
too.

"Malda," she said, "let us face this thing and be rational."  It was a
strange thing that Lois should be so rational and yet so musical--but
she was, and that was one reason I liked her so much.

"You are beginning to love Ford Mathews--do you know it?"

I said yes, I thought I was.

"Does he love you?"

That I couldn't say.  "It is early yet," I told her.  "He is a man, he
is about thirty I believe, he has seen more of life and probably loved
before--it may be nothing more than friendliness with him."

"Do you think it would be a good marriage?" she asked.  We had often
talked of love and marriage, and Lois had helped me to form my
views--hers were very clear and strong.

"Why yes--if he loves me," I said.  "He has told me quite a bit about
his family, good western farming people, real Americans.  He is strong
and well--you can read clean living in his eyes and mouth."  Ford's eyes
were as clear as a girl's, the whites of them were clear.  Most men's
eyes, when you look at them critically, are not like that.  They may
look at you very expressively, but when you look at them, just as
features, they are not very nice.

I liked his looks, but I liked him better.

So I told her that as far as I knew it would be a good marriage--if it
was one.

"How much do you love him?" she asked.

That I couldn't quite tell,--it was a good deal,--but I didn't think it
would kill me to lose him.

"Do you love him enough to do something to win him--to really put
yourself out somewhat for that purpose?"

"Why--yes--I think I do.  If it was something I approved of.  What do
you mean?"

Then Lois unfolded her plan.  She had been married,--unhappily married,
in her youth; that was all over and done with years ago; she had told me
about it long since; and she said she did not regret the pain and loss
because it had given her experience.  She had her maiden name again--and
freedom.  She was so fond of me she wanted to give me the benefit of her
experience--without the pain.

"Men like music," said Lois; "they like sensible talk; they like beauty
of course, and all that,--"

"Then they ought to like you!" I interrupted, and, as a matter of fact
they did.  I knew several who wanted to marry her, but she said "once
was enough."  I don't think they were "good marriages" though.

"Don't be foolish, child," said Lois, "this is serious.  What they care
for most after all is domesticity.  Of course they'll fall in love with
anything; but what they want to marry is a homemaker.  Now we are living
here in an idyllic sort of way, quite conducive to falling in love, but
no temptation to marriage.  If I were you--if I really loved this man
and wished to marry him, I would make a home of this place."

"Make a home?--why it _is_ a home.  I never was so happy anywhere in my
life.  What on earth do you mean, Lois?"

"A person might be happy in a balloon, I suppose," she replied, "but it
wouldn't be a home.  He comes here and sits talking with us, and it's
quiet and feminine and attractive--and then we hear that big gong at the
Calceolaria, and off we go stopping through the wet woods--and the spell
is broken.  Now you can cook."  I could cook.  I could cook excellently.
 My esteemed Mama had rigorously taught me every branch of what is now
called "domestic science;" and I had no objection to the work, except
that it prevented my doing anything else.  And one's hands are not so
nice when one cooks and washes dishes,--I need nice hands for my
needlework.  But if it was a question of pleasing Ford Mathews--

Lois went on calmly.  "Miss Caswell would put on a kitchen for us in a
minute, she said she would, you know, when we took the cottage.  Plenty
of people keep house up here,--we, can if we want to."

"But we don't want to," I said, "we never have wanted to.  The very
beauty of the place is that it never had any house-keeping about it.
Still, as you say, it would be cosy on a wet night, we could have
delicious little suppers, and have him stay--"

"He told me he had never known a home since he was eighteen," said Lois.

That was how we came to install a kitchen in the Cottagette.  The men
put it up in a few days, just a lean-to with a window, a sink and two
doors.  I did the cooking.  We had nice things, there is no denying
that; good fresh milk and vegetables particularly, fruit is hard to get
in the country, and meat too, still we managed nicely; the less you have
the more you have to manage--it takes time and brains, that's all.

Lois likes to do housework, but it spoils her hands for practicing, so
she can't; and I was perfectly willing to do it--it was all in the
interest of my own heart.  Ford certainly enjoyed it.  He dropped in
often, and ate things with undeniable relish.  So I was pleased, though
it did interfere with my work a good deal.  I always work best in the
morning; but of course housework has to be done in the morning too; and
it is astonishing how much work there is in the littlest kitchen.  You
go in for a minute, and you see this thing and that thing and the other
thing to be done, and your minute is an hour before you know it.

When I was ready to sit down the freshness of the morning was gone
somehow.  Before, when I woke up, there was only the clean wood smell of
the house, and then the blessed out-of-doors: now I always felt the call
of the kitchen as soon as I woke.  An oil stove will smell a little,
either in or out of the house; and soap, and--well you know if you cook
in a bedroom how it makes the room feel differently?  Our house had been
only bedroom and parlor before.

We baked too--the baker's bread was really pretty poor, and Ford did
enjoy my whole wheat, and brown, and especially hot rolls and gems.  it
was a pleasure to feed him, but it did heat up the house, and me.  I
never could work much--at my work--baking days.  Then, when I did get to
work, the people would come with things,--milk or meat or vegetables, or
children with berries; and what distressed me most was the wheelmarks on
our meadow.  They soon made quite a road--they had to of course, but I
hated it--I lost that lovely sense of being on the last edge and looking
over--we were just a bead on a string like other houses.  But it was
quite true that I loved this man, and would do more than this to please
him.  We couldn't go off so freely on excursions as we used, either;
when meals are to be prepared someone has to be there, and to take in
things when they come.  Sometimes Lois stayed in, she always asked to,
but mostly I did.  I couldn't let her spoil her summer on my account.
And Ford certainly liked it.

He came so often that Lois said she thought it would look better if we
had an older person with us; and that her mother could come if I wanted
her, and she could help with the work of course.  That seemed
reasonable, and she came.  I wasn't very fond of Lois's mother, Mrs.
Fowler, but it did seem a little conspicuous, Mr. Mathews eating with us
more than he did at the Calceolaria.

There were others of course, plenty of them dropping in, but I didn't
encourage it much, it made so much more work.  They would come in to
supper, and then we would have musical evenings.  They offered to help
me wash dishes, some of them, but a new hand in the kitchen is not much
help, I preferred to do it myself; then I knew where the dishes were.

Ford never seemed to want to wipe dishes; though I often wished he
would.

So Mrs. Fowler came.  She and Lois had one room, they had to,--and she
really did a lot of the work, she was a very practical old lady.

Then the house began to be noisy.  You hear another person in a kitchen
more than you hear yourself, I think,--and the walls were only boards.
She swept more than we did too.  I don't think much sweeping is needed
in a clean place like that; and she dusted all the time; which I know is
unnecessary.  I still did most of the cooking, but I could get off more
to draw, out-of-doors; and to walk.  Ford was in and out continually,
and, it seemed to me, was really coming nearer.  What was one summer of
interrupted work, of noise and dirt and smell and constant meditation on
what to eat next, compared to a lifetime of love?  Besides--if he
married me--I should have to do it always, and might as well get used to
it.

Lois kept me contented, too, telling me nice things that Ford said about
my cooking.  "He does appreciate it so," she said.

One day he came around early and asked me to go up Hugh's Peak with him.
 It was a lovely climb and took all day.  I demurred a little, it was
Monday, Mrs. Fowler thought it was cheaper to have a woman come and
wash, and we did, but it certainly made more work.

"Never mind," he said, "what's washing day or ironing day or any of that
old foolishness to us?  This is walking day--that's what it is."  It was
really, cool and sweet and fresh,--it had rained in the night,--and
brilliantly clear.

"Come along!" he said.  "We can see as far as Patch Mountain I'm sure.
There'll never be a better day."

"Is anyone else going?" I asked.

"Not a soul.  It's just us.  Come."

I came gladly, only suggesting--"Wait, let me put up a lunch."

"I'll wait just long enough for you to put on knickers and a short
skirt," said he.  "The lunch is all in the basket on my back.  I know
how long it takes for you women to 'put up' sandwiches and things."

We were off in ten minutes, light-footed and happy, and the day was all
that could be asked.  He brought a perfect lunch, too, and had made it
all himself.  I confess it tasted better to me than my own cooking; but
perhaps that was the climb.

When we were nearly down we stopped by a spring on a broad ledge, and
supped, making tea as he liked to do out-of-doors.  We saw the round sun
setting at one end of a world view, and the round moon rising at the
other; calmly shining each on each.

And then he asked me to be his wife.--

We were very happy.

"But there's a condition!" said he all at once, sitting up straight and
looking very fierce.  "You mustn't cook!"

"What!" said I.  "Mustn't cook?"

"No," said he, "you must give it up--for my sake."

I stared at him dumbly.

"Yes, I know all about it," he went on, "Lois told me.  I've seen a good
deal of Lois--since you've taken to cooking.  And since I would talk
about you, naturally I learned a lot.  She told me how you were brought
up, and how strong your domestic instincts were--but bless your artist
soul dear girl, you have some others!"  Then he smiled rather queerly
and murmured, "surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any
bird."

"I've watched you, dear, all summer;" he went on, "it doesn't agree with
you.

"Of course the things taste good--but so do my things!  I'm a good cook
myself.  My father was a cook, for years--at good wages.  I'm used to it
you see.

"One summer when I was hard up I cooked for a living--and saved money
instead of starving."

"O ho!" said I, "that accounts for the tea--and the lunch!"

"And lots of other things," said he.  "But you haven't done half as much
of your lovely work since you started this kitchen business, and--you'll
forgive me, dear--it hasn't been as good.  Your work is quite too good
to lose; it is a beautiful and distinctive art, and I don't want you to
let it go.  What would you think of me if I gave up my hard long years
of writing for the easy competence of a well-paid cook!"

I was still too happy to think very clearly.  I just sat and looked at
him.  "But you want to marry me?" I said.

"I want to marry you, Malda,--because I love you--because you are young
and strong and beautiful--because you are wild and sweet and--fragrant,
and--elusive, like the wild flowers you love.  Because you are so truly
an artist in your special way, seeing beauty and giving it to others.  I
love you because of all this, because you are rational and highminded
and capable of friendship,--and in spite of your cooking!"

"But--how do you want to live?"

"As we did here--at first," he said.  "There was peace, exquisite
silence.  There was beauty--nothing but beauty.  There were the clean
wood odors and flowers and fragrances and sweet wild wind.  And there
was you--your fair self, always delicately dressed, with white firm
fingers sure of touch in delicate true work.  I loved you then.  When
you took to cooking it jarred on me.  I have been a cook, I tell you,
and I know what it is.  I hated it--to see my wood-flower in a kitchen.
But Lois told me about how you were brought up to it and loved it--and I
said to myself, 'I love this woman; I will wait and see if I love her
even as a cook.'  And I do, Darling: I withdraw the condition.  I will
love you always, even if you insist on being my cook for life!"

"O I don't insist!" I cried.  "I don't want to cook--I want to draw!
But I thought--Lois said--How she has misunderstood you!"

"It is not true, always, my dear," said he, "that the way to a man's
heart is through his stomach; at least it's not the only way.  Lois
doesn't know everything, she is young yet!  And perhaps for my sake you
can give it up.  Can you sweet?"

Could I?  Could I?  Was there ever a man like this?



WHOLESALE HYPNOTISM


We are beginning to see some glimmering of new truth concerning the art
of suggestion.

Here is some one with a strong will who imposes upon you a definite
idea--"This napkin is a peach; a luscious, ripe peach," insists the
hypnotizer; and the hypnotized bites at the napkin with every appearance
of delight.

It is said that those once thoroughly hypnotized, surrendering their own
observation and judgement and submitting absolutely to the ideas
impressed upon their minds by others, become thereafter less able to
think and act for themselves, and more and more open to suggestion.

We begin to see this of the individual mind, but we have not yet seen
its application to the race mind.

Suggestion is a force acting upon us all, as is well known to the
politician and the advertiser, but it acts most strongly upon the weak
and those unaccustomed to using their own minds, as is completely shown
in children.

It is the susceptibility to suggestion which makes children so easily
swayed by the influence of their companions; so ready to follow the
leader who says "let's play" this or that: nearly all join in, and a
group of children used to such leadership will stand about rather
helplessly if deprived of it.

It is that extreme susceptibility which makes the church say "Give us
the first five years of a child's life, and he will never outgrow our
influence!"  Children, of all people, are most open to the power of
suggestion.

Now observe the cumulative action of this power, applied to the youth of
humanity, and in each generation further applied to each individual
youth.  Certain ideas first grasped in ages of dark savagery, or even
previous to that, and then believed to be of supreme importance, were
forcibly impressed upon the minds of children, all children, generation
after generation.  To select one simple instance, observe the use of the
fear-motive in controlling the young.

Among animals there are two main modifiers of conduct, desire and fear.
They act either to gratify a desire or to avoid a danger.

The young animal does not know his dangers, and it is imperative that he
should know them.  In those higher species where parental education is
developed, the mother shows her young what things are good for it, and
teaches it the terror necessary.  The little bird or beast must squat
and be still, must stay in the cave or lie hid in the grass; lest the
fox, hawk, lion, or whatever enemy is to be dreaded should pounce upon
it.  And this pre-human method of culture has come down to its through
long lines of savages with their real and fancied bugaboos to terrorize
the young; through ancient and modern races; through the warrior mothers
and nurses using "Napoleon" or "The Black Douglas" as the impending
danger, to the same primitive, ignorant custom to-day--"The Goberlins
'll git yer, if you don't watch out"!

The "pain economy" and "fear economy" of the beast and savage are long
left behind, but we preserve and artificially enforce the fear
instinct--by suggestion.  We hypnotize our children generation after
generation, with disciplinary dread, and rely so wholly upon it to
enforce good behavior that our citizens see no preventive of crime
except fear of punishment.

Similarly we impress on the helplessly receptive minds of our children,
whose earliest years are passed under the influence of uneducated
house-servants, the ancient, foolish prejudices and misconceptions of
our dark past.  If the expanding mind of the little child could be
surrounded by the influences of our highest culture, instead of our
lowest; and above all things be taught to _use its own power_--to
observe, deduce, and act accordingly, and be carefully shielded from the
cumulative force of age-old falsehood and folly, we should have a set of
people who would look at life with new eyes.  We could see things as
they are, and judge for ourselves what conduct was needed, whereas now
we see things as we have been taught they are; and believe, because we
have been told so, that we cannot alter conditions.

It is not lack of mental capacity which blinds us; not lack of power
which chains us; but we are hypnotized--and have been for a thousand
thousand years--with carefully invented lies.

"You can't alter human nature."   Who says so?  _Is it true?_  Is there
no difference between the nature of the modern American and the nature
of a Fiji Islander?  Do they respond alike under the same conditions?
Are their impulses and governing tendencies the same?

Human nature has altered from its dim beginnings, under the action of
changed conditions, just as dog-nature has altered from fierce wolf and
slinking jackal to the dear loved companion of mankind.

There are some properties common to all natures; some common to each
race and species; some common to special strains and families; but of
all "natures" human nature, the broadest, most complex, most recent, is
_most easily_ alterable.

Let that sink in.  Be hypnotized the other way for awhile!

You Can Alter Human Nature!

We are naturally displeased with human nature as we see it about us.  It
so inert--so subservient--so incredibly dull.

Put yourself in the place of a bright youngster, two hundred years
hence, looking back at these suffering times.  Suppose he is studying
"ancient history," and has been given pictures and books describing the
life of our day.  "But _why_ did they live so?" he will ask.  "Weren't
they people like us?  Couldn't they see--hear--feel?  Hadn't they arms
and hands and brains?  Here's this--this--what do you call it?
'Overcrowding in cities.'  What made them overcrowd?"  Then the
professor will have to explain.  "It was their belief that governed
them.  They believed that economic laws necessitated all that kind of
thing.  Everybody believed it."

"But how _could_ they believe it?  They had intelligence; look at the
things they invented, the scientific discoveries they made, the big
businesses they managed!  What _made_ them believe it?"  And unless the
professor understands the peculiar effect of race-hypnotism he will be
pushed for an answer.

What indeed makes us believe that so many human beings have to remain
inferior to so few; that this kind of animal cannot be improved and
elevated like any other kind?  What makes us believe that because one
man is inferior to another, therefore the other must take advantage of
him?  What makes us believe that while the wide earth responds
submissively to our modifying hand; while we master arts and sciences,
develop industries, probe mysteries, achieve marvels; we are, and must
ourselves remain a set of helpless, changeless undesirables?

"But," the professor will say to the child, "they _felt_ thus and so,
you see."  "Felt!" that sturdy son of the future will say, "Didn't they
know that feeling could be changed as easy as anything?"

It will be hard indeed, when human nature is altered a little more, to
make it patient with the besotted conviction of unalterableness that
paralyzes it now.

A baby's opening mind should be placed among the most beautiful and
rational conditions, specially arranged for easy observation and
deduction.  It should be surrounded by persons of the best wisdom now
ours; and whatever it may lack of what we do not yet know to be true, it
should be religiously guarded from what we do know to be false.

Every college should have its course in Humaniculture, and the most
earnest minds should be at work to steadily raise the standard of that
new science.

New concepts, broad and beautiful, should be implanted in each young
mind; this mighty power of suggestion being used by the highest, to lift
us up, instead of by the lowest, to keep us down.

What a simple process!  What a blessed change!  At present the child
mind is entrusted to the most ignorant, and taught the oldest lies.
Soon we shall entrust it only to the most wise and teach it the newest
truths.



[Untitled]


Sit up and think!
 The life in you is Life--unlimited!
You rose--you'll sink--
 But Life goes on--that isn't dead.



THE KITCHEN FLY


The ills that flesh is heir to are not all entailed.

We used to think that diseases were special afflictions sent by God, to
be borne with meek endurance.  Now we have learned that some of them
grow in us like plants in a garden, that some we give to one another as
presents, and some we keep as pets.

Many little go-betweens we have discovered, with legs and wings, who
operate as continual mischief-makers, and among these at last looms
large and deadly, that most widespread and intimate of pests--the Common
Fly.

The House Fly is his most familiar name, but that should be changed.  He
is not of his own nature a parlor fly, nor a library fly, nor a bedroom
fly; an attic fly nor a hall and stair fly; but he is _par excellence_
the Kitchen Fly.

Flies are not perennial bloomers.  They have to be born--hatched from
eggs, and the resultant larva have to have a Congenial Medium to be born
in.  The careful mother fly does not leave her little flock on a
mahogany center table.  Flies have to eat; they eat all the things we
do, and many that we don't!

There are two main nurseries for the Common Fly in all our cities, yes,
and in our country homes as well--the Stable and the Kitchen.

Unless stables are kept with the most absolute cleanliness flies are
bred there.

Unless kitchens are kept in the most absolute cleanliness flies are bred
there--or therefrom!  Moreover the smell of hot food draws flies from
afar; a kitchen even though spotless and screened is a constant bait for
flies.

I was once visiting in a fine clean summer camp in the Adirondacks,
where friends in combination did the work.  In the main room of this
place was a wide long window--one great picture, framing the purple
hills.  It was a good deal of work to clean that window, and we took
turns at it.  One day this window was laboriously polished inside and
out by an earnest gentleman of high ideals.  Then--in the kitchen--some
one cooked a cabbage.  Forthwith that front-room window was black with
flies--big, bumping, buzzing, blue-bottle flies.  To slay them was a
carnage--and they were carried out by the dustpanful.

In the country, by screening every window and door, by constant watch
upon each article of food to keep it covered, one may keep one's own
flies bumping vainly on the outside of one's own house--except when
people go in and out, and the ever-ready buzzer darts in before the
swing-door shuts.

But in the city, where a million homes maintain their million
fly-baiting kitchens, and each kitchen maintains its garbage pail, the
problem becomes more serious.

Let us face this fact.  In the residence part of a city the kitchen is
almost the only source of dirt.

The kitchen-stove furnishes its quota of coal-dust, coal-gas and coal
ashes.  But for the kitchen a heating plant could warm many blocks of
houses, and keep that source of dirt at a minimum, thus clearing our
streets of the ash-can and ash-cart nuisances.

The kitchen is wholly responsible for the garbage pail; each area or
alley gate offering for inspection and infection its unsavory
receptacle; and beyond that, the kitchen is in large measure responsible
for the stable.  In the quiet streets where people live, the horses
which defile those streets, which break the quiet, wear the pavement,
and wring the hearts of lovers of animals, are almost all kitchen
horses.

At early dawn the milkman's horse--many milkmen's horses.  Then the
baker's horse--many bakers' horses.  Then the iceman's horse, the
fishman's horse, the market man's horse, the vegetable man's horse, the
grocer's horse, the confectioner's horse; with, of course, the ashman's
horse, the garbage man's horse, and the coal man's horse.  All these
horses and their various stables, help to maintain the breeding of
flies; and the kitchen maintains them.

Nobody ever liked flies.  The rigorous housewife has long pursued them
with waving towel and flapping paper; dark plates of fly poison are set
on high places where the children can only occasionally get it; and the
dreadful "tanglefoot" hangs here and there, agonizing our ears with the
frantic buzzing of its slow-dying victims.

The housewife objected to the fly because he made work for her,
speckling all things offensively; and the house-husband objected to him
because he walked on his face, or his bald spot, and woke him from
needed slumber.

Also no one likes flies floating dankly in the soup, disguised as
currants, or sacrificing their legs to the butter.  But these distastes
are as nothing to the new Terror of the Fly.  He is now seen to be a
purveyor of disease--we might say _the_ purveyor of disease.

The cat and the dog, the rat and the mouse and their small parasites are
responsible for some diseases.  The deadly Anopheles only brings
malaria, even the Stegonyia has but one fever in his gift, albeit a
yellow one; but Musca Domestica deposits on our food, on our clothing,
on our pillows, on our very faces, according to the N. Y. Medical
Journal, the germs of "tuberculosis, leprosy, cholera, summer diarrhea
of children, plague, carbuncle, yaws, tapeworm, swine-plague and typhoid
fever."

Now that is a nice beast to have in the house!  And more especially that
is a nice beast to breed in the house, to maintain, feed, shelter, and
encourage.

When shall we be willing to face the simple fact that the preparation of
food is not a suitable process for the home?

The vegetarian will say that if we eliminate meat all will be well; let
him read again my tale of the Cabbage and the Bluebottle.  But meat is
unquestionably the worst of our food supply as far as flies are
concerned.  The fly delights in the voluminous cow, even while alive;
thrives in her stable, makes free with her milk, and follows her from
steak to soup with ceaseless interest.  If we had no meat, no fish, no
milk, no cheese, no butter, no eggs, we should reduce our bait a little;
but there would still remain plenty of fly provender, and also the
horses to bring it to our myriad doors.

Why not keep the food and leave out the fly?

Let us for once fairly face the possibility of a home without a kitchen.

Look at it--a real house, in no way different from any other house in
front.  But it does differ in the back--for it has no back!  Its back is
another front, just as pretty, just as dignified, just as _clean._
There is a dining-room in this house, cool, sweet, well-screened from
passing, vagrant winged things, but that is all; no kitchen, no
kitchen-sink, no raw meat coming in and garbage going out, no grease, no
smell of frying.

But how shall we get our food into our dining-rooms?

It will be delivered, cooked, in shining aluminium receptacles hot and
steaming, cold and fresh--all this _has been done._  And it and its
dishes, will go away again, tight-closed, leaving you to brush up the
crumbs and fold the tablecloth.  If you want your own elaborate sets of
china enough to wash dishes, that is quite permissible, a butler's
pantry will take care of that.

There is no more reason why a civilized family should cook its own food
in its own kitchen than kill its own pig in its own backyard.

Then rises the pathetic cry about not liking it.  Of course some people
won't like it.  Some people never like any new way of doing things.
Food habits are proverbially hard to change.

But I can tell you who will like it--that is the woman who is tired of
planning meals, tired of ordering meals, tired of managing servants, or
tired--deadly tired--of her own cooking.

And one generation of children, growIng up in kitchenless homes, eating
food that is prepared by trained experts and not by "greenhorns," used
to science and art in the food supply instead of affection and
ignorance--they will like it.

We like what we are used to, and if we have been used to it for a
thousand years we like it more intensely.  But that proves nothing at
all except that we are used to it.  It does not prove the thing is good
for us--nor that we can not get used to something better and like that,
in course of time, just as devotedly.  One would think, observing the
attitude of most of us toward any proposed change, that so far we had
never changed at all.

But with all history behind us; with that long, long flight of little
steps we took so many centuries to climb, and then, closer, the swiftly
heightening large steps we have been taking in these later years ever
more swiftly; what then accounts for our always clinging so desperately
to the one behind, and resisting so furiously being forced up one more!

It is like the old story of the liberal-minded Grandma and the
combination suit.  She visited her daughter in New York, resolved to
keep up with Progress.

They took her to hear Ignatius Donnelly with his Baconian theory;
Ingersoll hammering at Moses, and Jenness-Miller with her Reformed
Clothes for Women.

Then the old lady broke away and returned to her rural home.  "They took
away my Shakespeare, and they took away my God," said she; "but when
they took away my chemise I couldn't stand it."

We have seen the home robbed and depleted as years have passed; with
struggle and objection, no doubt, but inevitably shrinking.  Out went
the shears and the carders, out went the dye tub and the
spinning-wheels; big wool wheel, little flax wheel, all gone.  Out went
the clattering loom; out went the quilting-frame, the candle-mould, the
little mallet to break up the tall blue-papered "sugar loaves."

Some of us have seen all these.  In long remote places they are still to
be found.  In the neighborhood of Chicago's Hull House was found a woman
to whom the spinning-wheel was a wonderful modern invention!  She spun
with a spindle--like Clotho.

Now why do reasoning people, seeing all this behind them, so dread and
resist the next step before them--the eliminating of the kitchen?  Shall
we never learn, that as a means of feeding the world it is not a
success?  It does not bring health and happiness.  Every competent woman
is not a competent cook and never will be; any more than every man is a
competent carpenter.  The preparation of food is too important a task to
be left to a private servant--whether hired or married.

There are reasons, many, and good, why the kitchen must go; reasons of
health, of economy, of happiness; but this last reason is a good
accelerator--the Horror of the Fly.

Here he is by millions and millions: Here She is, by trillions.  Their
hairy feet, their whiskered probosces, slop and paddle in every foul and
nauseous thing.  They sit twiddling their paws on the pauper's sickbed;
and then twiddle those same paws on our warm chocolate-cake.

And every home that keeps a kitchen, with its attendant stables, helps
to maintain and disseminate this scourge of humanity, this universal
purveyor of infectious disease--The Kitchen Fly.



ALAS!


Have those in monstrous hats no glimmering dream
Of the high beauty of the human head,
House of the brain: seat of the sentient soul;
Haloed for sainthood; crowned for royalty;
Bright-ringed with roses, wreathed with noble bays,
Most beautifully bound with shining hair.

Alas for the soft glory they have lost!
Alas for the Ashantee wigs they wear!
Nor plait nor coil nor ringlet, but a mass
Of shorn dead hair from poorer women's heads.
Of bulging wire and hard, stiff, glittering bands.
A heap no loving hand would long to touch.

This body is the glory of the world;
The head the body's crown; but we on this
Plant like a fool's-cap these preposterous forms.
Alas for women's folly; and alas
For man, who likes his women to be fools,
And carefully has bred them to this end.



HER PETS


She saw the pleasant living creatures; bright birds, scattering music in
the air, fish like darting lights in the dark water; beasts with soft
eyes and softer fur.  Therefore to her house she brought them, in chains
and cages and glaring jails of glass she kept them, prisoners and exiles
all.


Out of the plenteous, pure water, freshened by free air, darkened by
shadowing leaves and hidden ledges; away from pleasant chase of food
desired; come the gold-red fish she loves; come to foul airless water,
scant and warm, where they gasp faintly to and fro, in dim distress;
come to the stale monotonous food that falls to them inert; come with
their lidless eyes to the round high-placed globe of glass, set in a
window in the sun, reflecting and refracting the fierce light from every
side;--even as the Carthaginians tortured their prisoners she tortures
the gold-red fish she loves.


Out of the billowing green boughs of the forest, the endless oceans of
bright air, the refreshing rain, the winds that lift and rush and fill
with wild rejoicing; out of the whispering darkness of deep leaves, the
wide sweet light of sunlit hill and valley; away from pleasant chase of
food desired; come the yellow song birds which she loves; come over land
and sea in small tight wicker cells; come to prisons of gilded wires
scarce larger; come to the smothering house air, the dull constant
dreary walls, the sick heat, the smell of coal gas and the smoke of oil;
to such stale monotonous food as falls to them inert; to hop and hop and
hop, to sing madly to no end, and dream of flight,--to this come the
birds she loves.


Out of his long wild past; lifted to be assistant in the chase, house
guardian, brother shepherd; comes the friend of man to be the pet of
woman.  Down, down, he sinks; no shepherd, no hunter, no guardian now;
far from the pleasant chase of food desired; only a pet, her pet.
Dwarfed, distorted, feeble; a snub-nosed monsterling; ears cropped, tail
cut, hair shaved in ludicrous patches; collared and chained; basketed,
blanketed, braceleted, _dressed,_--O last and utter ignominy!--stuffed
on unnatural food till he waddles grossly, panting and diseased; so
comes the dog she loves.


Of bird and beast and fish, her pets, what sacrifice is asked?  They
must first lose freedom, the essential joy of every life; fresh air,
fresh water, the daily need of every life.  They must lose the search
and chase of natural food, the major occupation of every animal,
deprived of which they are deprived of function; nerve, muscle,
brain,--all must deteriorate, disused.  They must lose the joy of long
adaptation to environment; no few generations in houses can overcome the
longings bred in countless ages for sky and river, forest and plain and
hill.


They must lose--and has the mother of the world no pity?--the free use
of nature's overwhelming instincts, they must be denied the strongest
desire of life.  The sorrowful mother of drowned kittens mourns under
the caressing hand that robbed her; the tumbling puppies are gone and
their mother finds no comfort, the little hen bird frets over a
scattered thread or feather, vainly striving to build a useless nest;
the little yellow-feathered lover shrills his heart out for the mate he
never sees.

The piercing clamor of bachelorhood enforced makes our nights hideous
with voices of sufferers free on roof and fence, or chained in yard and
kennel; and even--exquisite outrage! we surgically prepare for their
high position the pets we love.


Men, too, have pets, sometimes; men who are invalids, prisoners,
dwellers in lonely cabins; but not free human beings, working gladly in
a free human world.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER X

UNION HOUSE.


"We are weak!" said the Sticks, and men broke them;
 "We are weak!" said the Threads, and were torn;
Till new thoughts came and they spoke them;
 Till the Fagot and the Rope were born.

For the Fagot men find is resistant,
And they anchor on the Rope's taut length;
 Even grasshoppers combined,
 Are a force, the farmers find--
In union there is strength.


Ross Warden endured his grocery business; strove with it, toiled at it,
concentrated his scientific mind on alien tasks of financial calculation
and practical psychology, but he liked it no better.  He had no interest
in business, no desire to make money, no skill in salesmanship.

But there were five mouths at home; sweet affectionate feminine mouths
no doubt, but requiring food.  Also two in the kitchen, wider, and
requiring more food.  And there were five backs at home to be covered,
to use the absurd metaphor--as if all one needed for clothing was a four
foot patch.  The amount and quality of the covering was an unceasing
surprise to Ross, and he did not do justice to the fact that his
womenfolk really saved a good deal by doing their own sewing.

In his heart he longed always to be free of the whole hated load of
tradesmanship.  Continually his thoughts went back to the hope of
selling out the business and buying a ranch.

"I could make it keep us, anyhow," he would plan to himself; "and I
could get at that guinea pig idea.  Or maybe hens would do."  He had a
theory of his own, or a personal test of his own, rather, which he
wished to apply to a well known theory.  It would take some years to
work it out, and a great many fine pigs, and be of no possible value
financially.  "I'll do it sometime," he always concluded; which was cold
comfort.

His real grief at losing the companionship of the girl he loved, was
made more bitter by a total lack of sympathy with her aims, even if she
achieved them--in which he had no confidence.  He had no power to change
his course, and tried not to be unpleasant about it, but he had to
express his feelings now and then.

"Are you coming back to me?" he wrote.  "How con you bear to give so
much pain to everyone who loves you?  Is your wonderful salary worth
more to you than being here with your mother--with me?  How can you say
you love me--and ruin both our lives like this?  I cannot come to see
you--I _would_ not come to see you--calling at the back door!  Finding
the girl I love in a cap and apron!  Can you not see it is wrong,
utterly wrong, all this mad escapade of yours?  Suppose you do make a
thousand dollars a year--I shall never touch your money--you know that.
I cannot even offer you a home, except with my family, and I know how
you feel about that; I do not blame you.

"But I am as stubborn as you are, dear girl; I will not live on my
wife's money--you will not live in my mother's house--and we are
drifting apart.  It is not that I care less for you dear, or at all for
anyone else, but this is slow death--that's all."

Mrs. Warden wrote now and then and expatiated on the sufferings of her
son, and his failing strength under the unnatural strain, till Diantha
grew to dread her letters more than any pain she knew.  Fortunately they
came seldom.

Her own family was much impressed by the thousand dollars, and found the
occupation of housekeeper a long way more tolerable than that of
house-maid, a distinction which made Diantha smile rather bitterly.
Even her father wrote to her once, suggesting that if she chose to
invest her salary according to his advice he could double it for her in
a year, maybe treble it, in Belgian hares.

_"They'd_ double and treble fast enough!" she admitted to herself; but
she wrote as pleasant a letter as she could, declining his proposition.

Her mother seemed stronger, and became more sympathetic as the months
passed.  Large affairs always appealed to her more than small ones, and
she offered valuable suggestions as to the account keeping of the big
house.  They all assumed that she was permanently settled in this well
paid position, and she made no confidences.  But all summer long she
planned and read and studied out her progressive schemes, and
strengthened her hold among the working women.

Laundress after laundress she studied personally and tested
professionally, finding a general level of mediocrity, till finally she
hit upon a melancholy Dane--a big rawboned red-faced woman--whose
husband had been a miller, but was hurt about the head so that he was no
longer able to earn his living.  The huge fellow was docile, quiet, and
endlessly strong, but needed constant supervision.

"He'll do anything you tell him, Miss, and do it well; but then he'll
sit and dream about it--I can't leave him at all.  But he'll take the
clothes if I give him a paper with directions, and come right back."
Poor Mrs. Thorald wiped her eyes, and went on with her swift ironing.

Diantha offered her the position of laundress at Union House, with two
rooms for their own, over the laundry.  "There'll be work for him, too,"
she said.  "We need a man there.  He can do a deal of the heavier
work--be porter you know.  I can't offer him very much, but it will help
some."

Mrs. Thorald accepted for both, and considered Diantha as a special
providence.

There was to be cook, and two capable second maids.  The work of the
house must be done thoroughly well, Diantha determined; "and the food's
got to be good--or the girls wont stay."  After much consideration she
selected one Julianna, a "person of color," for her kitchen: not the
jovial and sloppy personage usually figuring in this character, but a
tall, angular, and somewhat cynical woman, a misanthrope in fact, with a
small son.  For men she had no respect whatever, but conceded a grudging
admiration to Mr. Thorald as "the usefullest biddablest male person" she
had ever seen.  She also extended special sympathy to Mrs. Thorald on
account of her peculiar burden, and the Swedish woman had no antipathy
to her color, and seemed to take a melancholy pleasure in Julianna's
caustic speeches.

Diantha offered her the place, boy and all.  "He can be 'bell boy' and
help you in the kitchen, too.  Can't you, Hector?"  Hector rolled large
adoring eyes at her, but said nothing.  His mother accepted the
proposition, but without enthusiasm.  "I can't keep no eye on him, Miss,
if I'm cookin' an less'n you keep your eye on him they's no work to be
got out'n any kind o' boy."

"What is your last name, Julianna?" Diantha asked her.

"I suppose, as a matter o' fac' its de name of de last nigger I
married," she replied.  "Dere was several of 'em, all havin' different
names, and to tell you de truf Mis' Bell, I got clean mixed amongst 'em.
 But Julianna's my name--world without end amen."

So Diantha had to waive her theories about the surnames of servants in
this case.

"Did they all die?" she asked with polite sympathy.

"No'm, dey didn't none of 'em die--worse luck."

"I'm afraid you have seen much trouble, Julianna," she continued
sympathetically; "They deserted you, I suppose?"

Julianna laid her long spoon upon the table and stood up with great
gravity.  "No'm," she said again, "dey didn't none of 'em desert me on
no occasion.  I divorced 'em."

Marital difficulties in bulk were beyond Diantha's comprehension, and
she dropped the subject.

Union House opened in the autumn.  The vanished pepper trees were dim
with dust in Orchardina streets as the long rainless summer drew to a
close; but the social atmosphere fairly sparkled with new interest.
Those who had not been away chattered eagerly with those who had, and
both with the incoming tide of winter visitors.

"That girl of Mrs. Porne's has started her housekeeping shop!"

"That 'Miss Bell' has got Mrs. Weatherstone fairly infatuated with her
crazy schemes."

"Do you know that Bell girl has actually taken Union House?  Going to
make a Girl's Club of it!"

"Did you ever _hear_ of such a thing!  Diantha Bell's really going to
try to run her absurd undertaking right here in Orchardina!"

They did not know that the young captain of industry had deliberately
chosen Orchardina as her starting point on account of the special
conditions.  The even climate was favorable to "going out by the day,"
or the delivery of meals, the number of wealthy residents gave
opportunity for catering on a large scale; the crowding tourists and
health seekers made a market for all manner of transient service and
cooked food, and the constant lack of sufficient or capable servants
forced the people into an unwilling consideration of any plan of
domestic assistance.

In a year's deliberate effort Diantha had acquainted herself with the
rank and file of the town's housemaids and day workers, and picked her
assistants carefully.  She had studied the local conditions thoroughly,
and knew her ground.  A big faded building that used to be "the Hotel'
in Orchardina's infant days, standing, awkward and dingy on a site too
valuable for a house lot and not yet saleable as a business block, was
the working base.

A half year with Mrs. Weatherstone gave her $500 in cash, besides the
$100 she had saved at Mrs. Porne's; and Mrs. Weatherstone's cheerfully
offered backing gave her credit.

"I hate to let you," said Diantha, "I want to do it all myself."

"You are a painfully perfect person, Miss Bell," said her last employer,
pleasantly, "but you have ceased to be my housekeeper and I hope you
will continue to be my friend.  As a friend I claim the privilege of
being disagreeable.  If you have a fault it is conceit.  Immovable
Colossal Conceit!  And Obstinacy!"

"Is that all?" asked Diantha.

"It's all I've found--so far," gaily retorted Mrs. Weatherstone.  "Don't
you see, child, that you can't afford to wait?  You have reasons for
hastening, you know.  I don't doubt you could, in a series of years,
work up this business all stark alone.  I have every confidence in those
qualities I have mentioned!  But what's the use?  You'll need credit for
groceries and furniture.  I am profoundly interested in this business.
I am more than willing to advance a little capital, or to ensure your
credit.  A man would have sense enough to take me up at once."

"I believe you are right," Diantha reluctantly agreed.  "And you shan't
lose by it!"

Her friends were acutely interested in her progress, and showed it in
practical ways.  The New Woman's Club furnished five families of patrons
for the regular service of cooked food, which soon grew, with
satisfaction, to a dozen or so, varying from time to time.  The many
families with invalids, and lonely invalids without families, were glad
to avail themselves of the special delicacies furnished at Union House.
Picnickers found it easier to buy Diantha's marvelous sandwiches than to
spend golden morning hours in putting up inferior ones at home; and many
who cooked for themselves, or kept servants, were glad to profit by this
outside source on Sunday evenings and "days out."

There was opposition too; both the natural resistance of inertia and
prejudice, and the active malignity of Mrs. Thaddler.

The Pornes were sympathetic and anxious.

"That place'll cost her all of $10,000 a year, with those twenty-five to
feed, and they only pay $4.50 a week--I know that!" said Mr. Porne.

"It does look impossible," his wife agreed, "but such is my faith in
Diantha Bell I'd back her against Rockefeller!"

Mrs. Weatherstone was not alarmed at all.  "If she _should_ fail--which
I don't for a moment expect--it wont ruin me," she told Isabel.  "And if
she succeeds, as I firmly believe she will, why, I'd be willing to risk
almost anything to prove Mrs. Thaddler in the wrong."

Mrs. Thaddler was making herself rather disagreeable.  She used what
power she had to cry down the undertaking, and was so actively
malevolent that her husband was moved to covert opposition.  He never
argued with his wife--she was easily ahead of him in that art, and, if
it came to recriminations, had certain controvertible charges to make
against him, which mode him angrily silent.  He was convinced in a dim
way that her ruthless domineering spirit, and the sheer malice she often
showed, were more evil things than his own bad habits; and that even in
their domestic relation her behavior really caused him more pain and
discomfort than he caused her; but he could not convince her of it,
naturally.

"That Diantha Bell is a fine girl," he said to himself.  "A damn fine
girl, and as straight as a string!"

There had crept out, through the quenchless leak of servants talk, a
varicolored version of the incident of Mathew and the transom; and the
town had grown so warm for that young gentleman that he had gone to
Alaska suddenly, to cool off, as it were.  His Grandmother, finding Mrs.
Thaddler invincible with this new weapon, and what she had so long
regarded as her home now visibly Mrs. Weatherstone's, had retired in
regal dignity to her old Philadelphia establishment, where she upheld
the standard of decorum against the weakening habits of a deteriorated
world, for many years.

As Mr. Thaddler thought of this sweeping victory, he chuckled for the
hundredth time.  "She ought to make good, and she will.  Something's got
to be done about it," said he.

Diantha had never liked Mr. Thaddler; she did not like that kind of man
in general, nor his manner toward her in particular.  Moreover he was
the husband of Mrs. Thaddler.  She did not know that he was still the
largest owner in the town's best grocery store, and when that store
offered her special terms for her exclusive trade, she accepted the
proposition thankfully.

She told Ross about it, as a matter well within his knowledge, if not
his liking, and he was mildly interested.  "I am much alarmed at this
new venture," he wrote, "but you must get your experience.  I wish I
could save you.  As to the groceries, those are wholesale rates, nearly;
they'll make enough on it.  Yours is a large order you see, and steady."

When she opened her "Business Men's Lunch" Mr. Thaddler had a still
better opportunity.  He had a reputation as a high flyer, and had really
intended to sacrifice himself on the altar of friendship by patronizing
and praising this "undertaking" at any cost to his palate; but no
sacrifice was needed.

Diantha's group of day workers had their early breakfast and departed,
taking each her neat lunch-pail,--they ate nothing of their
employers;--and both kitchen and dining room would have stood idle till
supper time.  But the young manager knew she must work her plant for all
it was worth, and speedily opened the dining room with the side entrance
as a "Caffeteria," with the larger one as a sort of meeting place;
papers and magazines on the tables.

From the counter you took what you liked, and seated yourself, and your
friends, at one of the many small tables or in the flat-armed chairs in
the big room, or on the broad piazza; and as this gave good food,
cheapness, a chance for a comfortable seat and talk and a smoke, if one
had time, it was largely patronized.

Mr. Thaddler, as an experienced _bon vivant,_ despised sandwiches.
"Picnicky makeshifts" he called them,--"railroad rations"--"bread and
leavings," and when he saw these piles on piles of sandwiches, listed
only as "No. 1," "No. 2" "No. 3," and so on, his benevolent intention
wavered.  But he pulled himself together and took a plateful, assorted.

"Come on, Porne," he said, "we'll play it's a Sunday school picnic," and
he drew himself a cup of coffee, finding hot milk, cream and sugar
crystals at hand.  "I never saw a cheap joint where you could fix it
yourself, before," he said,--and suspiciously tasted the mixture.

"By jing!  That's coffee!" he cried in surprise.  "There's no scum on
the milk, and the cream's cream!"  Five cents!  She won't get rich on
this."

Then he applied himself to his "No. 1" sandwich, and his determined
expression gave way to one of pleasure.  "Why that's bread--real bread!
I believe she made it herself!"

She did in truth,--she and Julianna with Hector as general assistant.
The big oven was filled several times every morning: the fresh rolls
disappeared at breakfast and supper, the fresh bread was packed in the
lunch pails, and the stale bread was even now melting away in large
bites behind the smiling mouths and mustaches of many men.  Perfect
bread, excellent butter, and "What's the filling I'd like to know?"
More than one inquiring-minded patron split his sandwich to add sight to
taste, but few could be sure of the flavorsome contents, fatless,
gritless, smooth and even, covering the entire surface, the last
mouthful as perfect as the first.  Some were familiar, some new, all
were delicious.

The six sandwiches were five cents, the cup of coffee five, and the
little "drop cakes," sweet and spicy, were two for five.  Every man
spent fifteen cents, some of them more; and many took away small cakes
in paper bags, if there were any left.

"I don't see how you can do it, and make a profit," urged Mr. Eltwood,
making a pastorial call.  "They are so good you know!"

Diantha smiled cheerfully.  "That's because all your ideas are based on
what we call 'domestic economy,' which is domestic waste.  I buy in
large quantities at wholesale rates, and my cook with her little helper,
the two maids, and my own share of the work, of course, provides for the
lot.  Of course one has to know how."

"Whenever did you find--or did you create?--those heavenly sandwiches?"
he asked.

"I have to thank my laundress for part of that success," she said.
"She's a Dane, and it appears that the Danes are so fond of sandwiches
that, in large establishments, they have a 'sandwich kitchen' to prepare
them.  It is quite a bit of work, but they are good and inexpensive.
There is no limit to the variety."

As a matter of fact this lunch business paid well, and led to larger
things.

The girl's methods were simple and so organized as to make one hand wash
the other.  Her house had some twenty-odd bedrooms, full accommodations
for kitchen and laundry work on a large scale, big dining, dancing, and
reception rooms, and broad shady piazzas on the sides.  Its position on
a corner near the business part of the little city, and at the foot of
the hill crowned with so many millionaires and near millionaires as
could get land there, offered many advantages, and every one was taken.

The main part of the undertaking was a House Worker's Union; a group of
thirty girls, picked and trained.  These, previously working out as
servants, had received six dollars a week "and found."  They now worked
an agreed number of hours, were paid on a basis by the hour or day, and
"found" themselves.  Each had her own room, and the broad porches and
ball room were theirs, except when engaged for dances and meetings of
one sort and another.

It was a stirring year's work, hard but exciting, and the only
difficulty which really worried Diantha was the same that worried the
average housewife--the accounts.



"THE OUTER REEF!"

(A Picture by Paul Dougherty.)


 Who dares paint daylight?
The bright white light of flaming noon?
 No blur of shadow, mist or haze,
 Just the whole unobstructed blaze
  Of hot mid-June.

 No screen of leafage;
The keen clean green of summer sea;
 Dazzle of surf in mid-day light,
 The very sound of the surges' fight,
  Broad--open--free.

 The earth all stillness,
Noon hush on the pastures' height;
 Turf topped cliffs with faces bare,
 Bones of the earth unveiled to air,
  Heat--breakers--light.



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN~MADE WORLD


X.

LAW AND GOVERNMENT.


It is easy to assume that men are naturally the lawmakers and
law-enforcers, under the plain historic fact that they have been such
since the beginning of the patriarchate.

Back of law lies custom and tradition.  Back of government lies the
correlative activity of any organized group.  What group-insects and
group-animals evolve unconsciously and fulfill by their social
instincts, we evolve consciously and fulfill by arbitrary systems called
laws and governments.  In this, as in all other fields of our action, we
must discriminate between the humanness of the function in process of
development, and the influence of the male or female upon it.  Quite
apart from what they may like or dislike as sexes, from their differing
tastes and faculties, lies the much larger field of human progress, in
which they equally participate.

On this plane the evolution of law and government proceeds somewhat as
follows:--The early woman-centered group organized on maternal lines of
common love and service.  The early combinations of men were first a
grouped predacity--organized hunting; then a grouped
belligerency,--organized warfare.

By special development some minds are able to perceive the need of
certain lines of conduct over others, and to make this clear to their
fellows; whereby, gradually, our higher social nature establishes rules
and precedents to which we personally agree to submit.  The process of
social development is one of progressive co-ordination.

From independent individual action for individual ends, up to
interdependent social action for social ends we slowly move; the "devil"
in the play being the old Ego, which has to be harmonized with the new
social spirit.  This social process, like all others, having been in
masculine hands, we may find in it the same marks of one-sided
Specialization so visible in our previous studies.

The coersive attitude is essentially male.  In the ceaseless age-old
struggle of sex combat he developed the desire to overcome, which is
always stimulated by resistance; and in this later historic period of
his supremacy, he further developed the habit of dominance and mastery.
We may instance the contrast between the conduct of a man when "in love"
and while courting; in which period he falls into the natural position
of his sex towards the other--namely, that of a wooer; and his behavior
when, with marriage, they enter the, artificial relation of the master
male and servile female.  His "instinct of dominance" does not assert
itself during the earlier period, which was a million times longer than
the latter; it only appears in the more modern and arbitrary relation.

Among other animals monogamous union is not accompanied by any such
discordant and unnatural features.  However recent as this habit is when
considered biologically, it is as old as civilization when we consider
it historically: quite old enough to be a serious force.  Under its
pressure we see the legal systems and forms of government slowly
evolving, the general human growth always heavily perverted by the
special masculine influence.  First we find the mere force of custom
governing us, the _mores_ of the ancient people.  Then comes the gradual
appearance of authority, from the purely natural leadership of the best
hunter or fighter up through the unnatural mastery of the patriarch,
owning and governing his wives, children, slaves and cattle, and making
such rules and regulations as pleased him.

Our laws as we support them now are slow, wasteful, cumbrous systems,
which require a special caste to interpret and another to enforce;
wherein the average citizen knows nothing of the law, and cares only to
evade it when he can, obey it when he must.  In the household, that
stunted, crippled rudiment of the matriarchate, where alone we can find
what is left of the natural influence of woman, the laws and government,
so far as she is responsible for them, are fairly simple, and bear
visible relation to the common good, which relation is clearly and
persistently taught.

In the larger household of city and state the educational part of the
law is grievously neglected.  It makes no allowance for ignorance.  If a
man breaks a law of which he never heard he is not excused therefore;
the penalty rolls on just the same.  Fancy a mother making solemn rules
and regulations for her family, telling the children nothing about them,
and then punishing them when they disobeyed the unknown laws!

The use of force is natural to the male; while as a human being he must
needs legislate somewhat in the interests of the community, as a male
being he sees no necessity for other enforcement than by penalty.  To
violently oppose, to fight, to trample to the earth, to triumph in loud
bellowings of savage joy,--these are the primitive male instincts; and
the perfectly natural social instinct which leads to peaceful
persuasion, to education, to an easy harmony of action, are
contemptuously ranked as "feminine," or as "philanthropic,"--which is
almost as bad.  "Men need stronger measures" they say proudly.  Yes, but
four-fifths of the world are women and children!

As a matter of fact the woman, the mother, is the first co-ordinator,
legislator, administrator and executive.  From the guarding and guidance
of her cubs and kittens up to the longer, larger management of human
youth, she is the first to consider group interests and co-relate them.

As a father the male grows to share in these original feminine
functions, and with us, fatherhood having become socialized while
motherhood has not, he does the best he can, alone, to do the world's
mother-work in his father way.

In study of any long established human custom it is very difficult to
see it clearly and dispassionately.  Our minds are heavily loaded with
precedent, with race-custom, with the iron weight called authority.
These heavy forces reach their most perfect expression in the absolutely
masculine field of warfare.  The absolute authority; the brainless,
voiceless obedience; the relentless penalty.  Here we have male coercion
at its height; law and government wholly arbitrary.  The result is as
might be expected, a fine machine of destruction.  But destruction is
not a human process--merely a male process of eliminating the unfit.

The female process is to select the fit; her elimination is negative and
painless.

Greater than either is the human process, to _develop fitness._

Men are at present far more human than women.  Alone upon their
self-seized thrones they have carried as best they might the burdens of
the state; and the history of law and government shows them as changing
slowly but irresistably in the direction of social improvement.

The ancient kings were the joyous apotheosis of masculinity.  Power and
Pride were theirs; Limitless Display; Boundless Self-indulgence;
Irresistable Authority.  Slaves and courtiers bowed before them,
subjects obeyed them, captive women filled their harems.  But the day of
the masculine monarchy is passing, and the day of the human democracy is
coming in.  In a Democracy Law and Government both change.  Laws are no
longer imposed on the people by one above them, but are evolved from the
people themselves.  How absurd that the people should not be educated in
the laws they make; that the trailing remnants of blind submission
should still becloud their minds and make them bow down patiently under
the absurd pressure of outgrown tradition!

Democratic government is no longer an exercise of arbitrary authority
from one above, but is an organization for public service of the people
themselves--or will be when it is really attained.

In this change government ceases to be compulsion, and becomes
agreement; law ceases to be authority and becomes co-ordination.  When
we learn the rules of whist or chess we do not obey them because we fear
to be punished if we don't, but because we want to play the game.  The
rules of human conduct are for our own happiness and service--any child
can see that.  Every child will see it when laws are simplified, based
on sociology, and taught in schools.  A child of ten should be
considered grossly uneducated who could not rewrite the main features of
the laws of his country, state, and city; and those laws should be so
simple in their principles that a child of ten could understand them.

Teacher: "What is a tax?"

Child: "A tax is the money we agree to pay to keep up our common
advantages."

Teacher: "Why do we all pay taxes?"

Child: "Because the country belongs to all of us, and we must all pay
our share to keep it up."

Teacher: "In what proportion do we pay taxes?"

Child: "In proportion to how much money we have."  (_Sotto voce_: "Of
course!")

Teacher: "What is it to evade taxes?"

Child: "It is treason."  (_Sotto voce_: "And a dirty mean trick.")

In masculine administration of the laws we may follow the instinctive
love of battle down through the custom of "trial by combat"--only
recently outgrown, to our present method, where each contending party
hires a champion to represent him, and these fight it out in a wordy
war, with tricks and devices of complex ingenuity, enjoying this kind of
struggle as they enjoy all other kinds.

It is the old masculine spirit of government as authority which is so
slow in adapting itself to the democratic idea of government as service.
 That it should be a representative government they grasp, but
representative of what? of the common will, they say; the will of the
majority;--never thinking that it is the common good, the common
welfare, that government should represent.

It is the inextricable masculinity in our idea of government which so
revolts at the idea of women as voters.  "To govern:" that means to
boss, to control, to have authority; and that only, to most minds.  They
cannot bear to think of the woman as having control over even their own
affairs; to control is masculine, they assume.  Seeing only
self-interest as a natural impulse, and the ruling powers of the state
as a sort of umpire, an authority to preserve the rules of the game
while men fight it out forever; they see in a democracy merely a wider
range of self interest, and a wider, freer field to fight in.

The law dictates the rules, the government enforces them, but the main
business of life, hitherto, has been esteemed as one long fierce
struggle; each man seeking for himself.  To deliberately legislate for
the service of all the people, to use the government as the main engine
of that service, is a new process, wholly human, and difficult of
development under an androcentric culture.

Furthermore they put forth those naively androcentric protests,--women
cannot fight, and in case their laws were resisted by men they could not
enforce them,--_therefore_ they should not vote!

What they do not so plainly say, but very strongly think, is that women
should not share the loot which to their minds is so large a part of
politics.

Here we may trace clearly the social heredity of male government.

Fix clearly in your mind the first head-ship of man--the leader of the
pack as it were--the Chief Hunter.  Then the second head-ship, the Chief
Fighter.  Then the third head-ship, the Chief of the Family.  Then the
long line of Chiefs and Captains, Warlords and Landlords, Rulers and
Kings.

The Hunter hunted for prey, and got it.  The Fighter enriched himself
with the spoils of the vanquished.  The Patriarch lived on the labor of
women and slaves.  All down the ages, from frank piracy and robbery to
the measured toll of tribute, ransom and indemnity, we see the same
natural instinct of the hunter and fighter.  In his hands the government
is a thing to sap and wreck, to live on.  It is his essential impulse to
want something very much; to struggle and fight for it; to take all he
can get.

Set against this the giving love that comes with motherhood; the endless
service that comes of motherhood; the peaceful administration in the
interest of the family that comes of motherhood.  We prate much of the
family as the unit of the state.  If it is--why not run the state on
that basis?  Government by women, so far as it is influenced by their
sex, would be influenced by motherhood; and that would mean care,
nurture, provision, education.  We have to go far down the scale for any
instance of organized motherhood, but we do find it in the hymenoptera;
in the overflowing industry, prosperity, peace and loving service of the
ant-hill and bee-hive.  These are the most highly socialized types of
life, next to ours, and they are feminine types.

We as human beings have a far higher form of association, with further
issues than mere wealth and propagation of the species.  In this human
process we should never forget that men are far more advanced than
women, at present.  Because of their humanness has come all the noble
growth of civilization, in spite of their maleness.

As human beings both male and female stand alike useful and honorable,
and should in our government be alike used and honored; but as creatures
of sex, the female is fitter than the male for administration of
constructive social interests.  The change in governmental processes
which marks our times is a change in principle.  Two great movements
convulse the world to-day, the woman's movement and the labor movement.
Each regards the other as of less moment than itself.  Both are parts of
the same world-process.

We are entering upon a period of social consciousness.  Whereas so far
almost all of us have seen life only as individuals, and have regarded
the growing strength and riches of the social body as merely so much the
more to fatten on; now we are beginning to take an intelligent interest
in our social nature, to understand it a little, and to begin to feel
the vast increase of happiness and power that comes of real Human Life.

In this change of systems a government which consisted only of
prohibition and commands; of tax collecting and making war; is rapidly
giving way to a system which intelligently manages our common interests,
which is a growing and improving method of universal service.  Here the
socialist is perfectly right in his vision of the economic welfare to be
assured by the socialization of industry, though that is but part of the
new development; and the individualist who opposes socialism, crying
loudly for the advantage of "free competition" is but voicing the spirit
of the predacious male.

So with the opposers to the suffrage of women.  They represent, whether
men or women, the male viewpoint.  They see the woman only as a female,
utterly absorbed in feminine functions, belittled and ignored as her
long tutelage has made her; and they see the man as he sees himself, the
sole master of human affairs for as long as we have historic record.

This, fortunately, is not long.  We can now see back of the period of
his supremacy, and are beginning to see beyond it.  We are well under
way already in a higher stage of social development, conscious,
well-organized, wisely managed, in which the laws shall be simple and
founded on constructive principles instead of being a set of
ring-regulations within which people may fight as they will; and in
which the government shall be recognized in its full use; not only the
sternly dominant father, and the wisely servicable mother, but the real
union of all people to sanely and economically manage their affairs.



COMMENT AND REVIEW


There is a fine article in the June Popular Science Monthly, by Dr.
Thomas W. Salmon on "Two Preventable Causes of Insanity."

He shows how much has been done by the popular recognition of cause and
effect in checking tuberculosis, malaria and yellow fever, and urges a
similar awakening in regard to insanity.  At the close of 1908 there
were 30,456 patients in the public and private institutions for the
insane in New York State, about one in 280 of the general population of
the state, he says; and then gives the new admissions for that year as
5,301.  Five thousand new lunatics a year is a good many.

Dr. Salmon then shows that of this number there were "664 cases of
general paralysis (dependant on syphilis) and 638 cases of alcoholic
psychoses (due to intemperance)," or _more than one-fourth of all first
admissions due to these two preventable causes._  There is a further
most interesting fact, that this general paralysis in men is nearly
three times as great in cities as in the country, and in women, twice as
great; while alcoholic psychosis in women is seven times as great in
cities.

Most striking of all is Dr. Salmon's showing that "_42 per cent. of all
male admissions from cities were for general paralysis and the alcoholic
psychoses._"  As he justly remarks, "Where are 'the nervous tension of
the cities' and 'the mad rush of modern life,' of which we speak so
glibly, compared with syphilis and drunkenness as the real dangers of
city life?"  But for these two causes the ratio of insanity would be
greater in the country, where, as is well known, the largest percentage
of women lunatics comes from the lonely farm house.

Further than this we are told that many other forms of lunacy are
indirectly due to syphilis and alcoholism, through parental
transmission.

Knowledge is power.  Society is but just awakening to a conscious
knowledge of itself, its pains and pleasures, and its powers.  One man
may not be strong enough to resist the influences which pull and push
him into these large hells, but when society as a whole,--or even women
as a half,--waken to a realization of all this needless suffering, this
dreadful waste, then we can prevent it.

*

The gentlemen of France are distressed about the birthrate.  It appears
that the men of that country do not bear enough children to keep up the
population as they desire.  Therefore serious measures are proposed "to
stimulate the birthrate."  They are these:

Additional military service to be imposed on bachelors over twenty-nine.

Marriage to be made obligatory to gentlemen employed by the state, at
the age of twenty-five, with supplementary salaries and pension
allowances for more than three children.

The law requiring equal distribution of estates among children to be
repealed.  The dislike of Frenchmen to dividing their property is a
frequent cause of restricted families, we are told.

We trust that the gentlemen of France, spurred and encouraged by these
incentives, will now produce more children than they have hitherto.

The New York _Times_, of Friday, June 24, gives an editorial to this
news from France,--and no wonder.  But it is perfectly serious in its
treatment, and offers no criticism of the measures proposed.  The writer
has apparently small know]edge of biology, for he expresses astonishment
that the miserably poor "increase prodigiously" in Russia and elsewhere.
 "Who shall solve these mysteries or dogmatize upon them?" he says, and
speculates further, in a vaguely awe-stricken manner, on the subject,
quoting from the vigorous Mr. Roosevelt and the gloomy Dr. Koch.

Do any of our readers, belonging to the negligible side of this race
problem see anything to smile at?  Let us parallel it:

There is dismay in the poultry yard over a grave falling off in the
supply of eggs.  A convocation of roosters is called to discuss it, and
to take measures to remedy the condition.  They propose (a) To make all
roosters over six months old do extra scratching for food.  (b) To
enforce matrimony--or its gallinaceous equivalent--on all roosters
employed by the flock.  (c) To alter the custom of dividing the worms
equally among the chicks.

The simile is strained, we admit: try to apply it to some other case, as
a shortage in the milk supply--considered by a convocation of bulls.
That seems rather absurd too.  Can not some one suggest a parallel which
could be taken as seriously as the Times takes this effort on the part
of Frenchmen?

*

People in general, peaceably minding their own business, do not give
much thought to their subtler enemies.  A burglar, creeping in through
the window, we can see and scream at; but a Public Poisoner, a whole
array of Public Poisoners, creeping through the Legislature, we do not
notice.

In the interests of the common good we have our National Health League,
working by means of the Owen Bill for a National Department of Health
which shall safeguard the people from disease and contamination as the
Bureau of Agriculture safeguards our cattle.

Against this measure, one of most needed social service, is rising an
organized opposition called the "League for Medical Freedom."  This
association defends the free practice of healing by unorthodox methods,
but its opposition to the Owen Bill is wholly ignorant, if not worse.
The Owen Bill, in urging a National Department of Health, does not seek
to regulate the practice of medicine.  Its work will be to maintain pure
food, pure drugs, pure streams, and to study human health and maintain
it as assiduously as we now study the health of swine and steers.

This sudden opposition, using great sums of money to advertise in the
newspapers, seems based on the big interests of the patent medicines and
other profitable health destroyers and life takers.

Our women, within their capacity as mothers and guardians of the home,
ought to inform themselves as to the work of the National Health League.

Write to the Committee of One Hundred, Drawer 45 New Haven, Conn.

*

How many of our readers know that superb magazine, _The Englishwoman?_*

As far as I have seen them it is by far the finest woman's publication
in the world.  A big, handsome, dignified monthly; 120 pages in large
clear type, a joy to the eye; and paper, a joy to the hand; the magazine
is three-quarters of an inch thick to _The Century's_ half inch, and
weighs ten ounces to _The Century's_ 18.  This is not only because there
are no pictures, but because of that specially light weight paper, so
much more used in England than with us.

Thus pleasing to the eye and to the hand, it gives to the mind a clear,
strong, varied presentation of the affairs of the world to-day as they
specially affect women.  Excellent writers and plenty of them furnish
the material; it is good reading straight through.

My special satisfaction in this monthly is in its breadth of view.  The
need of the ballot is strongly emphasized, and due record is kept of the
progress of the equal suffrage movement; but far more ground than that
is covered.  Studies are given of the previous position of women, of her
place in different countries and classes, of her connection with the
other stirring questions of the day.

Reading this, we gather an increasing sense of the real world-issues of
which the woman's movement is not only in itself an interesting part,
but one in the solution of which is shown to be that of many others.
People who shrink from "feminism" in its more intense and accentuated
forms, will find here a more proportional treatment, enlightening and
persuasive.


*"The Englishwoman."  Published by Sidgwick & Jackson, 3 Adam St.,
Adelphi.  London, W. C. England.  Monthly, 1s.  Yearly, 14s. 6d. post
free.

*

_The Woman's Journal,_* so long our best exponent of the equal rights
movement in America, is now the official organ of the National American
Women suffrage association.

This is as it should be.  The association needs an organ, and _The
Woman's Journal_ has always needed and desired a wider support than the
equal suffragists gave it.


*The Woman's Journal.  Saturday weekly.  $1.00 yearly, No. 585 Boylston
St., Boston, Mass.


It is the earnest wish of _The Forerunner_ that every American "equal
suffragist" take the _Woman's Journal,_ and so keep in touch with the
movement.  It is now but _one dollar a year,_ which, for such a weekly,
is more than reasonable.

It is also the earnest wish of The Forerunner that every American
interested in the woman's movement the world over, and its English
status in particular, should take _The Englishwoman._  That costs
fourteen shillings a year, and is worth it.

And who is to take _The Forerunner?_  Only those who like it and find it
useful.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


Problem 1st.  A woman of thirty, single and intending so to remain,
owning a tiny cottage in the woods near a large city; exhausted by ten
years' overwork and having spent her savings on doctor's bills, asks two
questions:

(a)  Why cannot she stay at home and enjoy it?

(b)  Can one love a man too much?  (There was a man, but he went away.)

To (a) the answer is: one cannot live at home, and earn one's living
without practicing some domestic industry.  Of these two obvious and
common ones are:

Take in washing:--not strong enough.

Take in sewing?--How about that?

A large city ought to furnish sewing and mending enough to keep one
woman who owns a cottage.  Five dollars a week ought to do it, including
carfare.

Then comes the more various tasks; to make some one thing excellently
well, and sell it: taking orders: making a little business of one's own.

The age of domestic industry is really past; but a lone woman with no
rent to pay ought to make good, unless too ill to work at all.

If there is any ground with the cottage she could raise some food
perhaps.

Third possibility: take another woman to board: or a child, if competent
to care for children.

As to the second question: Yes, one can; one often does.  If by "loving"
one means "wanting."  Love, pure love, strong giving love, does not
exhaust nor injure.  One can love a lifetime, without return--if it's
that kind.  But to hopelessly wish for what one cannot have is an
illness.  If that is the case it is time for a decided change of heart.

The world is full of people to love and serve; and a brave rational
attitude of living ought to cure and strengthen.

Sister--sit quiet in the door of the little cottage: say "I am here to
serve; to work for the world.  I am willing.  My own life is
desolate--well?  So are the lives of many.  That I must bear.  There are
many years before me to be lived through--bravely and lovingly.  If I
die--that's no hardship; if I live I will do the work I'm here for."

Then study out your case with dispassionate interest; _as if it were
some one else's_; and do what is wise.  When you are strong enough, if
you are willing to do housework (a job always waiting) for six months,
it should give you a clear $150.00, to live another six months without
care, and to practice the art you like best.  Plan _ahead;_ bear what
you have now in the determined hope of what you like better in five
years--ten years--for the rest of life.

And so enlarge your range of consciousness, thinking, talking, reading
about big human interests, that your own trouble shrinks in proportion.

Problem 2d.  "Several of my professors in the University have such a
condescending attitude toward women that most of us girls find it very
hard to do our best.  In some classes, we are actually, as a sex, marked
lower than the men of the class.  We have found in every instance that
the wives of these professors are of the lowest tabby-cat variety,
gossipy, infantile, at times malicious.

_Q._  (a)  Can you believe that these trained men would be as illogical
as to judge us all by their wives?

_Q._  (b)  Is there any way even to make a start to root out this idea
that all women are cast from the same mold,"--Studiosa.

_Ans._  (a)  "Trained" men are not necessarily logical men.  Logic in
some fields does not imply logic in all.  No matter how logical or how
much trained, most men are illogical about women.  (As are most women
also.)

_Ans._  (b)  Yes.  The way to start,--and finish--this idea that "all
women are cast from the same mold" is to prove that they are not by
being different.  The likeness men see in women is the likeness of sex.
Show them the difference in human personality.

Problem 3d.  "It is almost impossible for married women to go on
teaching.  Just as I am at my best, my usefulness is nullified because I
am married.  Would you please outline a plan of organization among
married women who wish to continue practicing their profession, thru
which they may arouse other women, and also reach the authorities who
have control over their work?"--_E. M. K._

_Ans._  The most suitable organization among married women, and single
ones as well, whereby to "arouse other women and reach the authorities"
is political organization.  That question is easily answered--by
securing equal suffrage.

Problem 4th.  "Several of us girls wish to associate with our men
friends as real comrades, paying our half of theatre tickets, suppers
and the like, as we have as much money, or as little, as they.  They are
fine young men, decidedly worth while.  Yet they make the most
astonishingly stupid objections, as do most of the other girls.  It is
not 'polite' or 'customary,' it is a man's 'privilege,' etc., etc.
Could you not give us suggestions, perhaps in story form, of how to win
the young men, and other girls too, without being too sharp-angled, over
to our side?"--_College Girl._

_Ans._  I knew of a good arrangement between a man and a woman on this
basis.  If he invited her, he paid for both.  If she invited him, she
paid for both.  If both went on their several initiatives each paid for
him or herself.

As to how to "win over" the most conservative of beings, young men and
young women, one can only recommend the trump card in any hand,--a sweet
and winning personality;--not "feminine influence," but personal
influence.  If one's company is much desired, one can dictate terms.

Further; don't be stubborn about it.  Ultimate principles are one
thing,--personal application are quite another.  Vary your attitude
according to the degree of intelligence and prejudice you have to deal
with.

Problem 5th.  "A person is condemned to die for a crime he did not
commit.  Should he as a good citizen submit peaceably to his own murder
(legal) or fight for his life, killing jailors perhaps, till
overpowered?"

_Ans._  "As a good citizen" he should submit.  See Socrates.

"In answer to question under 'Personal Problems' in June Forerunner,
'Why don't people wake up and _live!_ World size?'  Will submit:

_Ans._  (a)  Laziness.  If people knew that thirty minutes of a
healthful regimen practiced daily would double the daily pleasure of
living and add ten years to the span of life, nine out of ten would
neglect it.  And (b) thoughtlessness through faulty education; the
primary function of mental culture being to teach people to think,
analyze, and solve the problems of life, and cultivate the memory; but
memory is too often given first place to the exclusion of the
others."--_A. O. H._

This is an excellent answer.  There are others.--C. P. G.



THE EDITOR'S PROBLEM


To pay its running expenses this little magazine must have about three
thousand subscribers.  It now has between eleven and twelve hundred.

We want, to make good measure, two thousand more.  This is a bare
minimum, providing no salary to the editor.  If enough people care for
the magazine to support it to that extent, the editor will do her work
for nothing--and be glad of the chance!  If enough people care for it to
support her--she will be gladder.

Do you like the magazine, its spirit and purpose?  Do you find genuine
interest and amusement in the novel--the short story?  Do the articles
appeal to you?  Do the sermons rouse thought and stir to action?  Are
the problems treated such as you care to study?  Does the poetry have
bones to it as well as feathers?  Does it give you your dollar's worth
in the year?  And do you want another dollar's worth?

Most of the people who take it like it very much.  We are going to
print, a few at a time, some of the pleasant praises our readers send.
They are so cordial that we are moved to ask all those who do enjoy this
little monthly service of sermon and story, fun and fiction, poetry and
prose,

First, To renew their subscriptions.

Second, Each to get one new subscriber.  (Maybe more!)

Third, To make Christmas presents of subscriptions, or of bound volumes
of the first year.



[Advertisement]


Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman


Sent postpaid by

THE CHARLTON COMPANY
67 WALL STREET, NEW YORK


"Women and Economics"  $1.50

Since John Stuart Mill's essay there has been no book dealing with the
whole position of women to approach it in originality of conception and
brilliancy of exposition.--_London Chronicle._

A remarkable book.  A work on economics that has not a dull page--the
work of a woman about women that has not a flippant word.--_Boston
Transcript._

Will be widely read and discussed as the cleverest, fairest, most
forcible presentation of the view of the rapidly increasing group who
look with favor on the extension of industrial employment to
women.--_Political Science Quarterly._


"Concerning Children"  $1.25

WANTED:--A philanthropist, to give a copy to every English-speaking
parent.--_The Times,_ New York.

Should be read by every mother in the land.--_The Press,_ New York.

Wholesomely disturbing book that deserves to be read for its own
sake.--_Chicago Dial._


"In This Our World" (Poems)  $1.25

There is a joyous superabundance of life, of strength, of health, in
Mrs. Gilman's verse, which seems born of the glorious sunshine and rich
gardens of California.--_Washington Times._

The poet of women and for women, a new and prophetic voice in the world.
 Montaigne would have rejoiced in her.--_Mexican Herald._


"The Yellow Wall Paper"  $0.50

Worthy of a place beside some of the weird masterpieces of Hawthorne and
Poe.--_Literature._

As a short story it stands among the most powerful produced in
America.--_Chicago News._


"The Home"  $1.00

Indeed, Mrs. Gilman has not intended her book so much as a treatise for
scholars as a surgical operation on the popular mind.--_The Critic,_ New
York.

It is safe to say that no more stimulating arraignment has ever before
taken shape and that the argument of the book is noble, and, on the
whole, convincing.--_Congregationalist,_ Boston.


"Human Work"  $1.00

Charlotte Perkins Stetson Gilman has been writing a new book, entitled
"Human Work."  It is the best thing that Mrs. Gilman has done, and it is
meant to focus all of her previous work, so to speak.--_Tribune,_
Chicago.

In her latest volume, "Human Work," Charlotte Perkins Gilman places
herself among the foremost students and elucidators of the problem of
social economics.--"San Francisco Star._

It is impossible to overestimate the value of the insistence on the
social aspect of human affairs as Mrs. Gilman has outlined it.--_Public
Opinion._


IN PREPARATION:


"What Diantha Did" (A Novel)  $1.00

"The Man Made World": or, "Our Androcentric Culture"  $1.00


Orders taken for Bound Vols. THE FORERUNNER, $1.25



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK


AS TO PURPOSE:


_What is The Forerunner?_  It is a monthly magazine, publishing stories
short and serial, article and essay; drama, verse, satire and sermon;
dialogue, fable and fantasy, comment and review.  It is written entirely
by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

_What is it For?_  It is to stimulate thought: to arouse hope, courage
and impatience; to offer practical suggestions and solutions, to voice
the strong assurance of better living, here, now, in our own hands to
make.

_What is it about?_  It is about people, principles, and the questions
of every-day life; the personal and public problems of to-day.  It gives
a clear, consistent view of human life and how to live it.

_Is it a Woman's magazine?_  It will treat all three phases of our
existence--male, female and human.  It will discuss Man, in his true
place in life; Woman, the Unknown Power; the  Child, the most important
citizen.

_Is it a Socialist Magazine?_  It is a magazine for humanity, and
humanity is social.  It holds that Socialism, the economic theory, is
part of our gradual Socialization, and that the duty of conscious
humanity is to promote Socialization.

_Why is it published?_  It is published to express ideas which need a
special medium; and in the belief that there are enough persons
interested in those ideas to justify the undertaking.


AS TO ADVERTISING:


We have long heard that "A pleased customer is the best advertiser."
The Forerunner offers to its advertisers and readers the benefit of this
authority.  In its advertising department, under the above heading, will
be described articles personally known and used.  So far as individual
experience and approval carry weight, and clear truthful description
command attention, the advertising pages of The Forerunner will be
useful to both dealer and buyer.  If advertisers prefer to use their own
statements The Forerunner will publish them if it believes them to be
true.


AS TO CONTENTS:


The main feature of the first year is a new book on a new subject with a
new name:--

_"Our Androcentric Culture."_  this is a study of the historic effect on
normal human development of a too exclusively masculine civilization.
It shows what man, the male, has done to the world: and what woman, the
more human, may do to change it.

_"What Diantha Did."_  This is a serial novel.  It shows the course of
true love running very crookedly--as it so often does--among the
obstructions and difficulties of the housekeeping problem--and solves
that problem.  (NOT by co-operation.)

Among the short articles will appear:

"Private Morality and Public Immorality."
"The Beauty Women Have Lost"
"Our Overworked Instincts."
"The Nun in the Kitchen."
"Genius: Domestic and Maternal."
"A Small God and a Large Goddess."
"Animals in Cities."
"How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money."
"Prize Children"
"Kitchen-Mindedness"
"Parlor-Mindedness"
"Nursery-Mindedness"

There will be short stories and other entertaining matter in each issue.
 The department of "Personal Problems" does not discuss etiquette,
fashions or the removal of freckles.  Foolish questions will not be
answered, unless at peril of the asker.


AS TO VALUE:

If you take this magazine one year you will have:


One complete novel . . . By C. P. Gilman
One new book . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve short stories . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more short articles . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more new poems . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve Short Sermons . . . By C. P. Gilman
Besides "Comment and Review" . . . By C. P. Gilman
"Personal Problems" . . . By C. P. Gilman
And many other things . . . By C. P. Gilman

DON'T YOU THINK IT'S WORTH A DOLLAR?


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 11
SEPTEMBER, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

Your Unborn Grandchild is more real then your Buried Grandfather.
Let us then Obliterate Graveyards and Build Babygardens.




TO-MORROW NIGHT


Marginal mile after mile of smooth-running granite embankment,
Washed by clean waters, clean seas and clean rivers embracing;
Pier upon pier lying wide for the ships of all seas to foregather,
Broad steps of marble, descending, for the people to enter the water,
White quays of marble, with music, and myriad pleasure-boats waiting;
Music of orchestras playing in blossoming parks by the river,
Playing on white-pillared piers where the lightfooted thousands are
dancing,
Dancing at night in the breeze flowing fresh from the sea and the river;
Music of flute and guitar from the lovers afloat on the water,
Music of happy young voices far-flying across the bright ripples,
Bright with high-glittering ships and the low rosy lanterns of lovers,
Bright with the stars overhead and the stars of the city beside them,
Their city, the heaven they know, and love as they love one another.



MR. ROBERT GREY SR.


I thought I knew what trouble was when Jimmy went away.  It was bad
enough when he was clerking in Barstow and I only saw him once a week;
but now he'd gone to sea.

He said he'd never earn much as a clerk, and he hated it too.  He'd
saved every cent he could of his wages and taken a share in the Mary
Jenks, and I shouldn't see him again for a year maybe,--maybe more.  She
was a sealer.

O dear!  I'd have married him just as he was; but he said he couldn't
keep me yet, and if they had luck he'd make 400 per cent. on his savings
that voyage,--and it was all for me.  My blessed Jimmy!

He hadn't been gone but a bare fortnight when "unmerciful disaster
followed fast and followed faster" on our poor heads.  First father
broke his arm.  There was the doctor to pay, and all that plaster cast
thing, and of course I had to do the milking and all the work.  I didn't
mind that a bit.  We hadn't any horse then, to take care of, and Rosy,
our cow, was a dear; gentle as a kitten, and sweet-breathed as a baby.
But it put back all the farm work, of course; we couldn't hire, and
there wasn't enough to go shares on.  Mother was pretty wretched, and no
wonder.

And then Rosy was stolen!  That did seem the last straw.  As long as
Rosy was there and I could milk her, we shouldn't starve.

Poor father!  There he sat, with that plaster arm in the sling--the
other one looking so discouraged and nerveless, and his head bowed on
his breast; the hand hanging, the strong busy fingers laxly open.

"I'll go and look," he said, starting up, "where's my hat?"

"It's no use looking, father," said I, "the halter's gone, there are big
footprints beside her hoof-marks out to the road, and then quite a
stamped place, and then wagon wheels and her nice little clean tracks
going off after the wagon.  Plain stolen."

He sat down again and groaned.

"Thought I heard a wagon in the middle of the night," said mother,
weakly.  Her face was flushed, and her eyes ran over.  "I can't sleep
much you know.  I ought to have spoken, but you need your sleep."

I ran to her and kissed her.

"Now mother dear!  Don't you fret over it,--please don't!  We'll find
Rosy.  I'll get Mrs. Clark to 'phone for me at once."

"'Phone where?" said father.  "It's no use 'phoning.  Its those gypsies.
 And they got to town hours ago--and Rosy's beef by this time."  He set
his jaw hard; but there were tears in his eyes, too.

I was nearly distracted myself.  "If only Jimmy were here," I said,
"he'd find her!"

"I don't doubt he'd make a try," said father, "but it's too late."

I ran over to Mrs. Clark, and we 'phoned to the police in Barstow, and
sure enough they found the hide and horns!  It didn't do us any good.
They arrested some gypsies, but couldn't prove anything; shut one of 'em
up for vagrancy, too,--but that didn't do us any good, either.  And if
they'd proved it and convicted him it wouldn't have brought back
Rosy,--or given us another cow.

Then mother got sick.  It was pure discouragement as much as anything, I
think, and she missed Rosy's milk,--she used to half live on it.  After
she was sick she missed it more, there were so few things she could
eat,--and not many of those I could get for her.

O how I did miss Jimmy!  If he'd been there he'd have helped me to _see
over_ it all.  "Sho!" he'd have said.  "It's hard lines, little girl,
now; but bless you, a broken arm's only temporary; your father'll be as
good as ever soon.  And your mother'll get well; she's a strong woman.
I never saw a stronger woman of her age.  And as to the food--just claim
you're 'no breakfast' people, and believe in fasting for your health!"

That's the way Jimmy met things, and I tried to say it all to myself,
and keep my spirits up,--and theirs.  But Jimmy was at sea.

Well, father couldn't work, it had to be his right arm, of course.  And
mother couldn't work either; she was just helpless and miserable, and
the more she worried the sicker she got, and the sicker she got the more
she worried.  My patience!  How I did work!  No time to read, no time to
study, no time to sew on any of the pretty white things I was gradually
accumulating.  I got up before daylight, almost; kept the house as neat
as I could, and got breakfast, such as it was.  Father could dress
himself after a fashion, and he could sit with mother when I was outside
working in the garden.  I began that garden just as an experiment, the
day after father broke his arm.  The outlay was only thirty cents for
lettuce and radish seed, but it took a lot of work.

Then there was mother to do for, and father to cheer up (which was
hardest of all), and dinner and supper to get,--and nothing to get them
with, practically.

The doctor didn't push us any, but father hates a debt as he hates
poison, and mother is a natural worrier.  "She is killing herself with
worry," the doctor said; and he had no anti-toxin for that, apparently.

And then, as if that wasn't enough, that Mr. Robert Grey Sr. took
advantage of our misfortunes and began to make up to me again.

I never liked the old man since I was a little girl.  He was always
picking me up and kissing me, when I didn't want to in the least.  When
I got older he'd pinch my checks, and offer me a nickle if I'd kiss him.

Mother liked him, for he stood high in the church, and was a charitable
soul.  Father liked him because he was successful--father always admired
successful men;--and Mr. Grey got his money honestly, too, father said.
He was a kind old soul.  He offered to send me to college, and I was
awfully tempted; but father couldn't bear a money obligation,--and I
couldn't bear Mr. Grey.

There was a Robert Grey Jr., who was disagreeable enough; a thin,
pimply, sanctimonious young fellow, with a class of girls in
sunday-school.  He was sickly enough, but Mr. Robert Grey Sr. was worse.
 He sort of tottered and threw his feet about as he walked; and kind or
not kind, I couldn't bear him.  But he came around now all the time.

He brought mother nice things to eat,--you can't refuse gifts to the
sick,--and they were awfully nice; he has a first class cook.  And he
brought so much that there was enough for father too.  We had to eat it
to save it, you see,--but I hated every mouthful.  I lived on our
potatoes mostly, and they were poor enough--in June--and no milk to go
with them.

He came every day, bringing his basket of delicacies for mother, and
he'd chat awhile with her--she liked it; and he'd sit and talk with
father--he liked it; and then he'd hang around me--and I had to be civil
to him!  But I did not like it a bit.  I couldn't bear the old man with
his thin grey whiskers, and his watery gray eyes, and his big pink
mouth--color of an old hollyhock.

But he came and came, and nobody could fail to see what he wanted; but O
dear me!  How I wished for Jimmy.  My big, strong, brisk boy, with the
jolly laugh and the funny little swears that he invented himself!  I
watched the shipping news, and waited and hoped; he might come back any
time now, if they'd had luck.  But he didn't come.  Mr. Robert Grey Sr.
was there every day--and Jimmy didn't come.

I tried not to cry.  I needed all my strength and courage to keep some
heart in father and mother, and I tried always to remember what Jimmy
would have said; how he'd have faced it.  "Don't be phazed by
_anything,_" he used to say.  "Everything goes by--give it time.  Don't
holler!  Don't give a jam!"  (People always looked so surprised when
Jimmy said "Jam!")  "Just hang on and do the square thing.  You're not
responsible for other people's sorrows.  Hold up your own end."

Jimmy was splendid!  He used to read to me about an old philosopher
called Euripides, and I got to appreciate him too.  But when the papers
were full of "Storms at sea"--"Terrible weather in the
north"--"Gales"--"High winds"--"Losses in shipping"--it did seem as if I
couldn't bear it.

Then at last it came, in a terrible list of wrecks.  The Mary
Jenks--lost, with all on board.

O what was the use of living!  What did anything matter!  Why couldn't I
die!  Why couldn't I die!

But I didn't.  My health was as good as ever; I could even sleep--when I
wasn't crying.  Working hard out of doors and not eating very much makes
you sleep I guess, heart or no heart.  And I had to keep on working; my
lettuce was up and coming on finely, rows upon rows of it, just as I had
planted it, two days apart.  And the radishes too, they were eatable,
and we tried them.

But father laughed grimly at my small garden.  "A lot of good that'll do
us, child!" he said.  "O Jenny--there's more than that you can do for
your poor mother!  I know you feel badly, and ordinarily I wouldn't say
a word, but--you see how it is."

I saw how it was well enough, but it seemed to me too horrible to think
of.  To thrust that tottering old philanthropist right into my poor
bleeding heart!  I couldn't bear it.

Mother never said a word.  But she looked.  She'd lie there with her big
hollow eyes following me around the room; and when I came to do anything
for her she'd look in my face so!  It was more effective than all
father's talks.  For father had made up his mind now, and urged me all
the time.

"We might as well face the facts, Jenny," he said.  "James Young is
gone, and I'm sorry; and you are naturally broken-hearted.  But even if
you were a widow I'd say the same thing.  Here is this man who has been
good to you since you were a child; he will treat you well, you'll have
a home, you'll be provided for when he dies.  I know you're not in love
with him.  I don't expect it.  He don't either.  He has spoken to me.
He don't expect miracles.  Here we are, absolutely living on his food!
It--it is _terrible_ to me, Jennie!  But I couldn't refuse, for your
mother's sake.  Now if I could pocket my pride for her sake, can't you
pocket your grief?  You can't bring back the dead."

"O father, don't!" I said.  "How can you talk so!  O Jimmy!  Jimmy!--If
you were here!"

"He isn't here--he never will be!" said father steadily.  "But your
mother is here, and sick.  Mr. Grey wants to send her to a
sanitarium--'as a friend.'  I can't let him do that,--it would cost
hundreds of dollars.  But--as a son-in-law I could."

Mother didn't say a thing--dear mother.  But she looked at me.

They made me feel like a brute, between them; at least father did.  He
kept right on talking.

"Mr. Grey is a good man," he said, "an unusually good man.  If he was a
bad man I'd never say a word."

"He was when he was young, old Miss Green says," I answered.

"I am ashamed of you, Jennie," said father, "to listen to such
scandalous gossip!  How--how unmaidenly of you!  I dare say he was a
little wild,--forty years ago.  Most young fellows are, and he was rich
and handsome.  But he has been a shining light in this community for
forty years.--A good husband--a good father."

"What'd his wife die of?" I asked suddenly.

"An operation,--but he did everything for her.  She had the best doctors
and nurses.  She was a good deal of an invalid, I believe, after Robert
Jr. was born."

"He's not much!" said I.

"No, Robert Jr. has been a great disappointment to his father--the great
disappointment of his life, I may say; though he was very fond of his
wife.  But he won't trouble you any, Jenny; his father is going to send
him to Europe for a long time--for his health.  Now Jenny, all this is
ancient history.  Here is a good kind man who loves you dearly, and
wants to marry you at once.  If you do it you may save your mother's
life,--and set me on my feet again for what remains of mine.  I never
said a word while you were engaged to Jimmy Young, but now it's a plain
duty."

That night Mr. Grey Sr. came as usual.  He had sent round his car and
got mother to take a ride that afternoon.  It did her good, too.  And
when he came father went out and sat with her, and left me to him:--and
he asked me to marry him.

He told me all the things he'd do for me--for mother--for father.  He
said he shouldn't live very long anyway, and then I could be my own
mistress, with plenty of money.  And I couldn't say a word, yes or no.

I sat there, playing with the edge of the lamp-mat--and thinking of
Jimmy.

And then Mr. Robert Grey Sr. made a mistake.  He got a hold of my hand
and fingered it.  He came and took me in his arms--and kissed my mouth.

I jerked away from him--he almost fell over.  "No!  O NO!" I cried.  "I
can't do it Mr. Grey.  I simply _can't!"_

He turned the color of ashes.

"Why not?" he said.

"Because it isn't decent," said I firmly.  "I can't bear to have you
touch me--never could.  I will be a servant to you--I will work for
you--nurse you--but to be your wife!--I'm sorry Mr. Grey, but I can't do
it."

I ran upstairs, and cried and cried; and I had reason to cry, for father
was a living thundercloud after that, and mother was worse; and they
wouldn't take any more of Mr. Grey's kindnesses, either of them.

My lettuce and radishes kept us alive until the potatoes were ripe.  I
sold them, fresh every day.  Walked three miles with a big basket full
every morning, to one of the summer hotels.  It was awfully heavy,
especially when it rained.  They didn't pay much, but it kept us--a
dollar a day, sometimes more.

Father got better in course of time, of course, and went to work on the
farm in a discouraged sort of way.  But mother was worse, if anything.
She never blamed me--never said a word; but her eyes were a living
reproach.

"Mother, dear," I begged her, "do forgive me!  I'll work till I drop,
for you; I'll deny myself everything: I'll do most anything that's
decent and honest.  But to marry a man you don't love is not honest; and
to marry an old invalid like that--it's not decent."

She just sighed--didn't say anything.

"Cheer up mother, do!  Father's almost well; we can get through this
year somehow.  Next year I can make enough to buy a cow, really."

But it wasn't more than a month from that time, I was sitting on the
door stone at twilight--thinking of Jimmy, of course--and--there _was_
Jimmy.  I thought it was his ghost; but if it was it was a very
warm-blooded one.


As to old Mr. Robert Grey, Sr., he persuaded little Grace Salters to
marry him; a pretty, foolish, plump little thing; and if you'll believe
it, she died within a year--she and her baby with her.

Well.  If ever anybody was glad I was.

I don't mean glad she was dead, poor girl; but glad I didn't marry him,
and did marry Jimmy.



WHAT VIRTUES ARE MADE OF


"Making a virtue of necessity" we say, somewhat scornfully; and never
consider that all virtues are so made.

"The savage virtues" of endurance, patience, gratitude, hospitality, are
easily seen to be precisely the main necessities of savages.  Their
daily hardships and occasional miseries were such that an extra store of
endurance was needed, and this they artificially cultivated by the
system of initiation by torture.

The Spartans used the same plan, training the young soldier to bear a
doubly heavy spear, that the real one might be light to his hand.

Patience was needed by the hunter, and still more by the laboring squaw;
gratitude sprang from the great need--and rarity--of mercy or service;
and hospitality is always found in proportion to the distance,
difficulty, and danger of traveling.  Courage, as the preeminent virtue
of manhood, rose to this prominence later in history, under conditions
of constant warfare.

Where you have to meet danger, and your danger is best overcome by
courage, by that necessity courage becomes a virtue.  It has not been
deemed a virtue in women, because it was not a necessity.  They were not
allowed to face outer danger; and what dangers they had were best
escaped by avoidance and ingenuity.  Amusingly enough, since the woman's
main danger came through her "natural protector"--man; and since her
skill and success in escaping from or overcoming him was naturally not
valued by him, much less considered a necessity; this power of evasion
and adaptation in woman has never been called a virtue.  Yet it is just
as serviceable to her as courage to the man, and therefore as much a
virtue.

Honesty is a modern virtue.  It existed, without a name and without
praise, among savages; but its place among virtues comes with the period
of commercial life.  Without some honesty, no commerce; it is absolutely
necessary to keep the world going; its absence in any degree is a social
injury; therefore we extol honesty and seek to punish dishonesty, as the
savage never thought of doing.

All men are not honest in this commercial period, nor were all men brave
in the period of warfare: but they all agree in praising the virtue most
needed at the time.

Truth, as a special virtue, is interesting to study.  The feeling of
trust in the word of another is of great value, under some conditions.
Under what conditions?  In slavery?  No.  Truthfulness is evidently not
advantageous to slaves, for they do not manifest, or even esteem that
quality.

Those same Spartans, to whom courage and endurance stood so high,
thought but little of truth and honesty, and taught their boys to steal.
 In warfare trickery and robbery are part of the game.

Where do we find the "word of honour" most valued?  Among gentlefolk and
nobles, and those who inherit their traditions and impulses.  It is
conditioned upon freedom and power.  You must trust a man's word--when
you have no other hold upon him!

Mercy, kindness, "humanity"--as we quite justifiably call it,--is a very
young virtue, growing with social growth.  Cruelty was once the rule;
now the exception.  The more inextricably our lives are interwoven in
the social fabric, the more we need the mutual love which is the natural
state of social beings; and this feeling becoming a necessity, it also
becomes a virtue.  Similarly, as our lives depend on the presence and
service of other animals we need to be kind to them; and in our highest
development so far, kindness to animals has been elected virtue.

But of all virtues made of necessity, none is more glaringly in evidence
than the one we call "virtue" itself,--chastity.  We call it "virtue"
because it is _the_ quality--and the only quality--which has been a
necessity to the possessor--woman.  Her life depended absolutely on man.
 He valued her in one relation, and in that relation demanded this one
thing;--that she serve him alone.

Because of this demand, to her an absolute necessity, we have developed
the virtue of chastity, and praised it above all others--in woman!  But
in men it was not even considered a virtue, much less demanded and
enforced.

Could anything be clearer proof that virtue was made of necessity?

What we need to study now is the chief necessity of modern life.  When
we have found that out we shall be able to rearrange our scale of
virtues.



ANIMALS IN CITIES


A city is a group residence for human beings.  There is no room in it
for any animal but one--_Genus Homo._  At present we make a sort of
menagerie of it.

Genus Homo is the major factor, bus he shares his common home with many
other beasts, _genus equus,_ _genus canis,_ _genus felis,_ and members
of others whose Latin names are not so familiar.

The horse is most numerous.  He is a clean animal, a good friend and
strong servant where animals belong--in the country.  In the city he is
an enemy.  His stable is a Depot for the Wholesale Distribution of
Diseases.

The services of the horse, and the tons upon tons of fertilizing
material produced by him, are financially valuable; but the injury from
many deaths, the yearly drain from long sickness, and all the doctors
and druggists bills, amounts to a far greater loss.

There is no horse work in a city that cannot be done by machine.  The
carriage, wagon, truck and dray, can take his place as workers; and they
_breed no flies._

We are learning, learning fast, how large a proportion of diseases
spring from minute living things which get inside of us and play havoc
with our organism.  And very lately we are learning further, that of all
the benevolent distributors of disease none are more swift and sure than
certain insects; insects which are born and bred in and upon the bodies
and excreta of animals.

It is true that our kitchen garbage furnishes another popular nursery
for flies, but the unclean stable is the other breeding place.

Next in number to the horse come the dog and cat.  These creatures are
not healthy and not happy in a city.  They cannot be kept there without
injury to them; and the injury is more than revenged upon their keepers.
 The dog furnishes his quota of deaths from hydrophobia, as well as
plain "assault and battery;" he defiles our sidewalks, and the fruits
and vegetables exposed upon our sidewalks; he keeps us awake by his
forlorn howling; he has diseases of his own which we may receive from
him; and he has fleas.

The flea, as well as the fly, is a valiant and industrious purveyor of
disease.  From beast to beast they hop, carrying their toxic germs with
them: and the dog, displeased with his persecutors, scratches them off
upon our carpets.

The same applies to cats.  A cat in the country is clean and safe; a cat
in the city is neither--if it has any freedom.  If a young kitten,
cleansed and flealess, were reared in a lofty apartment, it would be
clean, doubtless; but the usual cat is free on intersecting fences; and
in the contact of warfare, or of gentler feelings, the flea is free to
travel and exchange.

The rat and mouse come under the same condemnation; they have fleas.
They make dirt.  They tend to increase and maintain our insect pests and
terrors.  They penetrate to all unsavory places.  They acquire disease
themselves, or carry the germs of it in their blood or on their fur.
Their parasites gather them up and give them to us.  The rats will leave
a sinking ship, the fleas will leave a sinking rat, and among their
millions some of them come to us.

When we build cities clean and tight from basement to roof,--all
concrete, brick, stone, metal, and plaster; when the holes for pipes of
all sorts are scaled as they enter the home; when the kitchen is
eliminated by 90 per cent. and replaced by the food laboratories; when
no animal but man is allowed within city limits--and he is taught to
keep clean; we can then compare, for antiseptic cleanliness with a fine
hospital--and have few hospitals to compare with!



WHAT DIANTHA DID


XI.

THE POWER OF THE SCREW.


Your car is too big for one person to stir--
 Your chauffeur is a little man, too;
Yet he lifts that machine, does the little chauffeur,
 By the power of a gentle jackscrew.


Diantha worked.

For all her employees she demanded a ten-hour day, she worked fourteen;
rising at six and not getting to bed till eleven, when her charges were
all safely in their rooms for the night.

They were all up at five-thirty or thereabouts, breakfasting at six, and
the girls off in time to reach their various places by seven.  Their day
was from 7 A. M. to 8.30 P. M., with half an hour out, from 11.30 to
twelve, for their lunch; and three hours, between 2.20 and 5.30, for
their own time, including their tea.  Then they worked again from 5.30
to 8.30, on the dinner and the dishes, and then they came home to a
pleasant nine o'clock supper, and had all hour to dance or rest before
the 10.30 bell for bed time.

Special friends and "cousins" often came home with them, and frequently
shared the supper--for a quarter--and the dance for nothing.

It was no light matter in the first place to keep twenty girls contented
with such a regime, and working with the steady excellence required, and
in the second place to keep twenty employers contented with them.  There
were failures on both sides; half a dozen families gave up the plan, and
it took time to replace them; and three girls had to be asked to resign
before the year was over.  But most of them had been in training in the
summer, and had listened for months to Diantha's earnest talks to the
clubs, with good results.

"Remember we are not doing this for ourselves alone," she would say to
them.  "Our experiment is going to make this kind of work easier for all
home workers everywhere.  You may not like it at first, but neither did
you like the old way.  It will grow easier as we get used to it; and we
_must_ keep the rules, because we made them!"

She laboriously composed a neat little circular, distributed it widely,
and kept a pile in her lunch room for people to take.

It read thus:


UNION HOUSE
Food and Service.

General Housework by the week . . . $10.00
General Housework by the day . . . $2.00
 Ten hours work a day, and furnish their own food.
Additional labor by the hour . . . $ .20
Special service for entertainments, maids and waitresses, by the hour .
. . $ .25
 Catering for entertainments.
 Delicacies for invalids.
 Lunches packed and delivered.
Caffeteria . . . 12 to 2


What annoyed the young manager most was the uncertainty and irregularity
involved in her work, the facts varying considerably from her
calculations.

In the house all ran smoothly.  Solemn Mrs. Thorvald did the laundry
work for thirty-five--by the aid of her husband and a big mangle for the
"flat work."  The girls' washing was limited.  "You have to be
reasonable about it," Diantha had explained to them.  "Your fifty cents
covers a dozen pieces--no more.  If you want more you have to pay more,
just as your employers do for your extra time."

This last often happened.  No one on the face of it could ask more than
ten hours of the swift, steady work given by the girls at but a fraction
over 14 cents an hour.  Yet many times the housekeeper was anxious for
more labor on special days; and the girls, unaccustomed to the three
free hours in the afternoon, were quite willing to furnish it, thus
adding somewhat to their cash returns.

They had a dressmaking class at the club afternoons, and as Union House
boasted a good sewing machine, many of them spent the free hours in
enlarging their wardrobes.  Some amused themselves with light reading, a
few studied, others met and walked outside.  The sense of honest leisure
grew upon them, with its broadening influence; and among her thirty
Diantha found four or five who were able and ambitious, and willing to
work heartily for the further development of the business.

Her two housemaids were specially selected.  When the girls were out of
the house these two maids washed the breakfast dishes with marvelous
speed, and then helped Diantha prepare for the lunch.  This was a large
undertaking, and all three of them, as well as Julianna and Hector
worked at it until some six or eight hundred sandwiches were ready, and
two or three hundred little cakes.

Diantha had her own lunch, and then sat at the receipt of custom during
the lunch hour, making change and ordering fresh supplies as fast as
needed.

The two housemaids had a long day, but so arranged that it made but ten
hours work, and they had much available time of their own.  They had to
be at work at 5:30 to set the table for six o'clock breakfast, and then
they were at it steadily, with the dining rooms to "do," and the lunch
to get ready, until 11:30, when they had an hour to eat and rest.  From
12:30 to 4 o'clock they were busy with the lunch cups, the bed-rooms,
and setting the table for dinner; but after that they had four hours to
themselves, until the nine o'clock supper was over, and once more they
washed dishes for half an hour.  The caffeteria used only cups and
spoons; the sandwiches and cakes were served on paper plates.

In the hand-cart methods of small housekeeping it is impossible to exact
the swift precision of such work, but not in the standardized tasks and
regular hours of such an establishment as this.

Diantha religiously kept her hour at noon, and tried to keep the three
in the afternoon; but the employer and manager cannot take irresponsible
rest as can the employee.  She felt like a most inexperienced captain on
a totally new species of ship, and her paper plans looked very weak
sometimes, as bills turned out to be larger than she had allowed for, or
her patronage unaccountably dwindled.  But if the difficulties were
great, the girl's courage was greater.  "It is simply a big piece of
work," she assured herself, "and may be a long one, but there never was
anything better worth doing.  Every new business has difficulties, I
mustn't think of them.  I must just push and push and push--a little
more every day."

And then she would draw on all her powers to reason with, laugh at, and
persuade some dissatisfied girl; or, hardest of all, to bring in a new
one to fill a vacancy.

She enjoyed the details of her lunch business, and studied it carefully;
planning for a restaurant a little later.  Her bread was baked in long
cylindrical closed pans, and cut by machinery into thin even slices, not
a crust wasted; for they were ground into crumbs and used in the
cooking.

The filling for her sandwiches was made from fish, flesh, and fowl; from
cheese and jelly and fruit and vegetables; and so named or numbered that
the general favorites were gradually determined.

Mr. Thaddler chatted with her over the counter, as far as she would
allow it, and discoursed more fully with his friends on the verandah.

"Porne," he said, "where'd that girl come from anyway?  She's a genius,
that's what she is; a regular genius."

"She's all that," said Mr. Porne, "and a benefactor to humanity thrown
in.  I wish she'd start her food delivery, though.  I'm tired of those
two Swedes already.  O--come from?  Up in Jopalez, Inca County, I
believe."

"New England stock I bet," said Mr. Thaddler.  "Its a damn shame the way
the women go on about her."

"Not all of them, surely," protested Mr. Porne.

"No, not all of 'em,--but enough of 'em to make mischief, you may be
sure.  Women are the devil, sometimes."

Mr. Porne smiled without answer, and Mr. Thaddler went sulking away--a
bag of cakes bulging in his pocket.

The little wooden hotel in Jopalez boasted an extra visitor a few days
later.  A big red faced man, who strolled about among the tradesmen,
tried the barber's shop, loafed in the post office, hired a rig and
traversed the length and breadth of the town, and who called on Mrs.
Warden, talking real estate with her most politely in spite of her
protestation and the scornful looks of the four daughters; who bought
tobacco and matches in the grocery store, and sat on the piazza thereof
to smoke, as did other gentlemen of leisure.

Ross Warden occasionally leaned at the door jamb, with folded arms.  He
never could learn to be easily sociable with ranchmen and teamsters.
Serve them he must, but chat with them he need not.  The stout gentleman
essayed some conversation, but did not get far.  Ross was polite, but
far from encouraging, and presently went home to supper, leaving a
carrot-haired boy to wait upon his lingering customers.

"Nice young feller enough," said the stout gentleman to himself, "but
raised on ramrods.  Never got 'em from those women folks of his, either.
 He _has_ a row to hoe!"  And he departed as he had come.

Mr. Eltwood turned out an unexpectedly useful friend to Diantha.  He
steered club meetings and "sociables" into her large rooms, and as
people found how cheap and easy it was to give parties that way, they
continued the habit.  He brought his doctor friends to sample the lunch,
and they tested the value of Diantha's invalid cookery, and were more
than pleased.

Hungry tourists were wholly without prejudice, and prized her lunches
for their own sake.  They descended upon the caffeteria in chattering
swarms, some days, robbing the regular patrons of their food, and sent
sudden orders for picnic lunches that broke in upon the routine hours of
the place unmercifully.

But of all her patrons, the families of invalids appreciated Diantha's
work the most.  Where a little shack or tent was all they could afford
to live in, or where the tiny cottage was more than filled with the
patient, attending relative, and nurse, this depot of supplies was a
relief indeed.

A girl could be had for an hour or two; or two girls, together, with
amazing speed, could put a small house in dainty order while the sick
man lay in his hammock under the pepper trees; and be gone before he was
fretting for his bed again.  They lived upon her lunches; and from them,
and other quarters, rose an increasing demand for regular cooked food.

"Why don't you go into it at once?" urged Mrs. Weatherstone.

"I want to establish the day service first," said Diantha.  "It is a
pretty big business I find, and I do get tired sometimes.  I can't
afford to slip up, you know.  I mean to take it up next fall, though."

"All right.  And look here; see that you begin in first rate shape.
I've got some ideas of my own about those food containers."

They discussed the matter more than once, Diantha most reluctant to take
any assistance; Mrs. Weatherstone determined that she should.

"I feel like a big investor already," she said.  "I don't think even you
realize the _money_ there is in this thing!  You are interested in
establishing the working girls, and saving money and time for the
housewives.  I am interested in making money out of it--honestly!  It
would be such a triumph!"

"You're very good--" Diantha hesitated.

"I'm not good.  I'm most eagerly and selfishly interested.  I've taken a
new lease of life since knowing you, Diantha Bell!  You see my father
was a business man, and his father before him--I _like it._  There I
was, with lots of money, and not an interest in life!  Now?--why,
there's no end to this thing, Diantha!  It's one of the biggest
businesses on earth--if not _the_ biggest!"

"Yes--I know," the girl answered.  "But its slow work.  I feel the
weight of it more than I expected.  There's every reason to succeed, but
there's the combined sentiment of the whole world to lift--it's as heavy
as lead."

"Heavy!  Of course it's heavy!  The more fun to lift it!  You'll do it,
Diantha, I know you will, with that steady, relentless push of yours.
But the cooked food is going to be your biggest power, and you must let
me start it right.  Now you listen to me, and make Mrs. Thaddler eat her
words!"

Mrs. Thaddler's words would have proved rather poisonous, if eaten.  She
grew more antagonistic as the year advanced.  Every fault that could be
found in the undertaking she pounced upon and enlarged; every doubt that
could be cast upon it she heavily piled up; and her opposition grew more
rancorous as Mr. Thaddler enlarged in her hearing upon the excellence of
Diantha's lunches and the wonders of her management.

"She's picked a bunch o' winners in those girls of hers," he declared to
his friends.  "They set out in the morning looking like a flock of sweet
peas--in their pinks and whites and greens and vi'lets,--and do more
work in an hour than the average slavey can do in three, I'm told."

It was a pretty sight to see those girls start out.  They had a sort of
uniform, as far as a neat gingham dress went, with elbow sleeves, white
ruffled, and a Dutch collar; a sort of cross between a nurses dress and
that of "La Chocolataire;" but colors were left to taste.  Each carried
her apron and a cap that covered the hair while cooking and sweeping;
but nothing that suggested the black and white livery of the regulation
servant.

"This is a new stage of labor," their leader reminded them.  "You are
not servants--you are employees.  You wear a cap as an English carpenter
does--or a French cook,--and an apron because your work needs it.  It is
not a ruffled label,--it's a business necessity.  And each one of us
must do our best to make this new kind of work valued and respected."

It is no easy matter to overcome prejudices many centuries old, and meet
the criticism of women who have nothing to do but criticize.  Those who
were "mistresses," and wanted "servants,"--someone to do their will at
any moment from early morning till late evening,--were not pleased with
the new way if they tried it; but the women who had interests of their
own to attend to; who merely wanted their homes kept clean, and the food
well cooked and served, were pleased.  The speed, the accuracy, the
economy; the pleasant, quiet, assured manner of these skilled employees
was a very different thing from the old slipshod methods of the ordinary
general servant.

So the work slowly prospered, while Diantha began to put in execution
the new plan she had been forced into.

While it matured, Mrs. Thaddler matured hers.  With steady dropping she
had let fall far and wide her suspicions as to the character of Union
House.

"It looks pretty queer to me!" she would say, confidentially, "All those
girls together, and no person to have any authority over them!  Not a
married woman in the house but that washerwoman,--and her husband's a
fool!"

"And again; You don't see how she does it?  Neither do I!  The expenses
must be tremendous--those girls pay next to nothing,--and all that broth
and brown bread flying about town!  Pretty queer doings, I think!"

"The men seem to like that caffeteria, don't they?" urged one caller,
perhaps not unwilling to nestle Mrs. Thaddler, who flushed darkly as she
replied.  "Yes, they do.  Men usually like that sort of place."

"They like good food at low prices, if that's what you mean," her
visitor answered.

"That's not all I mean--by a long way," said Mrs. Thaddler.  She said so
much, and said it so ingeniously, that a dark rumor arose from nowhere,
and grew rapidly.  Several families discharged their Union House girls.
Several girls complained that they were insultingly spoken to on the
street.  Even the lunch patronage began to fall off.

Diantha was puzzled--a little alarmed.  Her slow, steady lifting of the
prejudice against her was checked.  She could not put her finger on the
enemy, yet felt one distinctly, and had her own suspicions.  But she
also had her new move well arranged by this time.

Then a maliciously insinuating story of the place came out in a San
Francisco paper, and a flock of local reporters buzzed in to sample the
victim.  They helped themselves to the luncheon, and liked it.  but that
did not soften their pens.  They talked with such of the girls as they
could get in touch with, and wrote such versions of these talks as
suited them.

They called repeatedly at Union House, but Diantha refused to see them.
Finally she was visited by the Episcopalian clergyman.  He had heard her
talk at the Club, was favorably impressed by the girl herself, and
honestly distressed by the dark stories he now heard about Union House.

"My dear young lady,"  he said, "I have called to see you in your own
interests.  I do not, as you perhaps know, approve of your schemes.  I
consider them--ah--subversive of the best interests of the home!  But I
think you mean well, though mistakenly.  Now I fear you are not aware
that this-ah--ill-considered undertaking of yours, is giving rise to
considerable adverse comment in the community.  There is--ah--there is a
great deal being said about this business of yours which I am sure you
would regret if you knew it.  Do you think it is wise; do you think it
is--ah--right, my dear Miss Bell, to attempt to carry on a--a place of
this sort, without the presence of a--of a Matron of assured standing?"

Diantha smiled rather coldly.

"May I trouble you to step into the back parlor, Dr. Aberthwaite," she
said; and then;

"May I have the pleasure of presenting to you Mrs. Henderson Bell--my
mother?"

*

"Wasn't it great!" said Mrs. Weatherstone; "I was there you see,-- I'd
come to call on Mrs. Bell--she's a dear,--and in came Mrs. Thaddler--"

"Mrs. Thaddler?"

"O I know it was old Aberthwaite, but he represented Mrs. Thaddler and
her clique, and had come there to preach to Diantha about propriety--I
heard him,--and she brought him in and very politely introduced him to
her mother!--it was rich, Isabel."

"How did Diantha manage it?" asked her friend.

"She's been trying to arrange it for ever so long.  Of course her father
objected--you'd know that.  But there's a sister--not a bad sort, only
very limited; she's taken the old man to board, as it were, and I guess
the mother really set her foot down for once--said she had a right to
visit her own daughter!"

"It would seem so," Mrs. Porne agreed.  "I _am_ so glad!  It will be so
much easier for that brave little woman now."

It was.

Diantha held her mother in her arms the night she came, and cried tike a
baby.

"O mother _dear!_" she sobbed, "I'd no idea I should miss you so much.
O you blessed comfort!"

Her mother cried a bit too; she enjoyed this daughter more than either
of her older children, and missed her more.  A mother loves all her
children, naturally; but a mother is also a person--and may, without
sin, have personal preferences.

She took hold of Diantha's tangled mass of papers with the eagerness of
a questing hound.

"You've got all the bills, of course," she demanded, with her anxious
rising inflection.

"Every one," said the girl.  "You taught me that much.  What puzzles me
is to make things balance.  I'm making more than I thought in some
lines, and less in others, and I can't make it come out straight."

"It won't, altogether, till the end of the year I dare say," said Mrs.
Bell, "but let's get clear as far as we can.  In the first place we must
separate your business,--see how much each one pays."

"The first one I want to establish," said her daughter, "is the girl's
club.  Not just this one, with me to run it.  But to show that any group
of twenty or thirty girls could do this thing in any city.  Of course
where rents and provisions were high they'd have to charge more.  I want
to make an average showing somehow.  Now can you disentangle the girl
part front the lunch part and the food part, mother dear, and make it
all straight?"

Mrs.  Bell could and did; it gave her absolute delight to do it.  She
set down the total of Diantha's expenses so far in the Service
Department, as follows:

Rent of Union House . . . $1,500
Rent of furniture . . . $300
One payment on furniture . . . $400
Fuel and lights, etc. . . . $352
Service of 5 at $10 a week each . . . $2,600
Food for thirty-seven . . . $3,848
 -----
Total . . . $9,000

"That covers everything but my board," said Mrs. Bell.

"Now your income is easy--35 x $4.50 equals $8,190.  Take that from your
$9,000 and you are $810 behind."

"Yes, I know," said Diantha, eagerly, "but if it was merely a girl's
club home, the rent and fixtures would be much less.  A home could be
built, with thirty bedrooms--and all necessary conveniences--for $7,000.
 I've asked Mr. and Mrs. Porne about it; and the furnishing needn't cost
over $2,000 if it was very plain.  Ten per cent. of that is a rent of
$900 you see."

"I see," said her mother.  "Better say a thousand.  I guess it could be
done for that."

So they set down rent, $1,000.

"There have to be five paid helpers in the house," Diantha went on, "the
cook, the laundress, the two maids, and the matron.  She must buy and
manage.  She could be one of their mothers or aunts."

Mrs. Bell smiled.  "Do you really imagine, Diantha, that Mrs.
O'Shaughnessy or Mrs. Yon Yonson can manage a house like this as you
can?"

Diantha flushed a little.  "No, mother, of course not.  But I am keeping
very full reports of all the work.  Just the schedule of labor--the
hours--the exact things done.  One laundress, with machinery, can wash
for thirty-five, (its only six a day you see), and the amount is
regulated; about six dozen a day, and all the flat work mangled.

"In a Girl's Club alone the cook has all day off, as it were; she can do
the down stairs cleaning.  And the two maids have only table service and
bedrooms."

"Thirty-five bedrooms?"

"Yes.  But two girls together, who know how, can do a room in 8
minutes--easily.  They are small and simple you see.  Make the bed,
shake the mats, wipe the floors and windows,--you watch them!"

"I have watched them," the mother admitted.  "They are as quick as--as
mill-workers!"

"Well," pursued Diantha, "they spend three hours on dishes and tables,
and seven on cleaning.  The bedrooms take 280 minutes; that's nearly
five hours.  The other two are for the bath rooms, halls, stairs,
downstairs windows, and so on.  That's all right.  Then I'm keeping the
menus--just what I furnish and what it costs.  Anybody could order and
manage when it was all set down for her.  And you see--as you have
figured it--they'd have over $500 leeway to buy the furniture if they
were allowed to."

"Yes," Mrs. Bell admitted, "_if_ the rent was what you allow, and _if_
they all work all the time!"

"That's the hitch, of course.  But mother; the girls who don't have
steady jobs do work by the hour, and that brings in more, on the whole.
If they are the right kind they can make good.  If they find anyone who
don't keep her job--for good reasons--they can drop her."

"M'm!" said Mrs. Bell.  "Well, it's an interesting experiment.  But how
about you?  So far you are $410 behind."

"Yes, because my rent's so big.  But I cover that by letting the rooms,
you see."

Mrs. Bell considered the orders of this sort.  "So far it averages about
$25.00 a week; that's doing well."

"It will be less in summer--much less," Diantha suggested.  "Suppose you
call it an average of $15.00."

"Call it $10.00," said her mother ruthlessly.  "At that it covers your
deficit and $110 over."

"Which isn't much to live on," Diantha agreed, "but then comes my
special catering, and the lunches."

Here they were quite at sea for a while.  But as the months passed, and
the work steadily grew on their hands, Mrs. Bell became more and more
cheerful.  She was up with the earliest, took entire charge of the
financial part of the concern, and at last Diantha was able to rest
fully in her afternoon hours.  What delighted her most was to see her
mother thrive in the work.  Her thin shoulders lifted a little as small
dragging tasks were forgotten and a large growing business substituted.
Her eyes grew bright again, she held her head as she did in her keen
girlhood, and her daughter felt fresh hope and power as she saw already
the benefit of the new method as affecting her nearest and dearest.

All Diantha's friends watched the spread of the work with keenly
sympathetic intent; but to Mrs. Weatherstone it became almost as
fascinating as to the girl herself.

"It's going to be one of the finest businesses in the world!" she said,
"And one of the largest and best paying.  Now I'll have a surprise ready
for that girl in the spring, and another next year, if I'm not
mistaken!"

There were long and vivid discussions of the matter between her and her
friends the Pornes, and Mrs. Porne spent more hours in her "drawing
room" than she had for years.

But while these unmentioned surprises were pending, Mrs. Weatherstone
departed to New York--to Europe; and was gone some months.  In the
spring she returned, in April--which is late June in Orchardina.  She
called upon Diantha and her mother at once, and opened her attack.

"I do hope, Mrs. Bell, that you'll back me up," she said.  "You have the
better business head I think, in the financial line."

"She has," Diantha admitted.  "She's ten times as good as I am at that;
but she's no more willing to carry obligation than I am, Mrs.
Weatherstone."

"Obligation is one thing--investment is another," said her guest.  "I
live on my money--that is, on other people's work.  I am a base
capitalist, and you seem to me good material to invest in.  So--take it
or leave it--I've brought you an offer."

She then produced from her hand bag some papers, and, from her car
outside, a large object carefully boxed, about the size and shape of a
plate warmer.  This being placed on the table before them, was
uncovered, and proved to be a food container of a new model.

"I had one made in Paris," she explained, "and the rest copied here to
save paying duty.  Lift it!"

They lifted it in amazement--it was so light.

"Aluminum," she said, proudly, "Silver plated--new process!  And bamboo
at the corners you see.  All lined and interlined with asbestos, rubber
fittings for silver ware, plate racks, food compartments--see?"

She pulled out drawers, opened little doors, and rapidly laid out a
table service for five.

"It will hold food for five--the average family, you know.  For larger
orders you'll have to send more.  I had to make _some_ estimate."

"What lovely dishes!" said Diantha.

"Aren't they!  Aluminum, silvered!  If your washers are careful they
won't get dented, and you can't break 'em."

Mrs. Bell examined the case and all its fittings with eager attention.

"It's the prettiest thing I ever saw," she said.  "Look, Diantha; here's
for soup, here's for water--or wine if you want, all your knives and
forks at the side, Japanese napkins up here.  Its lovely, but--I should
think--expensive!"

Mrs. Weatherstone smiled.  "I've had twenty-five of them made.  They
cost, with the fittings, $100 apiece, $2,500.  I will rent them to you,
Miss Bell, at a rate of 10 per cent. interest; only $250 a year!"

"It ought to take more," said Mrs. Bell, "there'll be breakage and
waste."

"You can't break them, I tell you," said the cheerful visitor, "and
dents can be smoothed out in any tin shop--you'll have to pay for
it;--will that satisfy you?"

Diantha was looking at her, her eyes deep with gratitude.  "I--you know
what I think of you!" she said.

Mrs. Weatherstone laughed.  "I'm not through yet," she said.  "Look at
my next piece of impudence!"  This was only on paper, but the pictures
were amply illuminating.

"I went to several factories," she gleefully explained, "here and
abroad.  A Yankee firm built it.  It's in my garage now!"

It was a light gasolene motor wagon, the body built like those
old-fashioned moving wagons which were also used for excursions, wherein
the floor of the vehicle was rather narrow, and set low, and the seats
ran lengthwise, widening out over the wheels; only here the wheels were
lower, and in the space under the seats ran a row of lockers opening
outside.  Mrs. Weatherstone smiled triumphantly.

"Now, Diantha Bell," she said, "here's something you haven't thought of,
I do believe!  This estimable vehicle will carry thirty people inside
easily," and she showed them how each side held twelve, and turn-up
seats accommodated six more; "and outside,"--she showed the lengthwise
picture--"it carries twenty-four containers.  If you want to send all
your twenty-five at once, one can go here by the driver.

"Now then.  This is not an obligation, Miss Bell, it is another valuable
investment.  I'm having more made.  I expect to have use for them in a
good many places.  This cost pretty near $3,000, and you get it at the
same good interest, for $300 a year.  What's more, if you are smart
enough--and I don't doubt you are,--you can buy the whole thing on
installments, same as you mean to with your furniture."

Diantha was dumb, but her mother wasn't.  She thanked Mrs. Weatherstone
with a hearty appreciation of her opportune help, but no less of her
excellent investment.

"Don't be a goose, Diantha," she said.  "You will set up your food
business in first class style, and I think you can carry it
successfully.  But Mrs. Weatherstone's right; she's got a new investment
here that'll pay her better than most others--and be a growing thing I
do believe."

And still Diantha found it difficult to express her feelings.  She had
lived under a good deal of strain for many months now, and this sudden
opening out of her plans was a heavenly help indeed.

Mrs. Weatherstone went around the table and sat by her.  "Child," said
she, "you don't begin to realize what you've done for me--and for
Isobel--and for ever so many in this town, and all over the world.  And
besides, don't you think anybody else can see your dream?  We can't _do_
it as you can, but we can see what it's going to mean,--and we'll help
if we can.  You wouldn't grudge us that, would you?"

As a result of all this the cooked food delivery service was opened at
once.

"It is true that the tourists are gone, mostly," said Mrs. Weatherstone,
as she urged it, "but you see there are ever so many residents who have
more trouble with servants in summer than they do in winter, and hate to
have a fire in the house, too."

So Diantha's circulars had an addition, forthwith.

These were distributed among the Orchardinians, setting their tongues
wagging anew, as a fresh breeze stirs the eaves of the forest.

The stealthy inroads of lunches and evening refreshments had been
deprecated already; this new kind of servant who wasn't a servant, but
held her head up like anyone else ("They are as independent
as--as--'salesladies,'" said one critic), was also viewed with alarm;
but when even this domestic assistant was to be removed, and a square
case of food and dishes substituted, all Archaic Orchardina was
horrified.

There were plenty of new minds in the place, however; enough to start
Diantha with seven full orders and five partial ones.

Her work at the club was now much easier, thanks to her mother's
assistance, to the smoother running of all the machinery with the
passing of time, and further to the fact that most of her girls were now
working at summer resorts, for shorter hours and higher wages.  They
paid for their rooms at the club still, but the work of the house was so
much lightened that each of the employees was given two weeks of
vacation--on full pay.

The lunch department kept on a pretty regular basis from the patronage
of resident business men, and the young manager--in her ambitious
moments--planned for enlarging it in the winter.  But during the summer
her whole energies went to perfecting the _menus_ and the service of her
food delivery.

Mrs. Porne was the very first to order.  She had been waiting
impatiently for a chance to try the plan, and, with her husband, had the
firmest faith in Diantha's capacity to carry it through.

"We don't save much in money," she explained to the eager Mrs. Ree, who
hovered, fascinated, over the dangerous topic, "but we do in comfort, I
can tell you.  You see I had two girls, paid them $12 a week; now I keep
just the one, for $6.  My food and fuel for the four of us (I don't
count the babies either time--they remain as before), was all of $16,
often more.  That made $28 a week.  Now I pay for three meals a day,
delivered, for three of us, $15 a week--with the nurse's wages, $21.
Then I pay a laundress one day, $2, and her two meals, $.50, making
$23.50.  Then I have two maids, for an hour a day, to clean; $.50 a day
for six days, $3, and one maid Sunday, $.25.  $26.75 in all.  So we only
make $1.25.

_But!_ there's another room!  We have the cook's room for an extra
guest; I use it most for a sewing room, though and the kitchen is a sort
of day nursery now.  The house seems as big again!"

"But the food?" eagerly inquired Mrs. Ree.  "Is it as good as your own?
Is it hot and tempting?"

Mrs. Ree was fascinated by the new heresy.  As a staunch adherent of the
old Home and Culture Club, and its older ideals, she disapproved of the
undertaking, but her curiosity was keen about it.

Mrs. Porne smiled patiently.  "You remember Diantha Bell's cooking I am
sure, Mrs. Ree," she said.  "And Julianna used to cook for dinner
parties--when one could get her.  My Swede was a very ordinary cook, as
most of these untrained girls are.  Do take off your hat and have dinner
with us,--I'll show you," urged Mrs. Porne.

"I--O I mustn't," fluttered the little woman.  "They'll expect me at
home--and--surely your--supply--doesn't allow for guests?"

"We'll arrange all that by 'phone," her hostess explained; and she
promptly sent word to the Ree household, then called up Union House and
ordered one extra dinner.

"Is it--I'm dreadfully rude I know, but I'm _so_ interested!  Is
it--expensive?"

Mrs. Porne smiled.  "Haven't you seen the little circular?  Here's one,
'Extra meals to regular patrons 25 cents.'  And no more trouble to order
than to tell a maid."

Mrs. Ree had a lively sense of paltering with Satan as she sat down to
the Porne's dinner table.  She had seen the delivery wagon drive to the
door, had heard the man deposit something heavy on the back porch, and
was now confronted by a butler's tray at Mrs. Porne's left, whereon
stood a neat square shining object with silvery panels and bamboo
trimmings.

"It's not at all bad looking, is it?" she ventured.

"Not bad enough to spoil one's appetite," Mr. Porne cheerily agreed.

"Open, Sesame!  Now you know the worst."

Mrs. Porne opened it, and an inner front was shown, with various small
doors and drawers.

"Do you know what is in it?" asked the guest.

"No, thank goodness, I don't," replied her hostess.  "If there's
anything tiresome it is to order meals and always know what's coming!
That's what men get so tired of at restaurants; what they hate so when
their wives ask them what they want for dinner.  Now I can enjoy my
dinner at my own table, just as if I was a guest."

"It is--a tax--sometimes," Mrs. Ree admitted, adding hastily, "But one
is glad to do it--to make home attractive."

Mr. Porne's eyes sought his wife's, and love and contentment flashed
between them, as she quietly set upon the table three silvery plates.

"Not silver, surely!" said Mrs. Ree, lifting hers, "Oh, aluminum."

"Aluminum, silver plated," said Mr. Porne.  "They've learned how to do
it at last.  It's a problem of weight, you see, and breakage.  Aluminum
isn't pretty, glass and silver are heavy, but we all love silver, and
there's a pleasant sense of gorgeousness in this outfit."

It did look rather impressive; silver tumblers, silver dishes, the whole
dainty service--and so surprisingly light.

"You see she knows that it is very important to please the eye as well
as the palate," said Mr. Porne.  "Now speaking of palates, let us all
keep silent and taste this soup."  They did keep silent in supreme
contentment while the soup lasted.  Mrs. Ree laid down her spoon with
the air of one roused from a lovely dream.

"Why--why--it's like Paris," she said in an awed tone.

"Isn't it?" Mr. Porne agreed, "and not twice alike in a month, I think."

"Why, there aren't thirty kinds of soup, are there?" she urged.

"I never thought there were when we kept servants," said he.  "Three was
about their limit, and greasy, at that."

Mrs. Porne slipped the soup plates back in their place and served the
meat.

"She does not give a fish course, does she?" Mrs. Ree observed.

"Not at the table d'hote price," Mrs. Porne answered.  "We never
pretended to have a fish course ourselves--do you?"  Mrs. Ree did not,
and eagerly disclaimed any desire for fish.  The meat was roast beef,
thinly sliced, hot and juicy.

"Don't you miss the carving, Mr. Porne?" asked the visitor.  "I do so
love to see a man at the head of his own table, carving."

"I do miss it, Mrs. Ree.  I miss it every day of my life with devout
thankfulness.  I never was a good carver, so it was no pleasure to me to
show off; and to tell you the truth, when I come to the table, I like to
eat--not saw wood."   And Mr. Porne ate with every appearance of
satisfaction.

"We never get roast beef like this I'm sure," Mrs. Ree admitted, "we
can't get it small enough for our family."

"And a little roast is always spoiled in the cooking.  Yes this is far
better than we used to have," agreed her hostess.

Mrs. Ree enjoyed every mouthful of her meal.  The soup was hot.  The
salad was crisp and the ice cream hard.  There was sponge cake, thick,
light, with sugar freckles on the dark crust.  The coffee was perfect
and almost burned the tongue.

"I don't understand about the heat and cold," she said; and they showed
her the asbestos-lined compartments and perfectly fitting places for
each dish and plate.  Everything went back out of sight; small leavings
in a special drawer, knives and forks held firmly by rubber fittings,
nothing that shook or rattled.  And the case was set back by the door
where the man called for it at eight o'clock.

"She doesn't furnish table linen?"

"No, there are Japanese napkins at the top here.  We like our own
napkins, and we didn't use a cloth, anyway."

"And how about silver?"

"We put ours away.  This plated ware they furnish is perfectly good.  We
could use ours of course if we wanted to wash it.  Some do that and some
have their own case marked, and their own silver in it, but it's a good
deal of risk, I think, though they are extremely careful."

Mrs. Ree experienced peculiarly mixed feelings.  As far as food went,
she had never eaten a better dinner.  But her sense of Domestic
Aesthetics was jarred.

"It certainly tastes good," she said.  "Delicious, in fact.  I am
extremely obliged to you, Mrs. Porne, I'd no idea it could be sent so
far and be so good.  And only five dollars a week, you say?"

"For each person, yes."

"I don't see how she does it.  All those cases and dishes, and the
delivery wagon!"

That was the universal comment in Orchardina circles as the months
passed and Union House continued in existence--"I don't see how she does
it!"



THE WAITING-ROOM


The Waiting-room.  With row on row
 Of silent strangers sitting idly there,
 In a large place expressionless and bare,
 Waiting for trains to take them other-where;
And worst for children, who don't even know
  Where they're to go.

The Waiting-room.  Dull pallid Patients here,
 Stale magazines, cheap books, a dreary place;
 Each Silent Stranger, with averted face,
 Waiting for Some One Else to help his case;
and worst for children, wondering in fear
  Who will appear.



WHILE THE KING SLEPT


He was a young king, but an old subject, for he had been born and raised
a subject, and became a king quite late in life, and unexpectedly.

When he was a subject he had admired and envied kings, and had often
said to himself "If I were a king I would do this--and this."  And now
that he was a king he did those things.  But the things he did were
those which came from the envy of subjects, not from the conscience of
kings.

He lived in freedom and ease and pleasure, for he did not know that
kings worked; much less how their work should be done.  And whatever
displeased him he made laws against, that it should not be done; and
whatever pleased him he made laws for, that it should be done--for he
thought kings need but to say the word and their will was accomplished.

Then when the things were not done, when his laws were broken and
disregarded and made naught of, he did nothing; for he had not the pride
of kings, and knew only the outer showing of their power.

And in his court and his country there flourished Sly Thieves and Gay
Wantons and Bold Robbers; also Poisoners and Parasites and Impostors of
every degree.

And when he was very angry he slew one and another; but there were many
of them, springing like toadstools, so that his land became a scorn to
other kings.

He was sensitive and angry when the old kings of the old kingdoms
criticized his new kingdom.  "They are envious of my new kingdom;" he
said; for he thought his kingdom was new, because he was new to it.

Then arose friends and counsellors, many and more, and they gave him
criticism and suggestion, blame, advice, and special instructions.  Some
he denied and some he neglected and some he laughed at and some he would
not hear.

And when the Sly Thieves and Gay Wantons and Bold Robbers and Poisoners
and Parasites and Imposters of every degree waxed fat before his eyes,
and made gorgeous processions with banners before him, he said, "How
prosperous my country is!"

Then his friends and counsellors showed him the prisons--overflowing;
and the hospitals--overflowing; and the asylums--overflowing; and the
schools--with not enough room for the children; and the churches--with
not enough children for the room; and the Crime Mill, into which babies
were poured by the hundreds every day, and out of which criminals were
poured by the hundreds every day; and the Disease Garden, where we raise
all diseases and distribute them gratis.

And he said "I am tired of looking at these things, and tired of hearing
about them.  Why do you forever set before me that which is unpleasant?"

And they said "Because you are the king.  If you choose you can turn the
empty churches into free schools, teaching Heaven Building.  You can
gradually empty the hospitals and asylums and prisons, and destroy the
Crime Mill, and obliterate the Disease Garden."

But the king said "You are dreamers and mad enthusiasts.  These things
are the order of nature and cannot be stopped.  It was always so."  For
the king had been a subject all his life, and was used to submission; he
knew not the work of kings, nor how to do it.

And the false counsellors and the false friends and all the lying
servants who stole from the kitchens and the chambers answered falsely
when he asked them, and said, "These evils are the order of nature.
Your kingdom is very prosperous."

And the Sly Thieves and the Gay Wantons and the Bold Robbers and the
Parasites and Poisoners and Impostors of every degree hung like leeches
on the kingdom and bled it at every pore.

But the king was weary and slept.

Then the friends and counsellors went to the Queen, and called on her to
learn Queen's work, and do it; for the King slept.

"It is King's work," she said, and strove to waken him with tales of
want and sorrow in his kingdom.  But he sent her away, saying "I will
sleep."

"It is Queen's work also," they said to her; and though she had been a
subject with her husband, she was more by nature a Queen.  So she fell
to and learned Queen's work, and did it.

She had no patience with the Gay Wantons and Sly Thieves and Bold
Robbers; and the Poisoners and the Parasites and the Impostors of every
degree were a horror to her.  The false friends she saw through, and the
lying servants she disbelieved.

Since the king would not, she would; and when at last he woke, behold,
the throne was a double one, and the kingdom smiled and rejoiced from
sea to sea.



THE HOUSEWIFE


Here is the House to hold me--cradle of all the race;
Here is my lord and my love, here are my children dear--
Here is the House enclosing, the dear-loved dwelling-place;
Why should I ever weary for aught that I find not here?

Here for the hours of the day and the hours of the night;
Bound with the bands of Duty, rivetted tight;
Duty older than Adam--Duty that saw
Acceptance utter and hopeless in the eyes of the serving squaw.

Food and the serving of food--that is my daylong care;
What and when we shall eat, what and how we shall wear;
Soiling and cleaning of things--that is my task in the main--
Soil them and clean them and soil them--soil them and clean them again.

To work at my trade by the dozen and never a trade to know;
To plan like a Chinese puzzle--fitting and changing so;
To think of a thousand details, each in a thousand ways;
For my own immediate people and a possible love and praise.

My mind is trodden in circles, tiresome, narrow and hard,
Useful, commonplace, private--simply a small back-yard;
And I the Mother of Nations!--Blind their struggle and vain!--
I cover the earth with my children--each with a housewife's brain.



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


XI.

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT.


The human concept of Sin has had its uses no doubt; and our special
invention of a thing called Punishment has also served a purpose.

Social evolution has worked in many ways wastefully, and with
unnecessary pain, but it compares very favorably with natural evolution.

As we grow wiser; as our social consciousness develops, we are beginning
to improve on nature in more ways than one; a part of the same great
process, but of a more highly sublimated sort.

Nature shows a world of varied and changing environment.  Into this
comes Life--flushing and spreading in every direction.  A pretty hard
time Life has of it.  In the first place it is dog eat dog in every
direction; the joy of the hunter and the most unjoyous fear of the
hunted.

But quite outside of this essential danger, the environment waits, grim
and unappeasable, and continuously destroys the innocent myriads who
fail to meet the one requirement of life--Adaptation.  So we must not be
too severe in self-condemnation when we see how foolish, cruel, crazily
wasteful, is our attitude toward crime and punishment.

We become socially conscious largely through pain, and as we begin to
see how much of the pain is wholly of our own causing we are overcome
with shame.  But the right way for society to face its past is the same
as for the individual; to see where it was wrong and stop it--but to
waste no time and no emotion over past misdeeds.

What is our present state as to crime?  It is pretty bad.  Some say it
is worse than it used to be; others that it is better.  At any rate it
is bad enough, and a disgrace to our civilization.  We have murderers by
the thousand and thieves by the million, of all kinds and sizes; we have
what we tenderly call "immorality," from the "errors of youth" to the
sodden grossness of old age; married, single, and mixed.  We have all
the old kinds of wickedness and a lot of new ones, until one marvels at
the purity and power of human nature, that it should carry so much
disease and still grow on to higher things.

Also we have punishment still with us; private and public; applied like
a rabbit's foot, with as little regard to its efficacy.  Does a child
offend?  Punish it!  Does a woman offend?  Punish her!  Does a man
offend?  Punish him!  Does a group offend?  Punish them!

"What for?" some one suddenly asks.

"To make them stop doing it!"

"But they have done it!"

"To make them not do it again, then."

"But they do do it again--and worse."

"To prevent other people's doing it, then."

"But it does not prevent them--the crime keeps on.  What good is your
punishment?"

What indeed!

What is the application of punishment to crime?  Its base, its
prehistoric base, is simple retaliation; and this is by no means wholly
male, let us freely admit.  The instinct of resistance, of opposition,
of retaliation, lies deeper than life itself.  Its underlying law is the
law of physics--action and reaction are equal.  Life's expression of
this law is perfectly natural, but not always profitable.  Hit your hand
on a stone wall, and the stone wall hits your hand.  Very good; you
learn that stone walls are hard, and govern yourself accordingly.

Conscious young humanity observed and philosophized, congratulating
itself on its discernment.  "A man hits me--I hit the man a little
harder--then he won't do it again."  Unfortunately he did do it again--a
little harder still.  The effort to hit harder carried on the action and
reaction till society, hitting hardest of all, set up a system of legal
punishment, of unlimited severity.  It imprisoned, it mutilated, it
tortured, it killed; it destroyed whole families, and razed contumelious
cities to the ground.

Therefore all crime ceased, of course?  No?  But crime was mitigated,
surely!  Perhaps.  This we have proven at last; that crime does not
decrease in proportion to the severest punishment.  Little by little we
have ceased to raze the cities, to wipe out the families, to cut off the
ears, to torture; and our imprisonment is changing from slow death and
insanity to a form of attempted improvement.

But punishment as a principle remains in good standing, and is still the
main reliance where it does the most harm--in the rearing of children.
"Spare the rod and spoil the child" remains in belief, unmodified by the
millions of children spoiled by the unspared rod.

The breeders of racehorses have learned better, but not the breeders of
children.  Our trouble is simply the lack of intelligence.  We face the
babyish error and the hideous crime in exactly the same attitude.

"This person has done something offensive."

Yes?--and one waits eagerly for the first question of the rational
mind--but does not hear it.  One only hears "Punish him!"

What is the first question of the rational mind?

"Why?"

Human beings are not first causes.  They do not evolve conduct out of
nothing.  The child does this, the man does that, _because_ of
something; because of many things.  If we do not like the way people
behave, and wish them to behave better, we should, if we are rational
beings, study the conditions that produce the conduct.

The connection between our archaic system of punishment and our
androcentric culture is two-fold.  The impulse of resistance, while, as
we have seen, of the deepest natural origin, is expressed more strongly
in the male than in the female.  The tendency to hit back and hit harder
has been fostered in him by sex-combat till it has become of great
intensity.  The habit of authority too, as old as our history; and the
cumulative weight of all the religions and systems of law and
government, have furthermore built up and intensified the spirit of
retaliation and vengeance.

They have even deified this concept, in ancient religions, crediting to
God the evil passions of men.  As the small boy recited; "Vengeance.  A
mean desire to get even with your enemies: 'Vengeance is mine saith the
Lord'--'I will repay.'"

The Christian religion teaches better things; better than its expositors
and upholders have ever understood--much less practised.

The teaching of "Love your enemies, do good unto them that hate you, and
serve them that despitefully use you and persecute you," has too often
resulted, when practised at all, in a sentimental negation; a
pathetically useless attitude of non-resistance.  You might as well base
a religion on a feather pillow!

The advice given was active; direct; concrete.  "_Love!_"  Love is not
non-resistance.  "Do good!"  Doing good is not non-resistance.  "Serve!"
 Service is not non-resistance.

Again we have an overwhelming proof of the far-reaching effects of our
androcentric culture.  Consider it once more.  Here is one by nature
combative and desirous, and not by nature intended to monopolize the
management of his species.  He assumes to be not only the leader, but
the whole thing--to be humanity itself, and to see in woman as Grant
Allen so clearly put it "Not only not the race; she is not even half the
race, but a subspecies, told off for purposes of reproduction merely."

Under this monstrous assumption, his sex-attributes wholly identified
with his human attributes, and overshadowing them, he has imprinted on
every human institution the tastes and tendencies of the male.  As a
male he fought, as a male human being he fought more, and deified
fighting; and in a culture based on desire and combat, loud with
strident self-expression, there could be but slow acceptance of the more
human methods urged by Christianity.  "It is a religion for slaves and
women!" said the warrior of old.  (Slaves and women were largely the
same thing.)  "It is a religion for slaves and women" says the advocate
of the Superman.

Well?  Who did the work of all the ancient world?  Who raised the food
and garnered it and cooked it and served it?  Who built the houses, the
temples, the acqueducts, the city wall?  Who made the furniture, the
tools, the weapons, the utensils, the ornaments--made them strong and
beautiful and useful?  Who kept the human race going, somehow, in spite
of the constant hideous waste of war, and slowly built up the real
industrial civilization behind that gory show?--Why just the slaves and
the women.

A religion which had attractions for the real human type is not
therefore to be utterly despised by the male.

In modern history we may watch with increasing ease the slow, sure
progress of our growing humanness beneath the weakening shell of an
all-male dominance.  And in this field of what begins in the nurse as
"discipline," and ends on the scaffold as "punishment," we can clearly
see that blessed change.

What is the natural, the human attribute?  What does this "Love," and
"Do good," and "Serve" mean?  In the blundering old church, still
androcentric, there was a great to-do to carry out this doctrine, in
elaborate symbolism.  A set of beggars and cripples, gathered for the
occasion, was exhibited, and kings and cardinals went solemnly through
the motions of serving them.  As the English schoolboy phrased it,
"Thomas Becket washed the feet of leopards."

Service and love and doing good must always remain side issues in a male
world.  Service and love and doing good are the spirit of motherhood,
and the essense of human life.

Human life is service, and is not combat.  There you have the nature of
the change now upon us.

What has the male mind made of Christianity?

Desire--to save one's own soul.  Combat--with the Devil.
Self-expression--the whole gorgeous outpouring of pageant and display,
from the jewels of the high priest's breastplate to the choir of
mutilated men to praise a male Deity no woman may so serve.

What kind of mind can imagine a kind of god who would like a eunuch
better than a woman?

For woman they made at last a place--the usual place--of renunciation,
sacrifice and service, the Sisters of Mercy and their kind; and in that
loving service the woman soul has been content, not yearning for
cardinal's cape or bishop's mitre.

All this is changing--changing fast.  Everywhere the churches are
broadening out into more service, and the service broadening out beyond
a little group of widows and fatherless, of sick and in prison, to
embrace its true field--all human life.  In this new attitude, how shall
we face the problems of crime?

Thus: "It is painfully apparent that a certain percentage of our people
do not function properly.  They perform antisocial acts.  Why?  What is
the matter with them?"

Then the heart and mind of society is applied to the question, and
certain results are soon reached; others slowly worked toward.

First result.  Some persons are so morally diseased that they must have
hospital treatment.  The world's last prison will be simply a hospital
for moral incurables.  They must by no means reproduce their kind,--that
can be attended to at once.  Some are morally diseased, but may be
cured, and the best powers of society will be used to cure them.  Some
are only morally diseased because of the conditions in which they are
born and reared, and here society can save millions at once.

An intelligent society will no more neglect its children than an
intelligent mother will neglect her children; and will see as clearly
that ill-fed, ill-dressed, ill-taught and vilely associated little ones
must grow up gravely injured.

As a matter of fact we make our crop of criminals, just as we make our
idiots, blind, crippled, and generally defective.  Everyone is a baby
first, and a baby is not a criminal, unless we make it so.  It never
would be,--in right conditions.  Sometimes a pervert is born, as
sometimes a two-headed calf is born, but they are not common.

The older, simpler forms of crime we may prevent with case and despatch,
but how of the new ones?--big, terrible, far-reaching, wide-spread
crimes, for which we have as yet no names; and before which our old
system of anti-personal punishment falls helpless?  What of the crimes
of poisoning a community with bad food; of defiling the water; of
blackening the air; of stealing whole forests?  What of the crimes of
working little children; of building and renting tenements that produce
crime and physical disease as well?  What of the crime of living on the
wages of fallen women--of hiring men to ruin innocent young girls; of
holding them enslaved and selling them for profit?  (These things are
only "misdemeanors" in a man-made world!)

And what about a crime like this; to use the public press to lie to the
public for private ends?  No name yet for this crime; much less a
penalty.

And this: To bring worse than leprosy to an innocent clean wife who
loves and trusts you?

Or this: To knowingly plant poison in an unborn child?

No names, for these; no "penalties"; no conceivable penalty that could
touch them.

The whole punishment system falls to the ground before the huge mass of
evil that confronts us.  If we saw a procession of air ships flying over
a city and dropping bombs, should we rush madly off after each one
crying, "Catch him!  Punish him!" or should we try to stop the
procession?

The time is coming when the very word "crime" will be disused, except in
poems and orations; and "punishment," the word and deed, be obliterated.
 We are beginning to learn a little of the nature of humanity its
goodness, its beauty, its lovingness; and to see that even its stupidity
is only due to our foolish old methods of education.

It is not new power, new light, new hope that we need, but _to
understand what ails us._

We know enough now, we care enough now, we are strong enough now, to
make the whole world a thousand fold better in a generation; but we are
shackled, chained, blinded, by old false notions.  The ideas of the
past, the sentiments of the past, the attitude and prejudices of the
past, are in our way; and among them none more universally mischievous
than this great body of ideas and sentiments, prejudices and habits,
which make up the offensive network of the androcentric culture.



THE BEAUTY WOMEN HAVE LOST


We know how arbitrary, how changeable, how helplessly associative, is
the "beauty sense."  That which gives us a peculiar feeling of deep
pleasure, received through various senses, we call "beautiful," whether
it be color of form, sound, scent, or touch; but no sensation is more
erratic.

Among savages absolute mutilation is considered beautiful; among
partially civilized peoples, like ourselves, restriction and distortion
in our bodies and those of domestic animals are still considered
beautiful; and in matters of fashion, or of food, we all know the
helpless proverb--"Every one to his taste."

In this general variability of taste we have in great measure failed to
grasp certain laws of beauty which obtain whether appreciated or not.
Abstract beauty is but a concept, a thought form for purposes of
discussion.  The beauty perceived pertains to something, and in that
something lie its definitions and limitations.  This we practically
recognize in certain marked and simple forms.  The points which we
admire in a horse are visibly not the same as those admired in a fish or
bird; the beauty of a given animal must be of its own kind.

So vivid and sharp is this law of association, that precisely the same
bit of form and color which we would call beautiful while we supposed it
to be an irridescent shell, would strike us with disgust if we suddenly
perceived the little object to be a piece of very ancient meat.  Beauty
must _belong_--varying with its subject.

The beauty of women has suffered from too narrow a field of
appreciation.  It has been measured solely from a masculine viewpoint,
primarily as a characteristic of sex, secondarily as pertaining to a
subject creature; and associatively, to every mad extreme of fancy in
nature's variant, the male.

Among other creatures the beauty of the female is mainly that of race.
The lioness is a more appreciable working type of feline power than the
lion, whose sex-beauty, the mane, is somewhat similar to that of a
bison, or a great seal.

In our case, where the dependent female adds to her neutral race-beauty
the shifting attributes of sex-attraction, she has gained to a high
degree in the field man most admires, and lost in the normal beauty of
humanity.

Relative size and strength are elements of beauty in an animal; neither
dwarf nor giant is beautiful; and we for many years have dwarfed our
women, under the direct effect of restraining conditions and the
selective action of the master, whose pride would brook no equal.

Of late years, in some classes and countries, this is changing; so
frequently that the tall woman no longer excites remark or disapproval.

There is no reason whatever, in a civilized condition, why the male and
female should differ markedly in size, and the difference is
disappearing as above noted, as is also the extreme weakness so long
held desirable in women.

But in the great majority of cases our women are still content to be
what they consider beautiful as _women_, and never to consider human
beauty at all.

The disproportionate part played by costume and decoration in the
sex-governed activities of the dependent woman, has given a peculiar
cant to her beauty-sense.  If she be well dressed,--or so considered,
and richly ornamented, her sense of beauty is satisfied, quite
regardless of shape, size and color in herself.  This is perhaps a
fortunate provision to meet our special case, where the male must be
attracted as a means of livelihood, and under the average limitations of
personal charms.  But it is a pity, in the interest of a nobler race,
that our preoccupation with cloths should so blind us to the real beauty
of the human body.

I once knew a girl whose vanity led her to decline gymnasium work, on
the ground that it would make her hands large.  The same vanity would
have urged her to it if she had even known of the beauty of a well
proportioned, vigorous, active body.  She had read and heard of small
soft hands as a feminine attraction, but never of a smooth, strong neck,
a well set head, a firm, pliant, muscular trunk, and limbs that cannot
be beautiful unless they are strong.

"Slender," "plump," "rounded," "graceful,"--these words suggest beauty
in a woman, but "strong" does not.  Yet weakness,--in a healthy
adult,--is incompatible with true beauty--race beauty--the beauty women
have lost.

In their enforced restriction they have lost the beauty of expression
that comes of a rich wide life, fully felt, fully expressed.  Look at
the puffy negation of a row of women's faces in a street car.  Plump
women, "pretty" women perhaps, well dressed, "stylish," not ill
tempered,--and not anything else!  Their range of experience is
absolutely domestic; their interests and ambitions are either domestic
or what they fondly call "social;" they do not feel, know, or act in the
full sense of human life, and their faces show it.  They are rated
first, last, and all the time as mothers: mothers future, mothers
present, mothers past; and much is made of "the maternal expression" in
women's beauty.  It belongs there, surely.  It is a true large part of
it; beauty in a woman could not be true which was inimical to maternity;
but, but it is not the whole of life.

A man's face may be beautiful with a paternal expression, but if that is
all the expression he has, he lacks much.

There is a lack of dignity in our types of female loveliness.  There is
the appealing type, the coquettish, the provocative, the mysterious; but
seldom do we see the calm pride based on nature's mightiest power which
should distinguish womanhood.

The woman of the remote past, the far distant matriarchal age, had the
beauty of freedom and the beauty of power; though their hands were
large, doubtless, and assuredly strong.  In much later ages, while
losing this, we still kept somewhat of the free beauty of untramelled
bodies; but that too has gone under our binding weight of clothes.  No
free grace is possible under a huge, slouching, heavy hat, or to a body
poised on sharp-toed shoes with towering heels.

If we knew beauty--human beauty; if we were familiar from childhood with
the real proportions of the body; if we were familiar with pictures of
the human figure, and then shown that same figure, the woman's, with her
feet artificially mis-shapen and out of poise, her waist distorted, her
head obscured, her every action hampered and confined,--we should see
the ugliness of these things, as we do not now.

The human woman, now so rapidly developing, will regain the wholesome
natural beauty that belongs to her as a human being; will hold, of
course, the all-powerful attraction of her womanhood; but will leave to
the male of her species,--to whom it properly belongs, the effort of
conscious display.



COMMENT AND REVIEW


How many of you have read the life story of Alexander Irvine--"From the
Bottom Up"?*

It is one of the most vivid, interesting, readable of books.  It talks,
it laughs, it lives,--and it reveals.  It is not a "confession;" not the
overflow of a self-conscious soul like Marie Barklirtseff's outpourings;
it is a story; an account of what happened to the man, and how he grew.

A hungry, ragged, barefoot, ignorant little Irish boy; handicapped in
all ways but three; unusually fortunate in these.  He had a good body, a
good mind, a good heart.  Up and up and up he pushes; helped now by the
body, now by the soul, now by the intellect, till we find him, still in
strong middle life, educated, experienced, traveled, enobled by loving
and serving, awake to our larger social needs, and working with all his
splendid power to help humanity.

Never was there a man more alive; learning Greek roots while delivering
milk; converting miners, practicing a score of trades, and boxing like a
professional.

The book has a double value; in the hope and courage which must rise
from contact with such a personality and its rich experience, and in the
strong light it throws upon "how the other half live."  As Rose Pastor
Stokes so quaintly put it, "Half the world does not know how.  The other
half lives."

In this book one-half may learn much of the unnecessary misery of "the
submerged;" and the other half may begin to learn how to live.

* _From The Bottom Up._  The life story of Alexander Irvine.  Doubleday
Page & Co.  New York, 1910.

*

The English Suffrage papers are an inspiration--and a reproach.

_"Votes for Women"_--the London organ of the militant suffragist, is so
solid and assured; so richly upheld; so evidently the strong voice of a
strong party.

_"The Common Cause,"_ published in Manchester, is another, not militant,
giving the same sense of a settled position and masterly leadership.

The women of England are awake to their needs, and valiantly support
their defenders; but American women, as a rule, are still asleep as to
the responsibilities of citizenship.  Here suffrage papers still give
much space to argument and appeal: there, they are mostly filled with
the record of work planned and done; they are party organs, secure and
effective.

One of our best is _"The Progressive Woman"_ of Girard, Kansas.

It is edited by a progressive woman--Josephine Conger-Kaneko.

This is a Socialist as well as Suffragist paper, and more than that; it
stands for the whole front rank of the woman's movement.

In the August number we read of Kate O'Hare's campaign for congress in
Kansas; of "The Socialist Woman's Movement in Russia;" of "The White
Slave Traffic"--quoting from Elizabeth Goodnow's impressive book of
stories, "The Soul Market;" of "The Work of Madam Curie;" of "The
Marriage Contract;" of "The Woman's Suffrage Movement and Political
Parties;" with much other valuable matter.

*

The "Arena Club" of New Orleans is doing good work.  It has prepared a
bill against the "white slave traffic" in Louisiana, which was submitted
to the legislature by Hon. J. D. Wall, Representative for East
Feliciana, La.  This bill is now a law, and the next step is
enforcement.  This calls for activity on the part of the "City Mothers."

*

_"The Union Labor Advocate"_ is one of our exchanges, and a good one.
It is the organ of the National Woman's Trade Union League.  One of the
most practical and useful of all woman's organizations.

As women work for the world they become more human; becoming human, they
organize; and in organization grow in further humanness.  This was well
shown in the shirt-waist strike of last winter in New York, the new
sense of common interest bringing out college women, society women, all
kinds of women, to help the workingwomen in their struggle for decent
conditions.

Professor Francis Squire Potter formerly of Michigan University, is now
general lecturer for the League: a good field for her unusual powers.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


The _Forerunner's_ question in this department of the June issue,
reached a good many, it would seem.  Here is another response:

"When people must wake up too early every morning, half dead, or at
least half asleep, to begin the ceaseless, monotonous daily grind, keep
at it all day until half dead or at least half asleep until too late at
night, for the mere privilege of existence, they are too tired to wake
up and LIVE--the rest of the night.

When people are entombed in conventions, customs, _Beliefs_! from which
they may only be freed by digging, filing, gnawing, scraping, _wearing_,
themselves as well as their way out, few have the strength and spirit to
emerge and LIVE--only occassionally one comes out _alive_."

"Such _purely_ personal questions as 'how may I, half (or truly a minute
fraction of that) educated, half alive by reason of ill-health, wholly
unaccustomed to push my way in the world, grub out an existence and keep
out of the poor-house, and keep out of the way of others who are doing
things;' seem rather too small, and altogether too numerous."

A.  These "purely personal" questions are the most universal, and open
to the most universal answers.

To "Wake up and Live--World size" means this: Your personality is only
the smallest part of your consciousness.  A child with a hurt finger
howls inconsolably; a conquering king with a hurt finger doesn't know
it.

"You" are weak and ill; "you" are half educated: "you" don't know how to
work--Just put "we" for "you."

"We," thousands and millions of us, are at present suffering from
various wrong conditions.  Taken separately, personally, these wrong
conditions overwhelm us; each sits down in his or her own little circle
of pain, and suffers.

Taken _collectively_--faced, understood, met, overcome--those wrong
conditions can be removed and forgotten.

The writer of this interesting letter (thanks for its kind
appreciation!) sees the trouble of living clearly enough, but does not
see the joy of living.

In the first place, accept your own pain and loss, whatever it may be,
as merely a part of the general pain and loss.  Your own, singly, you
may be unable to help; but "ours" you can help.  Never mind what ails
"you"--you can stand it--other people do?  The human soul is a stronger
thing than you think--_you don't use enough of it._  Unless the mind is
affected, so that one is irresponsible, it is always open to a Human
Being to change the attitude of the mind, and enlarge its area of
consciousness.

Human Life is a huge Immortal Thing.

It has been on earth for many thousand years.

It is bigger, stronger, better, than it ever was.

It is on the verge of a new consciousness, a new power, a new joy, which
will make our poor past seem like a lovingly forgotten babyhood; and our
future a progressive Heaven--growing under our hands as we make it.

And our present! _This_ is our present!  Get into the game!  You are
human life.  Human life is You.

It's a big thing.  It's worth while to be alive--if you are human!

To get a lively sense of historic movement read "_The Martyrdom of Man_"
by Winwood Reade.  To get it of life today, read what you like of the
rising flood of sociologic and humanitarian books and magazines of
today.

When you are socially conscious--a live Human Being--your "personal
problems" will take on different proportions.  There is no personal
trouble so great as the trouble of the world--which we have to face and
conquer.

There is no personal joy so great as the joy of the world--which is ours
to feel, to make, to steadily enlarge.

Change your own condition if you can, but if you cannot, spread out your
life--your Human Life, till your burden is no bigger than a biscuit--to
such huge consciousness.

*

"When my children were little and at home it was easy to guide and
direct, but now they are in the big man-made world without judgment
enough to know that the _world_ standards are wrong, and the _home_
standards of helpfulness and co-operation right.

I believe we are going ahead, and I'm willing enough to help build the
road for others to pass over, but must my children hunger and thirst in
the wilderness?"

A.  This is a wide-spread problem.  The trouble lies in our confounding
personal and social relations.  Our children are in direct connection
with us physically and psychically--but not, of necessity, socially.  A
musician does not necessarily have musical children; a reformer does not
necessarily have reforming children.  There is no reason why our
children should be expected to see things as we do.  They may never see
the way out of the wilderness as we see it.

They are to love and serve, to shelter, guard, teach--and set free!

We must do our work--and they must do theirs.

*

Here is a question from Detroit.

"I entirely agree with you in believing that children should be governed
by reason, and that coercion is a mistake; but how would you suggest
dealing with a child before it can possibly understand reason?"

The writer then speaks of the selfishness and rudeness of undisciplined
children, and goes on:

"I have always thought that the training of a child should begin from a
very early age, long before they can listen to reason at all."

She is quite right.  Child culture should begin as soon as the child
begins.  The difficulty of the average parent is that he or she assumes
"reason" to mean reasoning--oral argument.

In the reaction from our old violent discipline, they use no discipline;
and for repression substitute gross indulgence.

When a child learns that fire burns by a mild, safe burning, he learns
_reasonably;_ the fire _reacts_--which is not a punishment, but a
consequence.  He should learn the rights of others as early as his own,
and by similar processes.  Real child culture calls for far more care
and training than the old rule of thumb, but it is of a different kind.

*

"I am very much interested in your 'Androcentric Culture.'  Is it your
idea that the female organism was the stronger before consciousness
existed only, or after that period in prehistoric times?"

For the scientific facts underlying the above work, all readers are
referred to Chapter XIV. of "_Pure Sociology,_" by Lester F. Ward.  It
is--or should be--in every Public Library, and should be read by every
woman in the world--and by the men also.



THE EDITOR'S PROBLEM


How to enlarge the subscription list!

To pay its running expenses this little magazine must have about three
thousand subscribers.  It now has between eleven and twelve hundred.

We want, to make good measure, two thousand more.  This is a bare
minimum, providing no salary to the editor.

If enough people care for the magazine to support it to that extent, the
editor will do her work for nothing--and be glad of the chance!  If
enough people care for it to support her--she will be gladder.

Do you like the magazine, its spirit and purpose?  Do you find genuine
interest and amusement in the novel--the short story?  Do the articles
appeal to you?  Do the sermons rouse thought and stir to action?  Are
the problems treated such as you care to study?  Does the poetry have
bones to it as well as feathers?  Does it give you your dollar's worth
in the year?  And do you want another dollar's worth?

Most of the people who take it like it very much.  We are going to
print, a few at a time, some of the pleasant praises our readers send.
They are so cordial that we are moved to ask all those who do enjoy this
little monthly service of sermon and story, fun and fiction, poetry and
prose:

First, To renew their subscriptions.

Second, Each to get one new subscriber.  (Maybe more!)

Third, To make Christmas present of subscriptions, or of bound volumes
of the first year.



FROM LETTERS OF SUBSCRIBERS


"I am delighted to hear of the Forerunner.  No one in the United States
is so competent as you to write the whole of a magazine, little or big,
from the beginning to end.  You have the gift of expression, if anyone
has, and, what is still more important, you have something to express."

*

"I enclose in this $1.00 for one year of the 'Gilmanian' and I think it
a bargain to get so much of you at the price."

*

"Indeed I am more than delighted to have an opportunity to communicate
regularly with you through The Forerunner, and I shall be very proud to
be numbered among the charter subscribers."

*

"Herewith I send $1.00 for my subscription, with all manner of good
wishes for your magazine.  Our family has enjoyed every line."

*

"I laid my copy on her dish, and she was so pleased with it that she
came to me with her dollar shortly afterwards."

*

"I enclose $1.00 for a year's subscription.  I found The Forerunner most
interesting, and shall look forward to it every month."

*

"The magazine is 'bully.'  It even exceeds all my expectations, high as
these were.  There are so many good points about the Forerunner that I
hope to come down soon with my husband to congratulate you in person."

*

"I have received the first number of your magazine, and am more than
pleased with it.  The first article was splendid--and ought to be read
before every circle of mothers belonging to the Mothers Congress."

*

Enclosed find two subscriptions to The Forerunner.  I am making
Christmas gifts to my friends of your interesting and stimulating
periodical."

*

"I think The Forerunner foreruns a lot of good things.  It is strong,
interesting, fearless, yet kindly, genial--I like it."

*

"The magazine is unique and distinctly 'Gilmanesque,' which is a
sufficient recommendation to me."

*

"I am constantly surprised at your originality and versatility, and
knowledge of human nature."

*

"Of course I have _got to have_ The Forerunner!  And I shall read every
word of every issue.  So will everybody else.  But what makes you so
lazy?  _Why don't you set the type?"_

*

"Your magazine has more real common sense to the square inch than any I
have ever seen.  I enclose subscription for one year, beginning with the
first number."

*

"I think a very great deal of this publication and shall try to have a
complete file of it on hand to use for reference.  I know of nothing
better in the whole field of the 'Woman Question.'"

*

"I am just 'stuck' on that article 'Why we honestly fear Socialism,' in
December Forerunner, and think it one of the best things to circulate
for propaganda work that I have yet seen."

*

"Will you please send me a year's subscription to The Forerunner, dating
from the first number.  They are too good for me to miss any."

*

"I feel The Forerunner will fill a need.  In my case it gratifies an
absorbing desire.  I knew ere it came out that women would get something
for which they had waited, Lo! these many years."

*

"Your magazines are splendid and I must be among your regular readers."

*

"The first number of The Forerunner has reached us and we wish to
express our appreciation of its excellence and the wish for its long
life.  Please find enclosed $1.00, our subscription for the current
year."

*

"Mrs. ----- and I are delighted with The Forerunner and send this dollar
to keep it running our way.  Please send samples to the addresses on the
attached list.  They should all take the paper, and I shall be glad to
tell them so the first chance I have."

*

"The ----- Club is using your Androcentric Culture articles as the study
one evening each month as they appear.  If you can't make something out
of men and women, then indeed only a miracle can."

"I _must_ have _your_ magazine all to myself!--and trust to the Lord to
provide the material bread!"

*

"B---- and I have just returned from a delightful week end with Mrs.
-----.  I told her about The Forerunner--and she naturally feels that
life is worthless until she has seen it."

*

"The verses are all brilliant; I don't know how you can think of so many
gay and serious things all at the same time.  It is as if you took your
conjuror's hat out and produced eggs, cannon-balls, perfume flowers, and
a whole live, quivering beef at the same stroke.  You are a sure
conjuror."

*

"Your scintellating first number has arrived.  I have been waiting for
an hour of leisure in which to tell you how much we have all enjoyed
it."

*

"Oh!  Charlotte Perkins Gilman!  You have--and do--and will--'Contribute
to the great stream of civilization'--by courageously obeying the
injunction, and calling aloud to your sisters to 'Let your light
shine.'"

*

"If you do no other good and great thing you will certainly work one
tremendous miracle; you will rouse every lazy brain that gets a glimpse
into these pages with such a dynamic force that a real desire may be
kindled to Think--Think--Think--for itself."

*

"I am delighted with the magazine.  It is meaty, and stimulating."

*

"The valuable readable material in it justifies the absence of any text
on the part of the new minister.  It will create free souls and that is
the great work, for while a dead body is not pleasant to look upon, a
dead soul is a thousand fold worse."

*

"I enclose one year's subscription to it for my sister, to whom I am
giving it as one of her Christmas presents.  And I know she will enjoy
The Forerunner as much as I do."

*

"The magazines are very interesting and I wish you much success.  I am
particularly interested in the suffrage arguments."

*

"I am charmed--thrilled with your strong trenchment work.  You are one
of the few who clearly see and forcibly express the fundamental
difference between the old androcentric world and the new dawning age in
which women and men co-operate in _world building._"

*

"I have been wanting and intending to congratulate you on your effort
and result,--and to wish you everlasting success.  It is unlike any of
the present-day magazines in many ways.

Allow me to say it is most interesting, and Mr. H---- joins me in
wishing for this publication a most brilliant future."

*

"Enclosed find $1.00, for which please send The Forerunner, your fine
crisp magazine."

*

"I see your _think marks_ on many an article written by both men and
women, and I know they have read your books."

*

"I want ten copies of the January Forerunner.  I think it is
particularly good and the article on suffrage--or 'The Humanness of
Women,' one of the very best things I ever read on the subject."

*

"The Forerunner is a great success!  I like it all, and it is not
disappointing in any respect in spite of the fact that I have been
getting more impatient to see it each month since I subscribed for it."

*

"Please send The Forerunner to me at ----- -----.  It does good
digging--loosens up the soil nicely."

*

"I have enjoyed The Forerunner very much.  I feel that I am getting more
than my money's worth; so to help the cause along I am sending you
herewith a few names of progressive friends, who will, I think, become
subscribers, and help in turn."



[Advertisement]


SOME OF OUR EXCHANGES


The Common Cause

WHAT IS IT?

There are in England something like twenty-five National Societies for
promoting the enfranchisement of women.  The oldest of these is the
National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, which was started in 1861
and whose President is Mrs. Fawcett, LL.D.  The National Union has over
two hundred branches in Great Britain, and a total membership of about
20,000.  It is the only British Woman's Suffrage Society affiliated to
the International Woman Suffrage Alliance.

The Common Cause
Is the Organ of the National Union.

It contains leaders and articles on political, social, legal and
industrial matters affecting women, and is a complete record or the work
done by the National Union for the enfranchisement of women in England.

The Common Cause
Is the Paper of Thinking Women.

Subscriptions should be sent to

64 DEANSCATE ARCADE,
MANCHESTER, ENGLAND

3 months, post free --- 1 shilling 9 pence
6 months, post free --- 3 shillings 3 pence
12 months, post free --- 6 shillings 6 pence

Every Thursday, 1 Penny


The Progressive Woman

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

Edited and Published by
JOSEPHINE CONGER-KANEKO
at Girard, Kansas, U.S.A.

Price, 50 cents a year.

The Progressive Woman stands for a better race through the political and
economic freedom of womankind.  Its contributors are among the cleverest
of the more advanced thinkers, and its readers endeavor to keep up with
its writers.

This is the great charm about The Progressive Woman--it does not stand
still: it leads.

Send to-day for sample copy.


Woman's Era

The New Magazine of Inspiration for the American Woman.

A World-wide Review
With Original Articles on

ECONOMICS,
ETHICS,
CIVICS,
ARTS AND CRAFTS,
MUSIC,
LITERATURE,
CLUB WORK,
Etc.

SPECIAL ARTS AND CRAFTS NUMBER FOR SEPTEMBER.

Sample copy . . . 10 cents
6 months . . . 75 cents
12 months . . . $1.50

(Worth a good deal more)

Address,

WOMAN'S ERA
New Orleans, La.


Up the Divide

A MONTHLY PERIODICAL

Asking:
Why not see Social and Religious Things from Higher Altitudes?

EDITED BY

DUREN J. H. WARD, A.M. (Harvard), Ph.D. (Leipsig) and WM. THURSTON
BROWN, A.B. (Yale).

IT IS A KIND BY ITSELF
UNIQUE IN EVERY WAY
A BRAND NEW THING IN MAGAZINES

SECOND YEAR

IS CALLED:

"Breezy, vigorous."
"Brusher away of cobwebs."
"Full of burning words."
"Blazes the trail."
"Crisp and bold thoughts."
"An eye-opener."
"The new spirit and new conscience shine on each page."
"Place not filled by any other."
"Speaks not as the Scribes and Pharisees."
"Charged with the gunpowder of progress."

$1.00 a year.  10 cents a copy.
With _The Forerunner,_ $1.80.

2442 Glenarm Pl., Denver, Colorado.


The Star

San Francisco, California.

JAMES H. BARRY, Editor.

A WIDE-AWAKE, UP-TO-DATE PAPER
FEARLESS, FRANK AND FREE

The First in the Land to Advocate Direct Legislation.  Stands for Human
Rights, including Votes for Women.  Considers all Questions of Public
Moment, such as Public Ownership, the Single Tax, the Tariff, etc.
Contains good Miscellaneous Matter.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY

Per year . . . $1.50
Six months . . . 75 cents

in advance

THE STAR

1122-1124 Mission Street, San Francisco, Cal.


READ

The Forecast

PHILADELPHIA'S ONLY MAGAZINE

Is right there every time on every topic uppermost in the minds of the
public.

THE SEPTEMBER NUMBER

contains many special features that are readable, timely, lively.

ELLA WHEELER WILCOX tells of "The Influences Which Shaped My Career."

ANTOINETTE E. GAZZAM contributes an original article on "Clothes" which
is most beautifully illustrated and full of valuable suggestions and
pleasing surprises.

THOMAS MARTINDALE, the renowned sportsman and author of "Sport Royal,"
and other fascinating sporting tales, tells of "The Lure of Hunting."
Mr. Martindale never wrote more entertainingly than in this article.

EDWENA LAWRENCE reveals inside information in an article, especially
pleasing to theatre-goers, on "The Educational Value of a Theatrical
Stock Company," an article that will be appreciated by both the actor
and auditor.

SPLENDID FICTION, intimate sketches of the personalities of the day,
able book reviews, able articles on political, social, civic and
national phases of the leading questions of the day, and an entertaining
department of Fun, Fact and Fiction, as well as

CHARLES HOUSTON GOUDISS'S splendid eugenism in an article treating of
the most important phase of the prevention of child degradation, combine
in making The Forecast the most attractive ten cent magazine published.

THE FORECAST,

423 Lafayette Building, Philadelphia.



[Advertisement]


Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman


Sent postpaid by

THE CHARLTON COMPANY
67 WALL STREET, NEW YORK


"Women and Economics"  $1.50

Since John Stuart Mill's essay there has been no book dealing with the
whole position of women to approach it in originality of conception and
brilliancy of exposition.--_London Chronicle._

A remarkable book.  A work on economics that has not a dull page--the
work of a woman about women that has not a flippant word.--_Boston
Transcript._

Will be widely read and discussed as the cleverest, fairest, most
forcible presentation of the view of the rapidly increasing group who
look with favor on the extension of industrial employment to
women.--_Political Science Quarterly._


"Concerning Children"  $1.25

WANTED:--A philanthropist, to give a copy to every English-speaking
parent.--_The Times,_ New York.

Should be read by every mother in the land.--_The Press,_ New York.

Wholesomely disturbing book that deserves to be read for its own
sake.--_Chicago Dial._


"In This Our World" (Poems)  $1.25

There is a joyous superabundance of life, of strength, of health, in
Mrs. Gilman's verse, which seems born of the glorious sunshine and rich
gardens of California.--_Washington Times._

The poet of women and for women, a new and prophetic voice in the world.
 Montaigne would have rejoiced in her.--_Mexican Herald._


"The Yellow Wall Paper"  $0.50

Worthy of a place beside some of the weird masterpieces of Hawthorne and
Poe.--_Literature._

As a short story it stands among the most powerful produced in
America.--_Chicago News._


"The Home"  $1.00

Indeed, Mrs. Gilman has not intended her book so much as a treatise for
scholars as a surgical operation on the popular mind.--_The Critic,_ New
York.

It is safe to say that no more stimulating arraignment has ever before
taken shape and that the argument of the book is noble, and, on the
whole, convincing.--_Congregationalist,_ Boston.


"Human Work"  $1.00

Charlotte Perkins Stetson Gilman has been writing a new book, entitled
"Human Work."  It is the best thing that Mrs. Gilman has done, and it is
meant to focus all of her previous work, so to speak.--_Tribune,_
Chicago.

In her latest volume, "Human Work," Charlotte Perkins Gilman places
herself among the foremost students and elucidators of the problem of
social economics.--"San Francisco Star._

It is impossible to overestimate the value of the insistence on the
social aspect of human affairs as Mrs. Gilman has outlined it.--_Public
Opinion._


IN PREPARATION:


"What Diantha Did" (A Novel)  $1.00

"The Man Made World": or, "Our Androcentric Culture"  $1.00


Orders taken for Bound Vols. THE FORERUNNER, $1.25



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK


AS TO PURPOSE:


_What is The Forerunner?_  It is a monthly magazine, publishing stories
short and serial, article and essay; drama, verse, satire and sermon;
dialogue, fable and fantasy, comment and review.  It is written entirely
by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

_What is it For?_  It is to stimulate thought: to arouse hope, courage
and impatience; to offer practical suggestions and solutions, to voice
the strong assurance of better living, here, now, in our own hands to
make.

_What is it about?_  It is about people, principles, and the questions
of every-day life; the personal and public problems of to-day.  It gives
a clear, consistent view of human life and how to live it.

_Is it a Woman's magazine?_  It will treat all three phases of our
existence--male, female and human.  It will discuss Man, in his true
place in life; Woman, the Unknown Power; the  Child, the most important
citizen.

_Is it a Socialist Magazine?_  It is a magazine for humanity, and
humanity is social.  It holds that Socialism, the economic theory, is
part of our gradual Socialization, and that the duty of conscious
humanity is to promote Socialization.

_Why is it published?_  It is published to express ideas which need a
special medium; and in the belief that there are enough persons
interested in those ideas to justify the undertaking.


AS TO ADVERTISING:


We have long heard that "A pleased customer is the best advertiser."
The Forerunner offers to its advertisers and readers the benefit of this
authority.  In its advertising department, under the above heading, will
be described articles personally known and used.  So far as individual
experience and approval carry weight, and clear truthful description
command attention, the advertising pages of The Forerunner will be
useful to both dealer and buyer.  If advertisers prefer to use their own
statements The Forerunner will publish them if it believes them to be
true.


AS TO CONTENTS:


The main feature of the first year is a new book on a new subject with a
new name:--

_"Our Androcentric Culture."_  this is a study of the historic effect on
normal human development of a too exclusively masculine civilization.
It shows what man, the male, has done to the world: and what woman, the
more human, may do to change it.

_"What Diantha Did."_  This is a serial novel.  It shows the course of
true love running very crookedly--as it so often does--among the
obstructions and difficulties of the housekeeping problem--and solves
that problem.  (NOT by co-operation.)

Among the short articles will appear:

"Private Morality and Public Immorality."
"The Beauty Women Have Lost"
"Our Overworked Instincts."
"The Nun in the Kitchen."
"Genius: Domestic and Maternal."
"A Small God and a Large Goddess."
"Animals in Cities."
"How We Waste Three-Fourths Of Our Money."
"Prize Children"
"Kitchen-Mindedness"
"Parlor-Mindedness"
"Nursery-Mindedness"

There will be short stories and other entertaining matter in each issue.
 The department of "Personal Problems" does not discuss etiquette,
fashions or the removal of freckles.  Foolish questions will not be
answered, unless at peril of the asker.


AS TO VALUE:

If you take this magazine one year you will have:


One complete novel . . . By C. P. Gilman
One new book . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve short stories . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more short articles . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve-and-more new poems . . . By C. P. Gilman
Twelve Short Sermons . . . By C. P. Gilman
Besides "Comment and Review" . . . By C. P. Gilman
"Personal Problems" . . . By C. P. Gilman
And many other things . . . By C. P. Gilman

DON'T YOU THINK IT'S WORTH A DOLLAR?


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 12  OCTOBER, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

Tin soldiers have long been a popular toy.
Why not tin carpenters?




ONLY MINE


They told me what she had done--
Of her life like a river free:
Teaching and showing with tender truth,
Giving her light to age and youth,
Till fathers and mothers and children grew
To listen and learn and see
What the village had come to be;
How they had no sickness, young or old,
And had lost but one from all their fold;
For all the people knew
How to keep life strong and true;
And I asked her how had her love begun
To ripen and reach to every one.

She lifted a royal head,
Standing straight, as a tree;
While troops of little ones clustered and clung
To raiment and hand and knee.
"Should I not be glad," said she,
"In health and beauty and joy like this?
Babies by hundreds to cuddle and kiss;
A happier town was never sung;
A heaven of children for old and young;
There is only one that is dead--
It was only mine," she said.



THE BOYS AND THE BUTTER


Young Holdfast and J. Edwards Fernald sat grimly at their father's
table, being seen and not heard, and eating what was set before them,
asking no questions for conscience' sake, as they had been duly reared.
But in their hearts were most unchristian feelings toward a venerable
guest, their mother's aunt, by name Miss Jane McCoy.

They knew, with the keen observation of childhood, that it was only a
sense of hospitality, and duty to a relative, which made their father
and mother polite to her--polite, but not cordial.

Mr. Fernald, as a professed Christian, did his best to love his wife's
aunt, who came as near being an "enemy" as anyone he knew.  But Mahala,
his wife, was of a less saintly nature, and made no pretense of more
than decent courtesy.

"I don't like her and I won't pretend to; it's not honest!" she
protested to her husband, when he remonstrated with her upon her want of
natural affection.  "I can't help her being my aunt--we are not
commanded to honor our aunts and uncles, Jonathan E."

Mrs. Fernald's honesty was of an iron hardness and heroic mould.  She
would have died rather than have told a lie, and classed as lies any
form of evasion, deceit, concealment or even artistic exaggeration.

Her two sons, thus starkly reared, found their only imaginative license
in secret converse between themselves, sacredly guarded by a pact of
mutual faith, which was stronger than any outward compulsion.  They
kicked each other under the table, while enduring this visitation,
exchanged dark glances concerning the object of their common dislike,
and discussed her personal peculiarities with caustic comment later,
when they should have been asleep.

Miss McCoy was not an endearing old lady.  She was heavily built, and
gobbled her food, carefully selecting the best.  Her clothing was
elaborate, but not beautiful, and on close approach aroused a suspicion
of deferred laundry bills.

Among many causes for dislike for her aunt, Mrs. Fernald cherished this
point especially.  On one of these unwelcome visits she had been at some
pains to carry up hot water for the Saturday evening bath, which was all
the New England conscience of those days exacted, and the old lady had
neglected it not only once but twice.

"Goodness sake, Aunt Jane! aren't you ever going to take a bath?"

"Nonsense!" replied her visitor.  "I don't believe in all this wetting
and slopping.  The Scripture says, 'Whoso washeth his feet, his whole
body shall be made clean.'"

Miss McCoy had numberless theories for other people's conduct, usually
backed by well-chosen texts, and urged them with no regard for anybody's
feelings.  Even the authority of parents had no terrors for her.

Sipping her tea from the saucer with deep swattering inhalations, she
fixed her prominent eyes upon the two boys as they ploughed their way
through their bread and butter.  Nothing must be left on the plate, in
the table ethics of that time.  The meal was simple in the extreme.  A
New Hampshire farm furnished few luxuries, and the dish of quince
preserves had already been depleted by her.

"Mahala," she said with solemn determination, "those boys eat too much
butter."

Mrs. Fernald flushed up to the edging of her cap.  "I think I must be
the judge of what my children eat at my table, Aunt Jane," she answered,
not too gently.

Here Mr. Fernald interposed with a "soft answer."  (He had never lost
faith in the efficacy of these wrath turners, even on long repeated
failure.  As a matter of fact, to his wife's temper, a soft answer,
especially an intentionally soft answer, was a fresh aggravation.)  "The
missionary, now, he praised our butter; said he never got any butter in
China, or wherever 'tis he lives."

"He is a man of God," announced Miss McCoy.  "If there is anybody on
this poor earth deserving reverence, it is a missionary.  What they
endure for the Gospel is a lesson for us all.  When I am taken I intend
to leave all I have to the Missionary Society.  You know that."

They knew it and said nothing.  Their patience with her was in no way
mercenary.

"But what I am speaking of is children," she continued, not to be
diverted from her fell purpose.  "Children ought not to eat butter."

"They seem to thrive on it," Mrs. Fernald replied tartly.  And in truth
both the boys were sturdy little specimens of humanity, in spite of
their luxurious food.

"It's bad for them.  Makes them break out.  Bad for the blood.  And
self-denial is good for children.  'It is better to bear the yoke in thy
youth.'"

The youth in question spread its butter more thickly, and ate it with
satisfaction, saying nothing.

"Here, boys!" she suddenly assailed them.  "If you will go without
butter for a year--a whole year, till I come round again--I'll give each
of you fifty dollars!"

This was an overwhelming proposition.

Butter was butter--almost the only alleviation of a dry and monotonous
bill of fare, consisting largely of bread.  Bread without butter!  Brown
bread without butter!  No butter on potatoes!  No butter on anything!
The young imagination recoiled.  And this measureless deprivation was to
cover a whole year.  A ninth or an eleventh of a lifetime to them
respectively.  About a fifth of all they could really remember.
Countless days, each having three meals; weeks, months, the long dry
butterless vista stretched before them like Siberian exile to a Russian
prisoner.

But, on the other hand, there was the fifty dollars.  Fifty dollars
would buy a horse, a gun, tools, knives--a farm, maybe.  It could be put
in the bank, and drawn on for life, doubtless.  Fifty dollars at that
time was like five hundred to-day, and to a child it was a fortune.

Even their mother wavered in her resentment as she considered the fifty
dollars, and the father did not waver at all, but thought it a Godsend.

"Let 'em choose," said Miss McCoy.

Stern is the stock of the Granite State.  Self-denial is the essence of
their religion; and economy, to give it a favorable name, is for them
Nature's first law.

The struggle was brief.  Holdfast laid down his thick-spread slice.  J.
Edwards laid down his.  "Yes, ma'am," said one after the other.  "Thank
you, ma'am.  We'll do it."

*

It was a long year.  Milk did not take the place of it.  Gravy and
drippings, freely given by their mother, did not take the place of it,
nor did the infrequent portions of preserves.  Nothing met the same
want.  And if their health was improved by the abstinence it was in no
way visible to the naked eye.  They were well, but they were well
before.

As to the moral effect--it was complex.  An extorted sacrifice has not
the same odor of sanctity as a voluntary one.  Even when made willingly,
if the willingness is purchased, the effect seems somewhat confused.
Butter was not renounced, only postponed, and as the year wore on the
young ascetics, in their secret conferences, indulged in wild visions of
oleaginous excess so soon as the period of dearth should be over.

But most they refreshed their souls with plans for the spending and the
saving of the hard-earned wealth that was coming to them.  Holdfast was
for saving his, and being a rich man--richer than Captain Briggs or
Deacon Holbrook.  But at times he wavered, spurred by the imagination of
J. Edwards, and invested that magic sum in joys unnumbered.

The habit of self-denial was perhaps being established, but so was the
habit of discounting the future, of indulging in wild plans of
self-gratification when the ship came in.

*

Even for butterless boys, time passes, and the endless year at last drew
to a close.  They counted the months, they counted the weeks, they
counted the days.  Thanksgiving itself shone pale by contrast with this
coming festival of joy and triumph.  As it drew nearer and nearer their
excitement increased, and they could not forget it even in the passing
visit of a real missionary, a live one, who had been to those dark lands
where the heathen go naked, worship idols and throw their children to
the crocodiles.

They were taken to hear him, of course, and not only so, but he came to
supper at their house and won their young hearts by the stories he told
them.  Gray of hair and beard was the preacher and sternly devout; but
he had a twinkling eye none the less, and told tales of wonder and
amazement that were sometimes almost funny and always interesting.

"Do not imagine, my young friends," he said, after filling them with
delicious horror at the unspeakable wickedness of those "godless lands,"
"that the heathen are wholly without morality.  The Chinese, among whom
I have labored for many years, are more honest than some Christians.
Their business honor is a lesson to us all.  But works alone cannot
save."  And he questioned them as to their religious state, receiving
satisfactory answers.

The town turned out to hear him; and, when he went on circuit,
preaching, exhorting, describing the hardships and dangers of missionary
life, the joys of soul-saving, and urging his hearers to contribute to
this great duty of preaching the Gospel to all creatures, they had a
sort of revival season; and arranged for a great missionary church
meeting with a special collection when he should return.

The town talked missionary and thought missionary; dreamed missionary,
it might well be; and garrets were ransacked to make up missionary boxes
to send to the heathen.  But Holdfast and J. Edwards mingled their
interest in those unfortunate savages with a passionate desire for
butter, and a longing for money such as they had never known before.

Then Miss McCoy returned.

They knew the day, the hour.  They watched their father drive down to
meet the stage, and tormented their mother with questions as to whether
she would give it to them before supper or after.

"I'm sure I don't know!" she snapped at last.  "I'll be thankful when
it's over and done with, I'm sure.  A mighty foolish business, I think!"

Then they saw the old chaise turn the corner.  What?  Only one in it!
The boys rushed to the gate--the mother, too.

"What is it, Jonathan?  Didn't she come?"

"Oh, father!"

"Where is she, father?"

"She's not coming," said Mr. Fernald.  "Says she's going to stay with
Cousin Sarah, so's to be in town and go to all the missionary doin's.
But she's sent it."

Then he was besieged, and as soon as the horse was put up, by three
pairs of busy hands, they came to the supper table, whereon was a full
two pounds of delicious butter, and sat down with tingling impatience.

The blessing was asked in all due form--a blessing ten miles long, it
seemed to the youngsters, and then the long, fat envelope came out of
Mr. Fernald's pocket.

"She must have written a lot," he said, taking out two folded papers,
and then a letter.

"My dear great-nephews," ran the epistle, "as your parents have assured
me that you have kept your promise, and denied yourselves butter for the
space of a year, here is the fifty dollars I promised to each of
you--wisely invested."

Mr. Fernald opened the papers.  To Holdfast Fernald and to J. Edwards
Fernald, duly made out, receipted, signed and sealed, were two $50 life
memberships in the Missionary society!

Poor children!  The younger one burst into wild weeping.  The older
seized the butter dish and cast it on the floor, for which he had to be
punished, of course, but the punishment added nothing to his grief and
rage.

When they were alone at last, and able to speak for sobbing, those
gentle youths exchanged their sentiments; and these were of the nature
of blasphemy and rebellion against God.  They had learned at one fell
blow the hideous lesson of human depravity.  People lied--grown
people--religious people--they lied!  You couldn't trust them!  They had
been deceived, betrayed, robbed!  They had lost the actual joy
renounced, and the potential joy promised and withheld.  The money they
might some day earn, but not heaven itself could give back that year of
butter.  And all this in the name of religion--and of missionaries!
Wild, seething outrage filled their hearts at first; slower results
would follow.

*

The pious enthusiasm of the little town was at its height.  The
religious imagination, rather starved on the bald alternatives of
Calvinism, found rich food in these glowing tales of danger, devotion,
sometimes martyrdom; while the spirit of rigid economy, used to daylong
saving from the cradle to the grave, took passionate delight in the
success of these noble evangelists who went so far afield to save lost
souls.

Out of their narrow means they had scraped still further; denied
themselves necessaries where no pleasures remained; and when the
crowning meeting was announced, the big collection meeting, with the
wonderful brother from the Church in Asia to address them again, the
meeting house was packed in floor and gallery.

Hearts were warm and open, souls were full of enthusiasm for the great
work, wave on wave of intense feeling streamed through the crowded
house.

Only in the Fernalds' pew was a spirit out of tune.

Fernald, good man though he was, had not yet forgiven.  His wife had not
tried.

"Don't talk to me!" she had cried passionately, when he had urged a
reconciliation.  "Forgive your enemies!  Yes, but she hasn't done any
harm to _me!_.  It's my boys she's hurt!  It don't say one word about
forgiving other people's enemies!"

Yet Mrs. Fernald, for all her anger, seemed to have some inner source of
consolation, denied her husband, over which she nodded to herself from
time to time, drawing in her thin lips, and wagging her head decisively.

Vengeful bitterness and impotent rage possessed the hearts of Holdfast
and J. Edwards.

This state of mind in young and old was not improved when, on arriving
at the meeting a little late, they had found the head of the pew was
occupied by Miss McCoy.

It was neither the time nor the place for a demonstration.  No other
seats were vacant, and Mrs. Fernald marched in and sat next to her,
looking straight at the pulpit.  Next came the boys, and murder was in
their hearts.  Last, Mr. Fernald, inwardly praying for a more Christian
spirit, but not getting it.

Holdfast and young J. Edwards dared not speak in church or make any
protest; but they smelled the cardamum seeds in the champing jaws beyond
their mother, and they cast black looks at each other and very secretly
showed clenched fists, held low.

In fierce inward rebellion they sat through the earlier speeches, and
when the time came for the address of the occasion, even the deep voice
of the brother from Asia failed to stir them.  Was he not a missionary,
and were not missionaries and all their works proved false?

But what was this?

The address was over; the collection, in cash, was in the piled plates
at the foot of the pulpit.  The collection in goods was enumerated and
described with full names given.

Then the hero of the hour was seen to confer with the other reverend
brothers, and to rise and come forward, raising his hand for silence.

"Dearly beloved brethren and sisters," he said, "in this time of
thanksgiving for gifts spiritual and temporal I wish to ask your
patience for a moment more, that we may do justice.  There has come to
my ears a tale concerning one of our recent gifts which I wish you to
hear, that judgment may be done in Israel.

"One among us has brought to the House of the Lord a tainted
offering--an offering stained with cruelty and falsehood.  Two young
children of our flock were bribed a year ago to renounce one of the
scant pleasures of their lives for a year's time--a whole long year of a
child's life.  They were bribed with a promise--a promise of untold
wealth to a child, of fifty dollars each."

The congregation drew a long breath.

Those who knew of the Fernald boys' endeavor (and who in that friendly
radius did not?) looked at them eagerly.  Those who recognized Miss
McCoy looked at her, too, and they were many.  She sat, fanning herself,
with a small, straight-handled palmleaf fan, striving to appear
unconscious.

"When the time was up," the clear voice went on remorselessly, "the year
of struggle and privation, and the eager hearts of childhood expected
the reward; instead of keeping the given word, instead of the money
promised, each child was given a paid life membership in our society!"

Again the house drew in its breath.  Did not the end justify the means?

He went on:

"I have conferred with my fellow members, and we are united in our
repudiation of this gift.  The money is not ours.  It was obtained by a
trick which the heathen themselves would scorn."

There was a shocked pause.  Miss McCoy was purple in the face, and only
kept her place for fear of drawing more attention if she strove to
escape.

"I name no names," the speaker continued, "and I regret the burden laid
upon me to thus expose this possibly well-meant transaction, but what we
have at stake to-night is not this handful of silver, nor the feelings
of one sinner, but two children's souls.  Are we to have their sense of
justice outraged in impressionable youth?  Are they to believe with the
Psalmist that all men are liars?  Are they to feel anger and blame for
the great work to which our lives are given because in its name they
were deceived and robbed?  No, my brothers, we clear our skirts of this
ignominy.  In the name of the society, I shall return this money to its
rightful owners.  'Whoso offendeth one of these little ones, it were
better that a millstone be hanged about his neck and he cast into the
depths of the sea.'"



A QUESTION


Why is it, God, that mother's hearts are made
 So very deep and wide?
How does it help the world that we should hold
Such welling floods of pain till we are old
Because when we were young one grave was laid--
 One baby died?



IS IT WRONG TO TAKE LIFE?


"Thou shalt not kill."

This is about as explicit as words can be; there is no qualification, no
palliating circumstance, no exception.

"Thou"--(presumably you and I, any and every person) "shalt not"--(a
prohibition absolute) "kill"--(take life: that is, apparently, of
anything).

How do we read this?  How apply it?

Some have narrowed it to assassination only, frankly paraphrasing the
simple law, as "Thou shalt do no murder," and excepting the whole range
of war-slaughter, of legal execution, of "self-defence" and "justifiable
homicide."

Some have widened it to cover not only all human beings, but all animal
life as well; the Buddhist and his modern followers sparing even the ant
in the path, and the malaria-planting mosquito.

Such extremists should sit in sackcloth and ashes over the riotous
carriage of their own phagasytes; ever ruthlessly destroying millions
upon millions of staphyllococci and similar intruders.

Where should the line be drawn?  And why?  Especially why?  Why is it
wrong to kill?

If we hark back to the direct command, we find that it could not have
been intended as universally binding.

"Whoso sheddeth man's blood by man shall his blood be shed," and all the
explicit directions as to who should be killed, and how; for such and
such offences, certainly justify the axe and rope of the executioner;
and beyond that come numbers of inspired commands as to the merciless
extermination of opposing tribes in which men, women and children were
"put to the sword"--even to babes unborn.  Killing seemed highly
honorable, even compulsory, among the people on whom this stern command
was laid.

Scholars teach us that the ten commandments were in truth not given to
the Israelites until after the return of Hezekiah; that may alter the
case a little, but assuredly if we are to believe the Old Testament at
all there was no blame attached to many kinds of killing.

The Prophets and Psalmists particularly yearned to have their enemies
destroyed, and exulted in their destruction.

In the teachings of Jesus we find another spirit altogether, but we have
not therefore abrogated the old commandments, and the problem of this
clear prohibition remains unsolved.

Those of us to-day who feel most keenly the evil of "taking life" are
almost Buddhistic in attitude.  They object to killing for food or
killing in self-defence.

Fortunately for them, we have not many destructive wild beasts among us,
thanks to the vigorous killing of our less scrupulous forefathers.

Some millennial dreamers suggest that the wolves and catamounts might
have been tamed, if taken young; the natural resistance of the parents
to the "taking" overcome by moral suasion, doubtless!  Yes, it is
conceivable that all the little snarling cubs and kittens might have
been tamed, and taught to feed out of the hand--_but on what?_

In India some there may be who would emulate their saintly master, who
offered his own body as food to a starving mother tiger; a sacrifice of
less moment than appears, since he believed he would soon have
another--that he had to have a great many--and that the sooner he got
through with the lot the better.

From this unkind point of view his offering was much like that of a lady
giving away a dress she is tired of, to promote the replenishment of her
wardrobe.

The popular objection to killing, in India, results in the continuance
of man-eating tigers and deadly serpents; which again results in their
killing, in their untaught vigor, great numbers of human beings and
other useful animals.  The sum of the killings would be less if the
killers were killed.

In our cooler land we have fewer poisonous reptiles and creeping things,
yet insects there are which most of us slay with enthusiasm; the most
sentimental devotee would hardly share couch or clothing with them!
Surely no rational person objects to "justifiable insecticide"?

The most merciful will usually admit our own right to live, and
therefore to kill in self-defence all creatures that would kill us.
Where the line is drawn, however, by many earnest thinkers and feelers,
is at killing harmless, inoffensive creatures for food.

The sheep we may shear, but not make into chops; the cow we may milk,
but not turn into steaks and stews; the hen we may rob of her potential
young, but neither roast nor fricassee.

It is no wonder, in view of the steaming horrors of the slaughter-house,
that we recoil from killing; but is it the killing which is wrong in
itself, or merely the horrors?

Let us first consider how this might be done; and then, if, at its best,
the essential act of "taking life" is deemed wrong, we will consider
that.

Suppose green pastures and still waters, the shade of trees, the warmth
of the sun, the shelter of roof and walls; suppose protection and kind
care, provision for the winter, and that we only shared the milk with
the calves instead of barbarously separating the mother from her young.
Calves might be bottle-fed, to satisfy their hunger, and afterward
turned loose with the mother; they could not take all the milk then, and
we might have the rest.

Suppose creatures thus living in an animal paradise, then gathered in
small numbers, in local centers, and neatly, instantaneously and
painlessly killed, any surgeon can tell us how.  They could then be
dressed, chilled and sent to larger centers for more general
distribution.

What hardship, to them, is involved in this?

Die they must, some time, and by worse methods.  In a wild state or a
tame they must either be killed by something or die slowly of old age
and incapacity.

Even if we nursed the toothless ox, and fed him with a spoon, he would
not enjoy it.

We have to admit that in this whole round world all creatures die, and
that in most cases, their lives are taken by others.

Looked at from a strictly scientific point of view, this is evidently
the order of nature, her universal law.  Looked at from a religious
point of view, it is as evidently the will of God, His universal law.

Some postulate a sinless Eden past, before this killing habit began; and
foresee a sinless Millennium to come, when we shall have outgrown it.
These do not use their imaginations enough.  Even if Edenic or
Millennial tigers could digest grass and apples, are they therefore
immortal?  Is a species to live on forever in one representative, or one
Platonic pair?

Because if we have life, as we know it, we have also reproduction, the
direction for which precedes the picture of Eden; each pair being told
"to increase and multiply and replenish the earth."  Now for the
imagination, to forecast results.

If the creatures fulfill this command, (and they do, diligently) the
earth presently becomes replenished to a degree apparently unforeseen;
unless, indeed, this law of mutual destruction be specially provided to
meet that difficulty.

Life is multiple and interchangeable.  Life continues on earth not in
permanent radiating lines, but in flowing union; the forms combining,
separating, growing, in and through one another.

Perhaps our error lies in fixing our minds in the eaten instead of the
eater; dwelling on the loss of the killed, instead of the gain of the
killer.

We say "all creatures eat one another," and it grieves us.  Why not say
"all creatures feed one another?"  There is something beautiful in that.

Life, to each creature, is all time--all that he has any knowledge
of--and living is a pleasure lasting all that time.  Death, on the other
hand, is but a moment, and even so is a pleasure to the wolf who eats,
if not to the sheep who is eaten.

We, with our larger range of thought, and with our strange religions
theories, have complicated and warped the thought of death by associate
ideas.  We place conscious fear before it, and load that fear with
threats of eternal punishment.

We try to measure the wholesome facts of life by arbitrary schemes of
later devising, and life seems dreary by contrast.

When we look at the facts themselves, however; see the grass green and
thick for all its cropping; fish swimming in great schools, "as good as
ever were caught"; the oysters peacefully casting forth their millions
of eggs to make up for all that are eaten; this whole blooming, fruiting
world of life and love; we find these to be the main things, the real
prominent features of the performance; and death but a "lightning change
artist," a quick transformation, in which one living form turns into
another, while life goes on.

Meanwhile, in our human affairs it would be a good thing if we would
develop as keen a sense of the responsibility of giving life as we have
in taking it.  We hold three powers in the life-process--a degree of
choice and judgment as to who comes on the stage, some power to decide
who shall go off, and when, and, most important of all, the ability to
modify life while we have it.

Is it not singular that there should be so much sentiment about taking
life and so little about giving it?  We give life almost as
thoughtlessly as the beasts below us.  We are variously minded about
taking it, killing many good men in war, and not killing many bad ones
in peace, except an ill-selected few; but as yet we have no deep feeling
about the struggles and sufferings of people while they live.

If we become religiously careful about the kind of people that are born,
and about the treatment they get after they are born, it will make more
difference to human happiness, and human progress, than would the
establishment of a purely vegetable diet, the abolition of capital
punishment, or even the end of war.



THE WORLD AND THE THREE ARTISTS


Three Artists found a World on their hands.  It was their World and they
were its Artists.

It was a Dull World, and needed Amusement.

It was a Hungry World, and needed Food.

It was a Tired World, and needed Inspiration.

It was an Ugly World, and needed Beauty.

Now the Artists were very powerful, having all these things in their
gift.

The first was an Artist Pure and Simple, so he arose and gave the Dull
World what he himself found amusing,--but the World was not amused.

"Stupid Beast!" said the Artist.  "When I am dead it will find my work
amusing!"

Then he gave the Hungry World what he thought good to eat,--but the
World would not eat it.

"Ungrateful Wretch!" said the Artist.  "When I am dead it will find this
good food."

Then he gave the Tired World what he thought was Inspiration,--but the
World was not Inspired.

"Dense Dolt!" said the Artist.  "When I am dead it will recognize my
Inspiration."

Then he gave the Ugly World what he thought was Beauty,--but the World
did not find it Beautiful.

"Blind Brute!" said the Artist.  "How terrible it is to be
unappreciated!  This Fool Incarnate can never realize what it is
ignoring!  And it will give me no reward!  When I am dead it will see my
Beauty!"

Now the World had its feelings, and did not enjoy the attitude of the
Artist; so verily it gave him no reward.  And he died.  Nevertheless
what he foretold was by no means fulfilled, for his work was for himself
alone, and perished with him.

Then arose the second Artist, and he was not only an Artist, but a
Merchant.

And he said, "I perceive that this my brother has died because he did
not please the World, and it would give him no reward.  I shall be
wiser."

Then he studied the tastes of the World; Dull, Hungry, Tired and Ugly; a
Neglected Child.

And he carefully catered to its ignorance, its prejudices and its
childish tastes; he tickled with cheap pleasures, he gave it what its
lower nature liked, and the Dull World found his Amusement amusing, and
paid for it; and the Hungry World found his food palatable, and paid for
it; and the Tired World received his Inspiration as if it were genuine,
and paid for it; and the Ugly World eagerly grasped his poor prettiness
as if it were Beauty, and paid for it; so the second Artist did not
die--until he died; and then he was dead; and his work with him.

But the third Artist, who was also a Citizen, thought long of his task.

"I am an Artist," he said, "and this is my World.  Of what avail is my
Beauty if the World does not see it?  How do I know that Worlds to Come
will see it?--even if it lives?  _This_ World needs Beauty, _now!_  If I
work to express myself alone, I die, lean and angry; and my work dies
with me.  If I basely cater to this Neglected Child, I die, though
fatter; and my work dies with me.  How shall I feed the World?"

But he was an Artist, and very powerful, so he essayed his task.

He earnestly studied the needs of the World.  "Shall I feed a lamb on
beef?" said he, "or a cat on pie?"

By the exercise of his intelligence he learned the needs of the World,
which were many and conspicuous; by the exercise of his Art he met them.

He gave it Amusement which was within reach of the tastes of that
Neglected Child, yet which was in truth Amusing; and the World was
Amused, and loved him.

He gave it food both palatable and nourishing; and the World was fed,
and loved him.

He gave it Inspiration which struck to the heart, yet was drawn from
Eternal Truth; and the World was Inspired, and loved him.

And he poured forth his very soul in Beauty; Beauty as simple as the
common flowers the whole world loves, and as true as the stars in
heaven, Beauty that ravished the soul of the Neglected Child, opened its
eyes to Radiant Joy, and lifted it along the ages.  And the World bathed
in Beauty, and loved him.  Also its taste improved continually under the
influence of his Art.  And the Artist was happy, for he fulfilled his
mighty task.

"My glorious World!" he said; "What happiness!  To be allowed to serve
the World!"

And he watched it grow; well-nourished now, full of sweet merriment,
strong in steady inspiration, rich in unfolding beauty.

For the World lived, and the Artist lived, and his work lived
forever,--in the world.



IN HOW LITTLE TIME


In how little time, were we so minded,
We could be wise and free--not held and blinded!
We could be hale and strong--not weak and sickly!
Could do away with wrong--and do it quickly!

Riches of earth, enough for all our keeping;
Love in the heart, awake, no longer sleeping;
Power in the hand and brain for what needs making;
Joy in the gift of power, joy in the taking!

In how little time could grow around us
A people clean and fair as life first found us!
One with the under-earth, in peaceful growing,
One with the over-soul, in doing, knowing.

Labor a joy and pride, in ease and beauty;
Art that should fill at last its human duty;
This we could make and have, were we not blinded!
In how little time--were we so minded!



WOMAN AND THE STATE


[A Discussion of Political Equality of Men and Women.  To be read in
connection with chapter 12 of Our Androcentric Culture, in this issue.]

Here are two vital factors in human life; one a prime essential to our
existence; the other a prime essential to our progress.

Both of them we idealize in certain lines, and exploit in others.  Both
of them are misinterpreted, balked of their full usefulness, and
humanity thus injured.

The human race does not get the benefit of the full powers of women, nor
of the full powers of the state.

In all civilized races to-day there is a wide and growing sense of
discontent among women; a criticism of their assigned limitations, and a
demand for larger freedom and opportunity.  Under different conditions
the demand varies; it is here for higher education, there for justice
before the law; here for economic independence, and there for political
equality.

This last is at present the most prominent Issue of "the woman question"
in England and America, as the activity of the "militant suffragists"
has forced it upon the attention of the world.

Thoughtful people in general are now studying this point more seriously
than ever before, genuinely anxious to adopt the right side, and there
is an alarmed uprising of sincere objection to the political equality of
women.

Wasting no time on ignorance, prejudice, or the resistance of special
interests, let us fairly face the honest opposition, and do it justice.

The conservative position is this:

Men and women have different spheres in life.  To men belong the
creation and management of the state, and the financial maintenance of
the home and family:

"To women belong the physical burden of maternity, and the industrial
management of the home and family; these duties require all their time
and strength:

"The prosperity of the state may be sufficiently conserved by men alone;
the prosperity of the family requires the personal presence and services
of the mother in the home: if women assume the cares of the state, the
home and family will suffer:

Some go even farther than this, and claim an essential limitation in
"the female mind" which prevents it from grasping large political
interests; holding, therefore, that if women took part in state affairs
it would be to the detriment of the community:

Others advance a theory that "society," in the special sense, is the
true sphere of larger service for women, and that those of them not
exclusively confined to "home duties" may find full occupation in
"social duties," including the time honored fields of "religion" and
"charity":

Others again place their main reliance on the statement that, as to the
suffrage, "women do not want it."

Let us consider these points in inverse order, beginning with the last
one.

We will admit that at present the majority of women are not consciously
desirous of any extension of their political rights and privileges, but
deny that this indifference is any evidence against the desirability of
such extension.

It has long been accepted that the position of women is an index of
civilization.  Progressive people are proud of the freedom and honor
given their women, and our nation honestly believes itself the leader in
this line.  "American women are the freest in the world!" we say; and
boast of it.

Since the agitation for women's rights began, many concessions have been
made to further improve their condition.  Men, seeing the justice of
certain demands, have granted in many states such privileges as
admission to schools, colleges, universities, and special instruction
for professions; followed by admission to the bar, the pulpit, and the
practice of medicine.  Married women, in many states, have now a right
to their own earnings; and in a few, mothers have an equal right in the
guardianship of their children.

We are proud and glad that our women are free to go unveiled, to travel
alone, to choose their own husbands; we are proud and glad of every
extension of justice already granted by men to women.

Now:--Have any of these concessions been granted because a majority of
women asked for them?  Was it advanced in opposition to any of them that
"women did not want it?"  Have as many women ever asked for these things
as are now asking for the ballot?  If it was desirable to grant these
other rights and privileges without the demand of a majority, why is the
demand of a majority required before this one is granted?

The child widows of India did not unitedly demand the abolition of the
"suttee."

The tortured girl children of China did not rise in overwhelming
majority to demand free feet; yet surely no one would refuse to lift
these burdens because only a minority of progressive women insisted on
justice.

It is a sociological impossibility that a majority of an unorganized
class should unite in concerted demand for a right, a duty, which they
have never known.

The point to be decided is whether political equality is to the
advantage of women and of the state--not whether either, as a body, is
asking for it.

Now for the "society" theory.  There is a venerable fiction to the
effect that women make--and manage, "society."  No careful student of
comparative history can hold this belief for a moment.  Whatever the
conditions of the age or place; industrial, financial, religious,
political, educational; these conditions are in the hands of men; and
these conditions dictate the "society" of that age or place.

"Society" in a constitutional monarchy is one thing; in a primitive
despotism another; among millionaires a third; but women do not make the
despotism, the monarchy, or the millions.  They take social conditions
as provided by men, precisely as they take all other conditions at their
hands.  They do not even modify an existing society to their own
interests, being powerless to do so.  The "double standard of morals,"
ruling everywhere in "society," proves this; as does the comparative
helplessness of women to enjoy even social entertainments, without the
constant attendance and invitation of men.

Even in its great function of exhibition leading to marriage, it is the
girls who are trained and exhibited, under closest surveillance; while
the men stroll in and out, to chose at will, under no surveillance
whatever.

That women, otherwise powerful, may use "society" to further their ends,
is as true as that men do; and in England, where women, through their
titled and landed position, have always had more political power than
here, "society" is a very useful vehicle for the activities of both
sexes.

But, in the main, the opportunities of "society" to women, are merely
opportunities to use their "feminine influence" in extra domestic
lines--a very questionable advantage to the home and family, to
motherhood, to women, or to the state.

In religion women have always filled and more than filled the place
allowed them.  Needless to say it was a low one.  The power of the
church, its whole management and emoluments, were always in the hands of
men, save when the Lady Abbess held her partial sway; but the work of
the church has always been helped by women--the men have preached and
the women practised!

Charity, as a vocation, is directly in line with the mother instinct,
and has always appealed to women.  Since we have learned how injurious
to true social development this mistaken kindness is, it might almost be
classified as a morbid by-product of suppressed femininity!

In passing we may note that charity as a virtue is ranked highest among
those nations and religions where women are held lowest.  With the
Moslems it is a universal law--and in the Moslem Paradise there are no
women--save the Houries!

The playground of a man-fenced "society"; the work-ground of a
man-taught church; and this "osmosis" of social nutrition, this leakage
and seepage of values which should circulate normally, called charity;
these are not a sufficient field for the activities of women.

As for those limitations of the "feminine mind" which render her unfit
to consider the victuallage of a nation, or the justice of a tax on
sugar; it hardly seems as if the charge need be taken seriously.  Yet so
able a woman as Mrs. Humphry Ward has recently advanced it in all
earnestness.

In her view women are capable of handling municipal, but not state
affairs.  Since even this was once denied them; and since, in England,
they have had municipal suffrage for some time; it would seem as if
their abilities grew with use, as most abilities do; which is in truth
the real answer.

Most women spend their whole lives, and have spent their whole lives for
uncounted generations, in the persistent and exclusive contemplation of
their own family affairs.  They are near-sighted, or near-minded,
rather; the trouble is not with the nature of their minds, but with the
use of them.

If men as a class had been exclusively confined to the occupation of
house-service since history began, they would be similarly unlikely to
manifest an acute political intelligence.

We may agree with Tennyson that "Woman is not undeveloped man, but
diverse;" that is _women_ are not undeveloped _men;_ but the feminine
half of humanity is undeveloped human.  They have exercised their
feminine functions, but not their human-functions; at least not to their
full extent.

Here appears a distinction which needs to be widely appreciated.

We are not merely male and female--all animals are that--our chief
distinction is that of race, our humanness.

Male characteristics we share with all males, bird and beast; female
characteristics we share with all females, similarly; but human
characteristics belong to _genus homo_ alone; and are possessed by both
sexes.  A female horse is just as much a horse as a male of her species;
a female human being is just as human as the male of her species--or
ought to be!

In the special functions and relations of sex there is no contest, no
possible rivalry or confusion; but in the general functions of humanity
there is great misunderstanding.

Our trouble is that we have not recognized these human functions as
such; but supposed them to be exclusively masculine; and, acting under
that idea, strove to prevent women from an unnatural imitation of men.

Hence this minor theory of the limitations of the "female mind."

The mind is pre-eminently human.  That degree of brain development which
distinguishes our species, is a human, not a sex characteristic.

There may be, has been, and still is, a vast difference in our treatment
of the minds of the two sexes.  We have given them a different
education, different exercises, different conditions in all ways.  But
all these differences are external, and their effect disappears with
them.

The "female mind" has proven its identical capacity with the "male
mind," _in so far as it has been given identical conditions._  It will
take a long time, however, before conditions are so identical, for
successive generations, as to give the "female mind" a fair chance.

In the meantime, considering its traditional, educational and
associative drawbacks, the "female mind" has made a remarkably good
showing.

The field of politics is an unfortunate one in which to urge this
alleged limitation; because politics is one of the few fields in which
some women have been reared and exercised under equal conditions with
men.

We have had queens as long as we have had kings, perhaps longer; and
history does not show the male mind, in kings, to have manifested a
numerically proportionate superiority over the female mind, in queens.
There have been more kings than queens, but have there been more good
and great ones, in proportion?

Even one practical and efficient queen is proof enough that being a
woman does not preclude political capacity.  Since England has had such
an able queen for so long, and that within Mrs. Humphry Ward's personal
memory, her position seems fatuous in the extreme.

It has been advanced that great queens owed their power to the
association and advice of the noble and high-minded men who surrounded
them; and, further, that the poor showing made by many kings, was due to
the association and vice of the base and low-minded women who surrounded
them.

This is a particularly pusillanimous claim in the first place; is not
provable in the second place; and, if it were true, opens up a very
pretty field of study in the third place.  It would seem to prove, if it
proves anything, that men are not fit to be trusted with political power
on account of an alarming affinity for the worst of women; and,
conversely, that women, as commanding the assistance of the best of men,
are visibly the right rulers!  Also it opens a pleasant sidelight on
that oft-recommended tool--"feminine influence."

We now come to our opening objection; that society and state, home, and
family, are best served by the present division of interests: and its
corollary, that if women enlarge that field of interest it would reduce
their usefulness in their present sphere.

The corollary is easily removed.  We are now on the broad ground of
established facts; of history, recent, but still achieved.

Women have had equal political rights with men in several places, for
considerable periods of time.  In Wyoming, to come near home, they have
enjoyed this status for more than a generation.  Neither here nor in any
other state or country where women vote, is there the faintest proof of
injury to the home or family relation.  In Wyoming, indeed, divorce has
decreased, while gaining so fast in other places.

Political knowledge, political interest, does not take up more time and
strength than any other form of mental activity; nor does it preclude a
keen efficiency in other lines; and as for the actual time required to
perform the average duties of citizenship--it is a contemptible bit of
trickery in argument, if not mere ignorance and confusion of idea, to
urge the occasional attendance on political meetings, or the annual or
bi-annual dropping of a ballot, as any interference with the management
of a house.

It is proven, by years on years of established experience, that women
can enjoy full political equality and use their power, without in the
least ceasing to be contented and efficient wives and mothers, cooks and
housekeepers.

What really horrifies the popular mind at the thought of women in
politics, is the picture of woman as a "practical politician;" giving
her time to it as a business, and making money by it, in questionable,
or unquestionable, ways; and, further, as a politician in office, as
sheriff, alderman, senator, judge.

The popular mind becomes suffused with horror at the first idea, and
scarcely less so at the second.  It pictures blushing girlhood on the
Bench; tender motherhood in the Senate; the housewife turned
"ward-heeler;" and becomes quite sick in contemplation of these
abominations.

No educated mind, practical mind, no mind able and willing to use its
faculties, need be misled for a moment by these sophistries.

There is absolutely no evidence that women as a class will rush into
"practical politics."  Where they have voted longest they do not
manifest this dread result.  Neither is there any proof that they will
all desire to hold office; or that any considerable portion of them
will; or that, if they did, they would get it.

We seem unconsciously to assume that when women begin to vote, men will
stop; or that the women will outnumber the men; also that, outnumbering
them, they will be completely united in their vote; and, still further,
that so outnumbering and uniting, they will solidly vote for a ticket
composed wholly of women candidates.

Does anyone seriously imagine this to be likely?

This may be stated with assurance; if ever we do see a clever,
designing, flirtatious, man-twisting woman; or a pretty, charming,
irresistable young girl, elected to office--it will not be by the votes
of women!

Where women are elected to office, by the votes of both men and women,
they are of suitable age and abilities, and do their work well.  They
have already greatly improved some of the conditions of local politics,
and the legislation they advocate is of a beneficial character.

What is the true relation of women to the state?

It is precisely identical with that of men.  Their forms of service may
vary, but their duty, their interest, their responsibility, is the same.

Here are the people on earth, half of them women, all of them her
children.  It is her earth as much as his; the people are their people,
the state their state; compounded of them all, in due relation.

As the father and mother, together; shelter, guard, teach and provide
for their children in the home; so should all fathers and mothers,
together; shelter, guard, teach and provide for their common children,
the community.

The state is no mystery; no taboo place of masculine secrecy; it is
simply us.

Democracy is but a half-grown child as yet, one of twins?  Its boy-half
is a struggling thing, with "the diseases of babyhood"; its girl-half
has hardly begun to take notice.

As human creatures we have precisely the same duty and privilege,
interest, and power in the state; sharing its protection, its
advantages, and its services.  As women we have a different relation.

Here indeed we will admit, and glory in, our "diversity."  The "eternal
womanly" is a far more useful thing in the state than the "eternal
manly."

To be woman means to be mother.  To be mother means to give love,
defense, nourishment, care, instruction.  Too long, far too long has
motherhood neglected its real social duties, its duties to humanity at
large.  Even in her position of retarded industrial development, as the
housekeeper and houseworker of the world, woman has a contribution of
special value to the state.

As the loving mother, the patient teacher, the tender nurse, the wise
provider and care-taker, she can serve the state, and the state needs
her service.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER XII

LIKE A BANYAN TREE


The Earth-Plants spring up from beneath,
 The Air-Plants swing down from above,
  But the Banyan trees grow
  Both above and below,
 And one makes a prosperous grove.


In the fleeting opportunities offered by the Caffeteria, and in longer
moments, rather neatly planned for, with some remnants of an earlier
ingenuity, Mr. Thaddler contrived to become acquainted with Mrs. Bell.
Diantha never quite liked him, but he won her mother's heart by frank
praise of the girl and her ventures.

"I never saw a smarter woman in my life," he said; "and no airs.  I tell
you, ma'am, if there was more like her this world would be an easier
place to live in, and I can see she owes it all to you, ma'am."

This the mother would never admit for a moment, but expatiated loyally
on the scientific mind of Mr. Henderson Bell, still of Jopalez.

"I don't see how he can bear to let her out of his sight," said Mr.
Thaddler.

"Of course he hated to let her go," replied the lady.  "We both did.
But he is very proud of her now."

"I guess there's somebody else who's proud of her, too," he suggested.
"Excuse me, ma'am, I don't mean to intrude, but we know there must be a
good reason for your daughter keeping all Orchardina at a distance.
Why, she could have married six times over in her first year here!"

"She does not wish to give up her work," Mrs. Bell explained.

"Of course not; and why should she?  Nice, womanly business, I am sure.
I hope nobody'd expect a girl who can keep house for a whole township to
settle down to bossing one man and a hired girl."

In course of time he got a pretty clear notion of how matters stood, and
meditated upon it, seriously rolling his big cigar about between pursed
lips.  Mr. Thaddler was a good deal of a gossip, but this he kept to
himself, and did what he could to enlarge the patronage of Union House.

The business grew.  It held its own in spite of fluctuations, and after
a certain point began to spread steadily.  Mrs. Bell's coming and Mr.
Eltwood's ardent championship, together with Mr. Thaddler's, quieted the
dangerous slanders which had imperilled the place at one time.  They
lingered, subterraneously, of course.  People never forget slanders.  A
score of years after there were to be found in Orchardina folk who still
whispered about dark allegations concerning Union House; and the papers
had done some pretty serious damage; but the fame of good food, good
service, cheapness and efficiency made steady headway.

In view of the increase and of the plans still working in her mind,
Diantha made certain propositions to Mr. Porne, and also to Mrs. Porne,
in regard to a new, specially built club-house for the girls.

"I have proved what they can do, with me to manage them, and want now to
prove that they can do it themselves, with any matron competent to
follow my directions.  The house need not be so expensive; one big
dining-room, with turn-up tables like those ironing-board seat-tables,
you know--then they can dance there.  Small reception room and office,
hall, kitchen and laundry, and thirty bedrooms, forty by thirty, with an
"ell" for the laundry, ought to do it, oughtn't it?"

Mrs. Porne agreed to make plans, and did so most successfully, and Mr.
Porne found small difficulty in persuading an investor to put up such a
house, which visibly could be used as a boarding-house or small hotel,
if it failed in its first purpose.

It was built of concrete, a plain simple structure, but fine in
proportions and pleasantly colored.

Diantha kept her plans to herself, as usual, but they grew so fast that
she felt a species of terror sometimes, lest the ice break somewhere.

"Steady, now!" she would say.  "This is real business, just plain
business.  There's no reason why I shouldn't succeed as well as Fred
Harvey.  I will succeed.  I am succeeding."

She kept well, she worked hard, she was more than glad to have her
mother with her; but she wanted something else, which seemed farther off
than ever.  Her lover's picture hung on the wall of her bedroom, stood
on her bureau, and (but this was a secret) a small one was carried in
her bosom.

Rather a grim looking young woman, Diantha, with the cares of the world
of house-keepers upon her proud young shoulders; with all the stirring
hopes to be kept within bounds, all the skulking fears to be resisted,
and the growing burden of a large affair to be carried steadily.

But when she woke, in the brilliant California mornings, she would lie
still a few moments looking at the face on the wall and the face on the
bureau; would draw the little picture out from under her pillow and kiss
it, would say to herself for the thousandth time, "It is for him, too."

She missed him, always.

The very vigor of her general attitude, the continued strength with
which she met the days and carried them, made it all the more needful
for her to have some one with whom she could forget every care, every
purpose, every effort; some one who would put strong arms around her and
call her "Little Girl."  His letters were both a comfort and a pain.  He
was loyal, kind, loving, but always that wall of disapproval.  He loved
her, he did not love her work.

She read them over and over, hunting anew for the tender phrases, the
things which seemed most to feed and comfort her.  She suffered not only
from her loneliness, but from his; and most keenly from his sternly
suppressed longing for freedom and the work that belonged to him.

"Why can't he see," she would say to herself, "that if this succeeds, he
can do his work; that I can make it possible for him?  And he won't let
me.  He won't take it from me.  Why are men so proud?  Is there anything
so ignominious about a woman that it is disgraceful to let one help you?
 And why can't he think at all about the others?  It's not just us, it's
all people.  If this works, men will have easier times, as well as
women.  Everybody can do their real work better with this old primitive
business once set right."

And then it was always time to get up, or time to go to bed, or time to
attend to some of the numberless details of her affairs.

She and her mother had an early lunch before the caffeteria opened, and
were glad of the afternoon tea, often held in a retired corner of the
broad piazza.  She sat there one hot, dusty afternoon, alone and
unusually tired.  The asphalted street was glaring and noisy, the cross
street deep in soft dust, for months unwet.

Failure had not discouraged her, but increasing success with all its
stimulus and satisfaction called for more and more power.  Her mind was
busy foreseeing, arranging, providing for emergencies; and then the
whole thing slipped away from her, she dropped her head upon her arm for
a moment, on the edge of the tea table, and wished for Ross.

From down the street and up the street at this moment, two men were
coming; both young, both tall, both good looking, both apparently
approaching Union House.  One of them was the nearer, and his foot soon
sounded on the wooden step.  The other stopped and looked in a shop
window.

Diantha started up, came forward,--it was Mr. Eltwood.  She had a vague
sense of disappointment, but received him cordially.  He stood there,
his hat off, holding her hand for a long moment, and gazing at her with
evident admiration.  They turned and sat down in the shadow of the
reed-curtained corner.

The man at the shop window turned, too, and went away.

Mr. Eltwood had been a warm friend and cordial supporter from the epoch
of the Club-splitting speech.  He had helped materially in the slow,
up-hill days of the girl's effort, with faith and kind words.  He had
met the mother's coming with most friendly advances, and Mrs. Bell found
herself much at home in his liberal little church.

Diantha had grown to like and trust him much.

"What's this about the new house, Miss Bell?  Your mother says I may
know."

"Why not?" she said.  "You have followed this thing from the first.
Sugar or lemon?  You see I want to disentangle the undertakings, set
them upon their own separate feet, and establish the practical working
of each one."

"I see," he said, "and 'day service' is not 'cooked food delivery.'"

"Nor yet 'rooms for entertainment,' she agreed.  "We've got them all
labelled, mother and I.  There's the 'd. s.' and 'c. f. d.' and 'r. f.
e.' and the 'p. p.'  That's picnics and parties.  And more coming."

"What, more yet?  You'll kill yourself, Miss Bell.  Don't go too fast.
You are doing a great work for humanity.  Why not take a little more
time?"

"I want to do it as quickly as I can, for reasons," answered Diantha.

Mr. Eltwood looked at her with tender understanding.  "I don't want to
intrude any further than you are willing to want me," he said, "but
sometimes I think that even you--strong as you are--would be better for
some help."

She did not contradict him.  Her hands were in her lap, her eyes on the
worn boards of the piazza floor.  She did not see a man pass on the
other side of the street, cast a searching glance across and walk
quickly on again.

"If you were quite free to go on with your beautiful work," said Mr.
Eltwood slowly, "if you were offered heartiest appreciation, profound
respect, as well as love, of course; would you object to marrying, Miss
Bell?" asked in an even voice, as if it were a matter of metaphysical
inquiry.  Mrs. Porne had told him of her theory as to a lover in the
home town, wishing to save him a long heart ache, but he was not sure of
it, and he wanted to be.

Diantha glanced quickly at him, and felt the emotion under his quiet
words.  She withdrew her eyes, looking quite the other way.

"You are enough of a friend to know, Mr. Eltwood," she said, "I rather
thought you did know.  I am engaged."

"Thank you for telling me; some one is greatly to be congratulated," he
spoke sincerely, and talked quietly on about less personal matters,
holding his tea untasted till it was cold.

"Do let me give you some that is hot," she said at last, "and let me
thank you from my heart for the help and strength and comfort you have
been to me, Mr. Eltwood."

"I'm very glad," he said; and again, "I am very glad."  "You may count
upon anything I can do for you, always," he continued.  "I am proud to
be your friend."

He held her hand once more for a moment, and went away with his head up
and a firm step.  To one who watched him go, he had almost a triumphant
air, but it was not triumph, only the brave beginning of a hard fight
and a long one.

Then came Mrs. Bell, returned from a shopping trip, and sank down in a
wicker rocker, glad of the shade and a cup of tea.  No, she didn't want
it iced.  "Hot tea makes you cooler," was her theory.

"You don't look very tired," said the girl.  "Seems to me you get
stronger all the time."

"I do," said her mother.  "You don't realize, you can't realize,
Diantha, what this means to me.  Of course to you I am an old woman, a
back number--one has to feel so about one's mother.  I did when I
married, and my mother then was five years younger than I am now."

"I don't think you old, mother, not a bit of it.  You ought to have
twenty or thirty years of life before you, real life."

"That's just what I'm feeling," said Mrs. Bell, "as if I'd just begun to
live!  This is so _different!_  There is a big, moving thing to work
for.  There is--why Diantha, you wouldn't believe what a comfort it is
to me to feel that my work here is--really--adding to the profits!"

Diantha laughed aloud.

"You dear old darling," she said, "I should think it was!  It is
_making_ the profits."

"And it grows so," her mother went on.  "Here's this part so well
assured that you're setting up the new Union House!  Are you _sure_
about Mrs. Jessup, dear?"

"As sure as I can be of any one till I've tried a long time.  She has
done all I've asked her to here, and done it well.  Besides, I mean to
keep a hand on it for a year or two yet--I can't afford to have that
fail."

Mrs. Jessup was an imported aunt, belonging to one of the cleverest
girls, and Diantha had had her in training for some weeks.

"Well, I guess she's as good as any you'd be likely to get," Mrs. Bell
admitted, "and we mustn't expect paragons.  If this can't be done by an
average bunch of working women the world over, it can't be done--that's
all!"

"It can be done," said the girl, calmly.  "It will be done.  You see."

"Mr. Thaddler says you could run any kind of a business you set your
hand to," her mother went on.  "He has a profound respect for your
abilities, Dina."

"Seems to me you and Mr. Thaddler have a good deal to say to each other,
motherkins.  I believe you enjoy that caffeteria desk, and all the
compliments you get."

"I do," said Mrs. Bell stoutly.  "I do indeed!  Why, I haven't seen so
many men, to speak to, since--why, never in my life!  And they are very
amusing--some of them.  They like to come here--like it immensely.  And
I don't wonder.  I believe you'll do well to enlarge."

Then they plunged into a discussion of the winter's plans.  The day
service department and its employment agency was to go on at the New
Union House, with Mrs. Jessup as manager; the present establishment was
to be run as a hotel and restaurant, and the depot for the cooked food
delivery.

Mrs. Thorvald and her husband were installed by themselves in another
new venture; a small laundry outside the town.  This place employed
several girls steadily, and the motor wagon found a new use between
meals, in collecting and delivering laundry parcels.

"It simplifies it a lot--to get the washing out of the place and the
girls off my mind," said Diantha.  "Now I mean to buckle down and learn
the hotel business--thoroughly, and develop this cooked food delivery to
perfection."

"Modest young lady," smiled her mother.  "Where do you mean to stop--if
ever?"

"I don't mean to stop till I'm dead," Diantha answered; "but I don't
mean to undertake any more trades, if that is what you mean.  You know
what I'm after--to get 'housework' on a business basis, that's all; and
prove, prove, PROVE what a good business it is.  There's the cleaning
branch--that's all started and going well in the day service.  There's
the washing--that's simple and easy.  Laundry work's no mystery.  But
the food part is a big thing.  It's an art, a science, a business, and a
handicraft.  I had the handicraft to start with; I'm learning the
business; but I've got a lot to learn yet in the science and art of it."


"Don't do too much at once," her mother urged.  "You've got to cater to
people as they are."

"I know it," the girl agreed.  "They must be led, step by step--the
natural method.  It's a big job, but not too big.  Out of all the women
who have done housework for so many ages, surely it's not too much to
expect one to have a special genius for it!"

Her mother gazed at her with loving admiration.

"That's just what you have, Dina--a special genius for housework.  I
wish there were more of you!"

"There are plenty of me, mother dear, only they haven't come out.  As
soon as I show 'em how to make the thing pay, you'll find that we have a
big percentage of this kind of ability.  It's all buried now in the
occasional 'perfect housekeeper.'

"But they won't leave their husbands, Dina."

"They don't need to," the girl answered cheerfully.  "Some of them
aren't married yet; some of them have lost their husbands, and _some_ of
them"--she said this a little bitterly--"have husbands who will be
willing to let their wives grow."

"Not many, I'm afraid," said Mrs. Bell, also with some gloom.

Diantha lightened up again.  "Anyhow, here you are, mother dear!  And
for this year I propose that you assume the financial management of the
whole business at a salary of $1,000 'and found.'  How does that suit
you?"

Mrs. Bell looked at her unbelievingly.

"You can't afford it, Dina!"

"Oh, yes, I can--you know I can, because you've got the accounts.  I'm
going to make big money this year."

"But you'll need it.  This hotel and restaurant business may not do
well."

"Now, mother, you _know_ we're doing well.  Look here!"  And Diantha
produced her note-book.

"Here's the little laundry place; its fittings come to so much, wages so
much, collection and delivery so much, supplies so much--and already
enough patronage engaged to cover.  It will be bigger in winter, a lot,
with transients, and this hotel to fall back on; ought to clear at least
a thousand a year.  The service club don't pay me anything, of course;
that is for the girls' benefit; but the food delivery is doing better
than I dared hope."

Mrs. Bell knew the figures better than Diantha, even, and they went over
them carefully again.  If the winter's patronage held on to equal the
summer's--and the many transient residents ought to increase it--they
would have an average of twenty families a week to provide for--one
hundred persons.

The expenses were:


Food for 100 at $250 a week.  Per capita.   $600
---
per year $13,000

Labor--delivery man.  $600
Head cook.  $600
Two assistant cooks.  $1,040
Three washers and packers.  $1,560
Office girl.  $520
---
Per year $4,320

Rent, kitchen, office, etc.  $500
Rent of motor.  $300
Rent of cases.  $250
Gasolene and repairs.  $630
---
Per year $1,680

Total.  $19,000


"How do you make the gasolene and repairs as much as that?" asked Mrs.
Bell.

"It's margin, mother--makes it even money.  It won't be so much,
probably."

The income was simple and sufficient.  They charged $5.00 a week per
capita for three meals, table d'hote, delivered thrice daily.  Frequent
orders for extra meals really gave them more than they set down, but the
hundred-person estimate amounted to $26,000 a year.

"Now, see," said Diantha triumphantly; "subtract all that expense list
(and it is a liberal one), and we have $7,000 left.  I can buy the car
and the cases this year and have $1,600 over!  More; because if I do buy
them I can leave off some of the interest, and the rent of kitchen and
office comes to Union House!  Then there's all of the extra orders.
It's going to pay splendidly, mother!  It clears $70 a year per person.
Next year it will clear a lot more."

It did not take long to make Mrs. Bell admit that if the business went
on as it had been going Diantha would be able to pay her a salary of a
thousand dollars, and have five hundred left--from the food business
alone.

There remained the hotel, with large possibilities.  The present simple
furnishings were to be moved over to New Union House, and paid for by
the girls in due time.  With new paint, paper, and furniture, the old
house would make a very comfortable place.

"Of course, it's the restaurant mainly--these big kitchens and the
central location are the main thing.  The guests will be mostly
tourists, I suppose."

Diantha dwelt upon the prospect at some length; and even her cautious
mother had to admit that unless there was some setback the year had a
prospect of large success.

"How about all this new furnishing?" Mrs. Bell said suddenly.  "How do
you cover that?  Take what you've got ahead now?"

"Yes; there's plenty," said Diantha.  "You see, there is all Union House
has made, and this summer's profit on the cooked food--it's plenty."

"Then you can't pay for the motor and cases as you planned," her mother
insisted.

"No, not unless the hotel and restaurant pays enough to make good.  But
I don't _have_ to buy them the first year.  If I don't, there is $5,500
leeway."

"Yes, you are safe enough; there's over $4,000 in the bank now," Mrs.
Bell admitted.  "But, child," she said suddenly, "your father!"

"Yes, I've thought of father," said the girl, "and I mean to ask him to
come and live at the hotel.  I think he'd like it.  He could meet people
and talk about his ideas, and I'm sure I'd like to have him."

"They talked much and long about this, till the evening settled about
them, till they had their quiet supper, and the girls came home to their
noisy one; and late that evening, when all was still again, Diantha came
to the dim piazza corner once more and sat there quite alone.

Full of hope, full of courage, sure of her progress--and aching with
loneliness.

She sat with her head in her hands, and to her ears came suddenly the
sound of a familiar step--a well-known voice--the hands and the lips of
her lover.

"Diantha!"  He held her close.

"Oh, Ross!  Ross!  Darling!  Is it true?  When did you come?  Oh, I'm so
glad!  So _glad_ to see you!"

She was so glad that she had to cry a little on his shoulder, which he
seemed to thoroughly enjoy.

"I've good news for you, little girl," he said.  "Good news at last!
Listen, dear; don't cry.  There's an end in sight.  A man has bought out
my shop.  The incubus is off--I can _live_ now!"

He held his head up in a fine triumph, and she watched him adoringly.

"Did you--was it profitable?" she asked.

"It's all exchange, and some cash to boot.  Just think!  You know what
I've wanted so long--a ranch.  A big one that would keep us all, and let
me go on with my work.  And, dear--I've got it!  It's a big fruit ranch,
with its own water--think of that!  And a vegetable garden, too, and
small fruit, and everything.  And, what's better, it's all in good
running order, with a competent ranchman, and two Chinese who rent the
vegetable part.  And there are two houses on it--_two_.  One for mother
and the girls, and one for us!"

Diantha's heart stirred suddenly.

"Where is it, dear?" she whispered.

He laughed joyfully.  "It's _here!"_ he said.  "About eight miles or so
out, up by the mountains; has a little canyon of its own--its own little
stream and reservoir.  Oh, my darling!  My darling!"

They sat in happy silence in the perfumed night.  The strong arms were
around her, the big shoulder to lean on, the dear voice to call her
"little girl."

The year of separation vanished from their thoughts, and the long years
of companionship opened bright and glorious before them.

"I came this afternoon," he said at length, "but I saw another man
coming.  He got here first.  I thought--"

"Ross!  You didn't!  And you've left me to go without you all these
hours!"

"He looked so confident when he went away that I was jealous," Ross
admitted, "furiously jealous.  And then your mother was here, and then
those cackling girls.  I wanted you--alone."

And then he had her, alone, for other quiet, happy moments.  She was so
glad of him.  Her hold upon his hand, upon his coat, was tight.

"I don't know how I've lived without you," she said softly.

"Nor I," said he.  "I haven't lived.  It isn't life--without you.  Well,
dearest, it needn't be much longer.  We closed the deal this afternoon.
I came down here to see the place, and--incidentally--to see you!"

More silence.

"I shall turn over the store at once.  It won't take long to move and
settle; there's enough money over to do that.  And the ranch pays,
Diantha!  It really _pays,_ and will carry us all.  How long will it
take you to get out of this?"

"Get out of--what?" she faltered.

"Why, the whole abominable business you're so deep in here.  Thank God,
there's no shadow of need for it any more!"

The girl's face went white, but he could not see it.  She would not
believe him.

"Why, dear," she said, "if your ranch is as near as that it would be
perfectly easy for me to come in to the business--with a car.  I can
afford a car soon."

"But I tell you there's no need any more," said he.  "Don't you
understand?  This is a paying fruit ranch, with land rented to
advantage, and a competent manager right there running it.  It's simply
changed owners.  I'm the owner now!  There's two or three thousand a
year to be made on it--has been made on it!  There is a home for my
people--a home for us!  Oh, my beloved girl!  My darling!  My own
sweetheart!  Surely you won't refuse me now!"

Diantha's head swam dizzily.

"Ross," she urged, "you don't understand!  I've built up a good business
here--a real successful business.  Mother is in it; father's to come
down; there is a big patronage; it grows.  I can't give it up!"

"Not for me?  Not when I can offer you a home at last?  Not when I show
you that there is no longer any need of your earning money?" he said
hotly.

"But, dear--dear!" she protested.  "It isn't for the money; it is the
work I want to do--it is my work!  You are so happy now that you can do
your work--at last!  This is mine!"

When he spoke again his voice was low and stern.

"Do you mean that you love--your work--better than you love me?"

"No!  It isn't that!  That's not fair!" cried the girl.  "Do you love
your work better than you love me?  Of course not!  You love both.  So
do I.  Can't you see?  Why should I have to give up anything?"

"You do not have to," he said patiently.  "I cannot compel you to marry
me.  But now, when at last--after these awful years--I can really offer
you a home--you refuse!"

"I have not refused," she said slowly.

His voice lightened again.

"Ah, dearest!  And you will not!  You will marry me?"

"I will marry you, Ross!"

"And when?  When, dearest?"

"As soon as you are ready."

"But--can you drop this at once?"

"I shall not drop it."

Her voice was low, very low, but clear and steady.

He rose to his feet with a muffled exclamation, and walked the length of
the piazza and back.

"Do you realize that you are saying no to me, Diantha?"

"You are mistaken, dear.  I have said that I will marry you whenever you
choose.  But it is you who are saying, 'I will not marry a woman with a
business.'"

"This is foolishness!" he said sharply.  "No man--that is a man--would
marry a woman and let her run a business."

"You are mistaken," she answered.  "One of the finest men I ever knew
has asked me to marry him--and keep on with my work!"

"Why didn't you take him up?"

"Because I didn't love him."  She stopped, a sob in her voice, and he
caught her in his arms again.

It was late indeed when he went away, walking swiftly, with a black
rebellion in his heart; and Diantha dragged herself to bed.

She was stunned, deadened, exhausted; torn with a desire to run after
him and give up--give up anything to hold his love.  But something,
partly reason and partly pride, kept saying within her: "I have not
refused him; he has refused me!"



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; or, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


XII.

POLITICS AND WARFARE.


I go to my old dictionary, and find; "Politics, I.  The science of
government; that part of ethics which has to do with the regulation and
government of a nation or state, the preservation of its safety, peace
and prosperity; the defence of its existence and rights against foreign
control or conquest; the augmentation of its strength and resources, and
the protection of its citizens in their rights; with the preservation
and improvement of their morals.  2.  The management of political
parties; the advancement of candidates to office; in a bad sense, artful
or dishonest management to secure the success of political measures or
party schemes, political trickery."

From present day experience we might add, 3.  Politics, practical; The
art of organizing and handling men in large numbers, manipulating votes,
and, in especial, appropriating public wealth.

We can easily see that the "science of government" may be divided into
"pure" and "applied" like other sciences, but that it is "a part of
ethics" will be news to many minds.

Yet why not?  Ethics is the science of conduct, and politics is merely
one field of conduct; a very common one.  Its connection with Warfare in
this chapter is perfectly legitimate in view of the history of politics
on the one hand, and the imperative modern issues which are to-day
opposed to this established combination.

There are many to-day who hold that politics need not be at all
connected with warfare, and others who hold that politics is warfare
front start to finish.

In order to dissociate the two ideas completely let us give a paraphrase
of the above definition, applying it to domestic management;--that part
of ethics which has to do with the regulation and government of a
family; the preservation of its safety, peace and prosperity; the
defense of its existence and rights against any strangers' interference
or control; the augmentation of its strength and resources, and the
protection of its members in their rights; with the preservation and
improvement of their morals.

All this is simple enough, and in no way masculine; neither is it
feminine, save in this; that the tendency to care for, defend and manage
a group, is in its origin maternal.

In every human sense, however, politics has left its maternal base far
in the background; and as a field of study and of action is as well
adapted to men as to women.  There is no reason whatever why men should
not develop great ability in this department of ethics, and gradually
learn how to preserve the safety, peace and prosperity of their nation;
together with those other services as to resources, protection of
citizens, and improvement of morals.

Men, as human beings, are capable of the noblest devotion and efficiency
in these matters, and have often shown them; but their devotion and
efficiency have been marred in this, as in so many other fields, by the
constant obtrusion of an ultra-masculine tendency.

In warfare, _per se_, we find maleness in its absurdest extremes.  Here
is to be studied the whole gamut of basic masculinity, from the initial
instinct of combat, through every form of glorious ostentation, with the
loudest possible accompaniment of noise.

Primitive warfare had for its climax the possession of the primitive
prize, the female.  Without dogmatising on so remote a period, it may be
suggested as a fair hypothesis that this was the very origin of our
organized raids.  We certainly find war before there was property in
land, or any other property to tempt aggressors.  Women, however, there
were always, and when a specially androcentric tribe had reduced its
supply of women by cruel treatment, or they were not born in sufficient
numbers, owing to hard conditions, men must needs go farther afield
after other women.  Then, since the men of the other tribes naturally
objected to losing their main labor supply and comfort, there was war.

Thus based on the sex impulse, it gave full range to the combative
instinct, and further to that thirst for vocal exultation so exquisitely
male.  The proud bellowings of the conquering stag, as he trampled on
his prostrate rival, found higher expression in the "triumphs" of old
days, when the conquering warrior returned to his home, with victims
chained to his chariot wheels, and braying trumpets.

When property became an appreciable factor in life, warfare took on a
new significance.  What was at first mere destruction, in the effort to
defend or obtain some hunting ground or pasture; and, always, to secure
the female; now coalesced with the acquisitive instinct, and the long
black ages of predatory warfare closed in upon the world.

Where the earliest form exterminated, the later enslaved, and took
tribute; and for century upon century the "gentleman adventurer," i.e.,
the primitive male, greatly preferred to acquire wealth by the simple
old process of taking it, to any form of productive industry.

We have been much misled as to warfare by our androcentric literature.
With a history which recorded nothing else; a literature which praised
and an art which exalted it; a religion which called its central power
"the God of Battles"--never the God of Workshops, mind you!--with a
whole complex social structure man-prejudiced from center to
circumference, and giving highest praise and honor to the Soldier; it is
still hard for its to see what warfare really is in human life.

Someday we shall have new histories written, histories of world
progress, showing the slow uprising, the development, the interservice
of the nations; showing the faint beautiful dawn of the larger spirit of
world-consciousness, and all its benefitting growth.

We shall see people softening, learning, rising; see life lengthen with
the possession of herds, and widen in rich prosperity with agriculture.
Then industry, blossoming, fruiting, spreading wide; art, giving light
and joy; the intellect developing with companionship and human
intercourse; the whole spreading tree of social progress, the trunk of
which is specialized industry, and the branches of which comprise every
least and greatest line of human activity and enjoyment.  This growing
tree, springing up wherever conditions of peace and prosperity gave it a
chance, we shall see continually hewed down to the very root by war.

To the later historian will appear throughout the ages, like some
Hideous Fate, some Curse, some predetermined check, to drag down all our
hope and joy and set life forever at its first steps over again, this
Red Plague of War.

The instinct of combat, between males, worked advantageously so long as
it did not injure the female or the young.  It is a perfectly natural
instinct, and therefore perfectly right, in its place; but its place is
in a pre-patriarchal era.  So long as the animal mother was free and
competent to care for herself and her young; then it was an advantage to
have "the best man win;" that is the best stag or lion; and to have the
vanquished die, or live in sulky celibacy, was no disadvantage to any
one but himself.

Humanity is on a stage above this plan.  The best man in the social
structure is not always the huskiest.  When a fresh horde of ultra-male
savages swarmed down upon a prosperous young civilization, killed off
the more civilized males and appropriated the more civilized females;
they did, no doubt, bring in a fresh physical impetus to the race; but
they destroyed the civilization.

The reproduction of perfectly good savages is not the main business of
humanity.  Its business is to grow, socially; to develop, to improve;
and warfare, at its best, retards human progress; at its worst,
obliterates it.

Combat is not a social process at all; it is a physical process, a
subsidiary sex process, purely masculine, intended to improve the
species by the elimination of the unfit.  Amusingly enough, or absurdly
enough; when applied to society, it eliminates the fit, and leaves the
unfit to perpetuate the race!

We require, to do our organized fighting, a picked lot of vigorous young
males, the fittest we can find.  The too old or too young; the sick,
crippled, defective; are all left behind, to marry and be fathers; while
the pick of the country, physically, is sent off to oppose the pick of
another country, and kill--kill--kill!

Observe the result on the population!  In the first place the balance is
broken--there are not enough men to go around, at home; many women are
left unmated.  In primitive warfare, where women were promptly enslaved,
or, at the best, polygamously married, this did not greatly matter to
the population; but as civilization advances and monogamy obtains,
whatever eugenic benefits may once have sprung from warfare are
completely lost, and all its injuries remain.

In what we innocently call "civilized warfare" (we might as well speak
of "civilized cannibalism!"), this steady elimination of the fit leaves
an everlowering standard of parentage at home.  It makes a widening
margin of what we call "surplus women," meaning more than enough to be
monogamously married; and these women, not being economically
independent, drag steadily upon the remaining men, postponing marriage,
and increasing its burdens.

The birth rate is lowered in quantity by the lack of husbands, and
lowered in quality both by the destruction of superior stock, and by the
wide dissemination of those diseases which invariably accompany the
wife-lessness of the segregated males who are told off to perform our
military functions.

The external horrors and wastes of warfare we are all familiar with; A.
It arrests industry and all progress.  B. It destroys the fruits of
industry and progress.  C. It weakens, hurts and kills the combatants.
D. It lowers the standard of the non-combatants.  Even the conquering
nation is heavily injured; the conquered sometimes exterminated, or at
least absorbed by the victor.

This masculine selective process, when applied to nations, does not
produce the same result as when applied to single opposing animals.
When little Greece was overcome it did not prove that the victors were
superior, nor promote human interests in any way; it injured them.

The "stern arbitrament of war" may prove which of two peoples is the
better fighter, but ft does not prove it therefor the fittest to
survive.

Beyond all these more or less obvious evils, comes a further result, not
enough recognized; the psychic effects of military standard of thought
and feeling.

Remember that an androcentric culture has always exempted its own
essential activities from the restraints of ethics,--"All's fair in love
and war!"  Deceit, trickery, lying, every kind of skulking underhand
effort to get information; ceaseless endeavor to outwit and overcome
"the enemy"; besides as cruelty and destruction; are characteristic of
the military process; as well as the much praised virtues of courage,
endurance and loyalty, personal and public.

Also classed as a virtue, and unquestionably such from the military
point of view, is that prime factor in making and keeping an army,
obedience.

See how the effect of this artificial maintenance of early mental
attitudes acts on our later development.  True human progress requires
elements quite other than these.  If successful warfare made one nation
unquestioned master of the earth its social progress would not be
promoted by that event.  The rude hordes of Genghis Khan swarmed over
Asia and into Europe, but remained rude hordes; conquest is not
civilization, nor any part of it.

When the northern tribes-men overwhelmed the Roman culture they
paralysed progress for a thousand years or so; set back the clock by
that much.  So long as all Europe was at war, so long the arts and
sciences sat still, or struggled in hid corners to keep their light
alive.

When warfare itself ceases, the physical, social and psychic results do
not cease.  Our whole culture is still hag-ridden by military ideals.

Peace congresses have begun to meet, peace societies write and talk, but
the monuments to soldiers and sailors (naval sailors of course), still
go up, and the tin soldier remains a popular toy.  We do not see boxes
of tin carpenters by any chance; tin farmers, weavers, shoemakers; we do
not write our "boys books" about the real benefactors and servers of
society; the adventurer and destroyer remains the idol of an
Androcentric Culture.

In politics the military ideal, the military processes, are so
predominant as to almost monopolise "that part of ethics."  The science
of government, the plain wholesome business of managing a community for
its own good; doing its work, advancing its prosperity, improving its
morals--this is frankly understood and accepted as A Fight from start to
finish.  Marshall your forces and try to get in, this is the political
campaign.  When you are in, fight to stay in, and to keep the other
fellow out.  Fight for your own hand, like an animal; fight for your
master like any hired bravo; fight always for some desired
"victory"--and "to the victors belong the spoils."

This is not by any means the true nature of politics.  It is not even a
fair picture of politics to-day; in which man, the human being, is doing
noble work for humanity; but it is the effect of man, the male, on
politics.

Life, to the "male mind" (we have heard enough of the "female mind" to
use the analogue!) _is_ a fight, and his ancient military institutions
and processes keep up the delusion.

As a matter of fact life is growth.  Growth comes naturally, by
multiplication of cells, and requires three factors to promote it;
nourishment, use, rest.  Combat is a minor incident of life; belonging
to low levels, and not of a developing influence socially.

The science of politics, in a civilized community, should have by this
time a fine accumulation of simplified knowledge for diffusion in public
schools; a store of practical experience in how to promote social
advancement most rapidly, a progressive economy and ease of
administration, a simplicity in theory and visible benefit in practice,
such as should make every child an eager and serviceable citizen.

What do we find, here in America, in the field of "politics?"

We find first a party system which is the technical arrangement to carry
on a fight.  It is perfectly conceivable that a flourishing democratic
government be carried on _without any parties at all;_ public
functionaries being elected on their merits, and each proposed measure
judged on its merits; though this sounds impossible to the androcentric
mind.

"There has never been a democracy without factions and parties!" is
protested.

There has never been a democracy, so far--only an androcracy.

A group composed of males alone, naturally divides, opposes, fights;
even a male church, under the most rigid rule, has its secret
undercurrents of antagonism.

"It is the human heart!" is again protested.  No, not essentially the
human heart, but the male heart.  This is so well recognized by men in
general, that, to their minds, in this mingled field of politics and
warfare, women have no place.

In "civilized warfare" they are, it is true, allowed to trail along and
practice their feminine function of nursing; but this is no part of war
proper, it is rather the beginning of the end of war.  Some time it will
strike our "funny spot," these strenuous efforts to hurt and destroy,
and these accompanying efforts to heal and save.

But in our politics there is not even provision for a nursing corps;
women are absolutely excluded.

"They cannot play the game!" cries the practical politician.  There is
loud talk of the defilement, the "dirty pool" and its resultant
darkening of fair reputations, the total unfitness of lovely woman to
take part in "the rough and tumble of politics."

In other words men have made a human institution into an ultra-masculine
performance; and, quite rightly, feel that women could not take part in
politics _as men do._  That it is not necessary to fulfill this human
custom in so masculine a way does not occur to them.  Few men can
overlook the limitations of their sex and see the truth; that this
business of taking care of our common affairs is not only equally open
to women and men, but that women are distinctly needed in it.

Anyone will admit that a government wholly in the hands of women would
be helped by the assistance of men; that a gynaecocracy must, of its own
nature, be one sided.  Yet it is hard to win reluctant admission of the
opposite fact; that an androcracy must of its own nature be one sided
also, and would be greatly improved by the participation of the other
sex.

The inextricable confusion of politics and warfare is part of the
stumbling block in the minds of men.  As they see it, a nation is
primarily a fighting organization; and its principal business is
offensive and defensive warfare; therefore the ultimatum with which they
oppose the demand for political equality--"women cannot fight, therefore
they cannot vote."

Fighting, when all is said, is to them the real business of life; not to
be able to fight is to be quite out of the running; and ability to solve
our growing mass of public problems; questions of health, of education,
of morals, of economics; weighs naught against the ability to kill.

This naive assumption of supreme value in a process never of the first
importance; and increasingly injurious as society progresses, would be
laughable if it were not for its evil effects.  It acts and reacts upon
us to our hurt.  Positively, we see the ill effects already touched on;
the evils not only of active war; but of the spirit and methods of war;
idealized, inculcated and practiced in other social processes.  It tends
to make each man-managed nation an actual or potential fighting
organization, and to give us, instead of civilized peace, that "balance
of power" which is like the counted time in the prize ring--only a rest
between combats.

It leaves the weaker nations to be "conquered" and "annexed" just as
they used to be; with tariffs instead of tribute.  It forces upon each
the burden of armament; upon many the dreaded conscription; and
continually lowers the world's resources in money and in life.

Similarly in politics, it adds to the legitimate expenses of governing
the illegitimate expenses of fighting; and must needs have a "spoils
system" by which to pay its mercenaries.

In carrying out the public policies the wheels of state are continually
clogged by the "opposition;" always an opposition on one side or the
other; and this slow wiggling uneven progress, through shorn victories
and haggling concessions, is held to be the proper and only political
method.

"Women do not understand politics," we are told; "Women do not care for
politics;" "Women are unfitted for politics."

It is frankly inconceivable, from the androcentric view-point, that
nations can live in peace together, and be friendly and serviceable as
persons are.  It is inconceivable also, that in the management of a
nation, honesty, efficiency, wisdom, experience and love could work out
good results without any element of combat.

The "ultimate resort" is still to arms.  "The will of the majority" is
only respected on account of the guns of the majority.  We have but a
partial civilization, heavily modified to sex--the male sex.



THE SOCIALIST AND THE SUFFRAGIST


Said the Socialist to the Suffragist:
 "My cause is greater than yours!
  You only work for a Special Class,
  We for the gain of the General Mass,
 Which every good ensures!"

Said the Suffragist to the Socialist:
 "You Underrate my Cause!
  While women remain a Subject Class,
  You never can move the General Mass,
 With your Economic Laws!"

Said the Socialist to the Suffragist:
 "You misinterpret facts!
  There is no room for doubt or schism
  In Economic Determinism--
 It governs all our acts!"

Said the Suffragist to the Socialist:
 "You men will always find
  That this old world will never move
  More swiftly in its ancient groove
 While women stay behind!"

"A lifted world lifts women up,"
 The Socialist explained.
  "You cannot lift the world at all
  While half of it is kept so small,"
 The Suffragist maintained.

*

The world awoke, and tartly spoke:
 "Your work is all the same;
  Work together or work apart,
  Work, each of you, with all your heart--
 Just get into the game!"



COMMENT AND REVIEW


[We mean to carry lists of books useful to our readers.  We wish to
prove that it will pay publishers to advertise with us.  If you order
any book reviewed here, please send your order to THE FORERUNNER]


There is a book which ought to be held in continual prominence by every
magazine in the world that appeals particularly to women.  It contains a
scientific theory of more importance to the world than any put forth
since the theory of evolution, and of more importance to women than any
ever produced.

It is new, original, wildly startling, intensely significant, and, in
the world of ideas, revolutionary in the highest degree.

When this theory is generally accepted, and when the world's ideas have
been rearranged in accordance with it, we shall find ourselves looking
at a new life--with new eyes.

All our social questions will require new reading, and will find new
answers.

It furnishes a key to the whole "woman question," which unlocks every
long-barred door and ironbound chest; it cuts the ground from under the
feet of the most ancient prejudice, and makes tradition seem but a
current rumor of to-day.

This book was published in 1893.

When I read it I was so impressed with its colossal possibility that I
went to the publishers and asked to see the reviews--expecting to find
some recognition of a world-lifting truth.

I found nothing of the sort.  The reviewers reviewed the book in general
with respect, with varying insight and intelligence, and one or two
dwelt fot a moment on this special theory; but not one recognized its
measureless importance.

This is not remarkable.  In proportion to the far-reaching value of a
truth is the difficulty of popular recognition.  With almost all of us
the mind is constantly used upon immediate facts and their
short-distance relations; a man may be an expert lumber-jack, for
instance, or a successful lumber-dealer, yet utterly fail to grasp the
importance of forest conservation.

Even those most interested in the woman's movement of to-day were little
impressed by this new view.

"What difference does it make?" they said.  "We are dealing with
conditions of to-day--not with questions of primitive biology!"

Nevertheless, when a great truth is born into the world's mind, it does
not die.  This, though not widely hailed, has grown and spread and
influenced our common thought, and minor books are springing up in its
train--among them Thomas's "Sex and Society," and my own "Androcentric
Culture."

The author of the book, Professor Lester F. Ward, is our greatest
Sociologist, and recognized in Europe far more than here--as is quite
natural.  He now occupies the chair of Sociology at Brown University, in
Providence, R. I.  His previous books have had wide influence--"Dynamic
Sociology" and "Psychic Factors in Civilization"--as well as much
current literature in scientific magazines.

The special theory here referred to is, in a word, this:

That the female sex is the present form of the original type of life,
once capable in itself of the primary process of reproduction; while the
male sex is a later addition, introduced as an assistant to the original
organism, in the secondary process of fertilization.

Most biologists still deny this.

Most readers, not knowing whether it is so or not, will say, "Why is
that important?"

It will take time and study to establish the facts; but only a little
use of the mind is needed to establish the importance to men and women.

Our ideas are all based on the primal concept expressed in the Adam and
Eve story--that he was made first, and that she was made to assist him.
On this assumption rests all our social structure as it concerns the
sexes.

Reverse this idea once and for all; see that woman is in reality the
race-type, and the man the sex-type--and all our dark and tangled
problems of unhappiness, sin and disease, as between men and women, are
cleared at once.  Much, very much, of our more general trouble is
traceable tho same source.

You don't see it?  Never mind.  Read the book; or at least read the
great Fourteenth Chapter, which covers the ground.

The book is "PURE SOCIOLOGY," by Lester F. Ward.  Published by the
MacMillan Co.  Price, $4.00.

Make your library get it.

If you can afford to, buy it.

Get up classes of women to study it.

Read the whole if it interests you--it is a great Sociology; but every
woman who knows how to read ought to read that Fourteenth Chapter.

*

While going to press the Pure Food Magazine is holding a great Pure Food
Exhibition in this city.

At one of the meetings of the Congress of Domestic Science there was a
discussion of the Servant Question.  A paper was read by a "Mistress,"
and one by a, "Servant."  The latter was as nice a girl as one need see;
and her paper was intensely practical, full of good sense, well
expressed--and short!

Here it is:

"I know I am not equal to the honor of appearing here to-day, and I
should like to be able to express myself clearer and better if I only
had the power to do so, but I have never spoken before in my life.  I
have earned my living ever since I was fourteen, both in a factory and
as a maid, and I think that I get a better living when I am out at
service.  I have had good places and some bad ones; kind mistresses, and
severe ones.  I have pleased some, and others nothing I could do was
right.  At service we are sure of a good home and much better food and
shelter than is the factory girl, but we have not the independence and
freedom that is given them, but I do not see how it could be arranged
otherwise.  But if we could have a quiet spot, so when our work was
finished we could have a room to call our own (not the kitchen, where
the cook is still busy with the pots and pans), but a little space where
our mothers and friends could come and see us, I am sure that we maids
would not abuse that privilege.  Also, if you ladies would kindly
remember that our time off is our own, and would not say, "I do wish you
would not go off to-day, as I need you, but it will be all right, as I
will let you off all of to-morrow," and then think that it will be just
the same to us.  Our time off should be a positive arrangement, as we
make our plans for those hours, and to-morrow is not to-day with our
friends waiting for us.

"We all hope for a home of our own, and we can only learn from those
that we serve; and if only more interest and consideration were shown
us, I am sure, we would all do much better work, as we all like to
please and we do our best when we are happy and appreciated.

"Unequal wages are a source of discontent, but if we could be taught how
to secure the value for our money, to spend with better judgment, even
less money would go farther.

"Then, again, if our amusements could be arranged so that we could get
something decent between nine and ten o'clock at night; but everything
is half over, or shut, by that time, and we've nothing to do but walk
the streets, sit in the park, drink soda water, or look at moving
pictures, until you hate them all, and when Monday morning comes you've
spent your money and had nothing.  It's a deadly life, and we all look
forward to getting out of it soon.  Never a minute to call one's own,
not often a room or bed to one's self, at the beck and call of somebody
night and day, and in many places not even trusted with the things to
work with, if there are any."

*

Would you like a tiny book of poetry--real poetry, made by one of our
strong writers?

He makes not only the poems, but the book; prints it, binds it, sends it
to you himself.

It is a dainty thing, five and a half by four inches; but it has in it
both thought and feeling, and beauty of expression.

"A Ship of Souls" is the title, and the first stanza carries the main
idea--touched and re-touched throughout.

"My soul is not one; 'tis a ship of souls,
 And I am the vessel in which they ride.
Some handle the ropes and manage the sails,
 And one at the helm stands firm to guide.
Some board me for pleasure, and some for gain,
 And some make journeys to distant goals,
And my life is steered through the sun and rain,
 For I am not a soul, but a ship of souls."

A Ship of Souls.--Being a group of poems written and printed by Harvey
White.  The Maverick Press; Woodstock, New York, 1910.  50c.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


I.


_Question._--"An aged widow would like to live with her married
daughter, but their dispositions are incompatible.  The mother is very
fond of the daughter, but the daughter finds it impossible to respond or
feel affectionate, and is so irritated and critical because of the
mother's old-fashioned ways, etc., that continued close association
becomes very unpleasant.

"Who is to blame, and what can the mother do to improve the situation?

"Mutual Wellwisher."


_Answer._--There is no "blame" in the problem as stated.
Incompatibility of disposition is not a crime.  If, however, the
daughter allows her irritation and critical attitude to result in actual
discussion and expressed disapproval of her mother's "old-fashioned
ways," then she is certainly to blame; whether her mother is a guest or
a boarder, she is not her daughter's pupil.

Again, if the mother allows herself to interfere with the daughter's
"ways," she is to blame for that; her period of tutoring is past.
Ex-parents should not presume on their unavoidable relationship to give
instruction to ex-children.

The real answer is a long way back, being to this effect:

The aged widow, when a young woman, should have had such large practical
interest in life, over and above her family, that she would not be
reduced to the position of "living with a married daughter; or, if she
did live with her, would have enough else to occupy her to keep her
"old-fashioned ways" in the background.  Further, if she had kept up
with human progress in some business, her ways wouldn't be so
old-fashioned.

The Practical Answer to the Practical Question, "What can the mother do
to improve the situation?" is not difficult.  She can (a) alter her
ways; (b) live somewhere else; (c) if neither of these is possible, she
can put it clearly to the daughter, "as man to man," that she _has_ to
live with her, that she _cannot_ learn new ways, and that they must use
mutual politeness in accommodating one an other as far as possible.

It is a very carefully worded problem, this.  If the daughter is healthy
and otherwise contented, she ought to furnish the patience, as doubtless
the mother did in her time.  But it may be that the mother always
irritated the daughter, in her youth, and has never never learned
better.

If I were the aged widow I would live somewhere else!


II


_Question._--A friend writes to ask--

"How about flies its the central kitchen?" (This being apropos of "The
Kitchen and the Fly," in the August number of this magazine.)

_Answer._--One kitchen, though large, is more easily protected than a
hundred kitchens, though small.  There will be less "garbage," in
proportion, and it can be better handled.  The officers of such a
kitchen will be of a higher grade than the present class of servants,
and capable of maintaining a higher grade of cleanliness; as, for
instance, in the Franco-American soup factory, where there is exquisite
cleanliness and care.

Further, in such a kitchen there will be no laundry or other extraneous
work done; no running in and out of children and others; nothing but the
scientific preparation of food.

Also, as shown in the article, the flies will be reduced 99 per cent. by
the reduction in the number of horses required to bring supplies and
remove garbage and ashes.  To the large kitchen, wholesale supplies
could be brought in motor trucks--a further loss to the fly.


III


_Question._--"A certain husband has been in the habit for years of
paying a dollar a month lodge dues, and other incidental expenses of
lodge meetings.  The wife has paid a dollar a year dues in a suffrage
club, and a dollar and a half a year for subscription to the Woman's
Journal.  The 'late' panic has shrunk the family income, and something
must be cut off.  The Wife will cut off the two small amounts mentioned.
 She will cut off anything else that is for her separate existence.
Now, the question is, how may her feeling of virtue and self-sacrifice
be changed to a realization of injustice?"

_Answer._--This is a very large question--how to change the ethical
values of a woman's life!

We gather by inference that the "certain husband" has not cut off his
lodge dues--or anything else.

The best answer is: let the woman EARN HER OWN LIVING.  That goes
farthest in changing self-sacrifice to justice.



OUR BOUND VOLUME AS A CHRISTMAS PRESENT


The first year comprises fourteen issues--November, 1909, to December,
1910, inclusive.

In it is the Housekeeping novel--"What Diantha Did"--which will interest
many, both men and women.  It offers a very practical solution to the
Servant Question.

In it is also the Book About Men--"The Man-Made World, or Our
Androcentric Culture."

There have been books and books about women--mostly, unpleasant.  This
is the first one about men, as such; men as distinguished from Human
Beings--as women have always been distinguished from Human Beings.

You won't wholly like the book--just consider whether it is true!

The novel separately, or the book separately, would also make good
presents, but the date of their publication is not settled, while in the
bound volume of the magazine you get them both for only 25c. more than
one would cost.

This set, making a volume of some 420 pages, with its twelve short
stories, its articles, fables, verse, and other matter, will make a very
good gift--for some people.  Ready early in December.  $1.25.



TO THOSE SPECIALLY INTERESTED IN THIS MAGAZINE, OR SPECIALLY INTERESTED
IN FIFTY DOLLARS


This is not a "Popular Magazine."  It does not try to be.  It is a
magazine which meets the needs of a comparatively few, but they like it
immensely--as is shown by the extracts from their letters we are now
publishing.

We want to reach, if possible, all the people who would like The
Forerunner if they knew about it.

For the rest of this year we are making a special offer to anyone who
will get us new subscribers; the regular commission of 25 per cent., and
a rising premium which goes up to a total of 50 per cent. for a hundred
new paid year's subscriptions.

$50.00 for one hundred new subscribers!

For a girl in college who wants to help herself;

For a woman in a liberal church, or with a wide acquaintance among
progressive thinkers;

For a Suffragist in touch with similar believers;

For any man or woman who can reach organizations of liberal-minded
people;

For anybody who thinks they would like to earn $50.00 that way--it is a
good offer.

Write for full terms, samples, etc.



IF YOU RENEW


The first year runs through December; fourteen copies.

Renew from January, 1911, and get the whole of next year.



IF YOU DISCONTINUE


So far one subscriber has discontinued.

She will get the magazine two months more.

If you must discontinue, please let us know.



[Advertisement]

Subscribe for

The Woman's Journal

Official Organ of the National American Woman Suffrage Association

A weekly newspaper devoted to winning the ballot for women
Contains all the best news about women and their progress

FOUNDED 1870 BY LUCY STONE AND HENRY B. BLACKWELL

Edited by
Alice Stone Blackwell

The Woman's Journal is published in Boston and controlled by the
National American Woman Suffrage Association whose headquarters are at
505 Fifth Avenue, New York City.  It gives suffrage news from every
state in the Union, and especially from the states where campaigns are
under way; it gives important suffrage news from all the countries where
the women have the full right of suffrage, and from the countries where
the battle is waging; it gives official announcements and rousing news.

Thousands of women read it every week from beginning to end.  Nobody who
has read it one month can ever do without it.  It is the only paper of
its kind in this country.

Send for sample copies for yourself and ask us to send them to your
friends.


Try our four months trial subscription for 25 cents


REGULAR SUBSCRIPTION RATES

DOMESTIC

1 year . . . $1.00
6 months . . . $.50
4 months on trial . . . $.25
Single copies . . . $.05

CANADIAN

1 year . . . $1.50

FOREIGN

1 year . . . $1.50

A full year's subscription costs only . . . $1.00

CAN YOU AFFORD TO BE WITHOUT IT?



[Advertisement]


SOME OF OUR EXCHANGES


We print The Forerunner

The Co-operative Press
In Spruce Street New York

May we do some of YOUR printing?


The Englishwoman
A MONTHLY MAGAZINE FOR WOMEN

$3.50 post free per annum to any part of the United States

"The Englishwoman" is intended to reach the cultured public and bring
before it, in a convincing and moderate form, the case for the
Enfranchisement of Women.  No support will be given to any particular
party in politics.

The magazine will be inspired from the first page to the last by one
continuous policy, which is to further the Enfranchisement of Women.

It will try to do so, first by securing the sympathy and holding the
attention of that public which is interested in letters, art and culture
generally.  and by an impartial statement of facts.  Its chief features
will be:

Articles dealing with the Women's Movement in England and other
countries.

Notes on parliamentary bills as affecting women and children.

Articles on Women's Work in Professions and Trades.

Sociological questions and their influence on the status of women.

Stories, poems, scientific articles, and short plays.

Criticisms of music, painting, sculpture, and current literature.

Editorial Offices: 11 Haymarket, London, S.W., England.

Publishers: Messrs. SIDGWICK & JACKSON.
3 Adam Street, Adelphi, London, W.C., England.

Every American woman interested in the suffrage should read

THE ENGLISHWOMAN


The Common Cause

WHAT IS IT?

There are in England something like twenty-five National Societies for
promoting the enfranchisement of women.  The oldest of these is the
National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, which was started in 1861
and whose President is Mrs. Fawcett, LL.D.  The National Union has over
two hundred branches in Great Britain, and a total membership of about
20,000.  It is the only British Woman's Suffrage Society affiliated to
the International Woman Suffrage Alliance.

The Common Cause
Is the Organ of the National Union.

It contains leaders and articles on political, social, legal and
industrial matters affecting women, and is a complete record or the work
done by the National Union for the enfranchisement of women in England.

The Common Cause
Is the Paper of Thinking Women.

Subscriptions should be sent to

64 DEANSCATE ARCADE,
MANCHESTER, ENGLAND

3 months, post free --- 1 shilling 9 pence
6 months, post free --- 3 shillings 3 pence
12 months, post free --- 6 shillings 6 pence

Every Thursday, 1 Penny


The Progressive Woman

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

Edited and Pubilshed by
JOSEPHINE CONGER-KANEKO
at Girard, Kansas, U.S.A.

Price, 50 cents a year.

The Progressive Woman stands for a better race through the political and
economic freedom of womankind.  Its contributors are among the cleverest
of the more advanced thinkers, and its readers endeavor to keep up with
its writers.

This is the great charm about The Progressive Woman--it does not stand
still: it leads.

Send to-day for sample copy.


Woman's Era

The New Magazine of Inspiration for the American Woman.

A World-wide Review
With Original Articles on

ECONOMICS,
ETHICS,
CIVICS,
ARTS AND CRAFTS,
MUSIC,
LITERATURE,
CLUB WORK,
Etc.

SPECIAL ARTS AND CRAFTS NUMBER FOR SEPTEMBER.

Sample copy . . . 10 cents
6 months . . . 75 cents
12 months . . . $1.50

(Worth a good deal more)

Address,

WOMAN'S ERA
New Orleans, La.


Up the Divide

A MONTHLY PERIODICAL

Asking:
Why not see Social and Religious Things from Higher Altitudes?

EDITED BY

DUREN J. H. WARD, A.M. (Harvard), Ph.D. (Leipsig) and WM. THURSTON
BROWN, A.B. (Yale).

IT IS A KIND BY ITSELF
UNIQUE IN EVERY WAY
A BRAND NEW THING IN MAGAZINES

SECOND YEAR

IS CALLED:

"Breezy, vigorous."
"Brusher away of cobwebs."
"Full of burning words."
"Blazes the trail."
"Crisp and bold thoughts."
"An eye-opener."
"The new spirit and new conscience shine on each page."
"Place not filled by any other."
"Speaks not as the Scribes and Pharisees."
"Charged with the gunpowder of progress."

$1.00 a year.  10 cents a copy.
With _The Forerunner,_ $1.80.

2442 Glenarm Pl., Denver, Colorado.


The Star

San Francisco, California.

JAMES H. BARRY, Editor.

A WIDE-AWAKE, UP-TO-DATE PAPER
FEARLESS, FRANK AND FREE

The First in the Land to Advocate Direct Legislation.  Stands for Human
Rights, including Votes for Women.  Considers all Questions of Public
Moment, such as Public Ownership, the Single Tax, the Tariff, etc.
Contains good Miscellaneous Matter.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY

Per year . . . $1.50
Six months . . . 75 cents

in advance

THE STAR

1122-1124 Mission Street, San Francisco, Cal.


READ

The Forecast

PHILADELPHIA'S ONLY MAGAZINE

Is right there every time on every topic uppermost in the minds of the
public.

THE SEPTEMBER NUMBER

contains many special features that are readable, timely, lively.

ELLA WHEELER WILCOX tells of "The Influences Which Shaped My Career."

ANTOINETTE E. GAZZAM contributes an original article on "Clothes" which
is most beautifully illustrated and full of valuable suggestions and
pleasing surprises.

THOMAS MARTINDALE, the renowned sportsman and author of "Sport Royal,"
and other fascinating sporting tales, tells of "The Lure of Hunting."
Mr. Martindale never wrote more entertainingly than in this article.

EDWENA LAWRENCE reveals inside information in an article, especially
pleasing to theatre-goers, on "The Educational Value of a Theatrical
Stock Company," an article that will be appreciated by both the actor
and auditor.

SPLENDID FICTION, intimate sketches of the personalities of the day,
able book reviews, able articles on political, social, civic and
national phases of the leading questions of the day, and an entertaining
department of Fun, Fact and Fiction, as well as

CHARLES HOUSTON GOUDISS'S splendid eugenism in an article treating of
the most important phase of the prevention of child degradation, combine
in making The Forecast the most attractive ten cent magazine published.

THE FORECAST,

423 Lafayette Building, Philadelphia.



[Advertisement]


Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman


Sent postpaid by

THE CHARLTON COMPANY
67 WALL STREET, NEW YORK


"Women and Economics"  $1.50

Since John Stuart Mill's essay there has been no book dealing with the
whole position of women to approach it in originality of conception and
brilliancy of exposition.--_London Chronicle._

A remarkable book.  A work on economics that has not a dull page--the
work of a woman about women that has not a flippant word.--_Boston
Transcript._

Will be widely read and discussed as the cleverest, fairest, most
forcible presentation of the view of the rapidly increasing group who
look with favor on the extension of industrial employment to
women.--_Political Science Quarterly._


"Concerning Children"  $1.25

WANTED:--A philanthropist, to give a copy to every English-speaking
parent.--_The Times,_ New York.

Should be read by every mother in the land.--_The Press,_ New York.

Wholesomely disturbing book that deserves to be read for its own
sake.--_Chicago Dial._


"In This Our World" (Poems)  $1.25

There is a joyous superabundance of life, of strength, of health, in
Mrs. Gilman's verse, which seems born of the glorious sunshine and rich
gardens of California.--_Washington Times._

The poet of women and for women, a new and prophetic voice in the world.
 Montaigne would have rejoiced in her.--_Mexican Herald._


"The Yellow Wall Paper"  $0.50

Worthy of a place beside some of the weird masterpieces of Hawthorne and
Poe.--_Literature._

As a short story it stands among the most powerful produced in
America.--_Chicago News._


"The Home"  $1.00

Indeed, Mrs. Gilman has not intended her book so much as a treatise for
scholars as a surgical operation on the popular mind.--_The Critic,_ New
York.

It is safe to say that no more stimulating arraignment has ever before
taken shape and that the argument of the book is noble, and, on the
whole, convincing.--_Congregationalist,_ Boston.


"Human Work"  $1.00

Charlotte Perkins Stetson Gilman has been writing a new book, entitled
"Human Work."  It is the best thing that Mrs. Gilman has done, and it is
meant to focus all of her previous work, so to speak.--_Tribune,_
Chicago.

In her latest volume, "Human Work," Charlotte Perkins Gilman places
herself among the foremost students and elucidators of the problem of
social economics.--"San Francisco Star._

It is impossible to overestimate the value of the insistence on the
social aspect of human affairs as Mrs. Gilman has outlined it.--_Public
Opinion._


IN PREPARATION:


"What Diantha Did" (A Novel)  $1.00

"The Man Made World": or, "Our Androcentric Culture"  $1.00


Orders taken for Bound Vols. THE FORERUNNER, $1.25



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER

A Monthly Magazine

WRITTEN, EDITED, OWNED AND PUBLISHED
By Charlotte Perkins Gilman


"THE CRUX"


Mrs. Gilman's new novel, will appear in
THE FORERUNNER, of 1911.

This touches upon one of the most vivid and vital of our age problems;
and has more than one kind of love story in it.  Also, published
serially, her next book,


"Moving the Mountain"


Those who believe this world is a good place, easily made better, and
who wish to know how to help it, will enjoy reading this book.  Those
who do not so believe and wish may not enjoy it so much, but it will do
them good.

The Forerunner carries Mrs. Gilman's best and newest work; her social
philosophy, her verse, satire, fiction, ethical teaching, humor, and
comment.  It stands for Humanness in Women, and in Men; for better
methods in Child-culture; for the Home that is no Workshop; for the New
Ethics, the New Economics, the New World we are to make--are making.


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________

$1.00 a year
$0.10 a copy





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 13
NOVEMBER, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

"The Public Wants Facts!" says the Popular Editor; "Give us the Facts!"
Haven't we had all the Facts in the universe before us always?
Isn't it time we learned _to think about them?_




WORSHIP


How does it feel?--
The drawing of the magnet on the steel?
All else gives way;
No rivets hold, no bars delay,
Called in that overwhelming hour,
From far and near they fly and cling,
Allied, united, clustering;
And the great pulsing currents flow
Through each small scattered scrap below.
Scattered no more;
One with that all compelling core;
One absolute, one all alive with power.

How does it feel?--
The swift obedient utmost flight
Of radiant sky-wide waves of light,
Far couriers of the central sun,
Crossing a million miles as one--
Still going--going--
Limitless joy that needs no knowing
Each last least flickering ray
One with the Heart of Day.



MY ASTONISHING DODO


She was twenty-six, and owned it cheerfully, the day I met her.

This prejudiced me in her favor at once, for I prize honesty in women,
and on this point it is unusual.  She did not, it is true, share largely
in my special artistic tastes, or, to any great extent, in my social
circle; but she was a fine wholesome sweet woman, cheerful and strong,
and I wished to make a friend of her.  I greatly prized my good friends
among women, for I had conscientious views against marrying on a small
salary.

Later it appeared that she had other and different views, but she did
not mention them then.

Dorothea was her name.  Her family called her Dora, her intimate
friends, Dolly, but I called her Dodo, just between ourselves.

A very good-looking girl was Dodo, though not showy; and in no way
distinguished in dress, which rather annoyed me at first; for I have a
great admiration for a well-gowned, well-groomed woman.

My ideas on matrimony were strongly colored by certain facts and figures
given me by an old college friend of mine.  He was a nice fellow, and
his wife one of the loveliest girls of our set, though rather delicate.
They lived very comfortably in a quiet way, with a few good books and
pictures, and four little ones.

"It's a thousand dollars a year for the first year for each baby," he
told me, "and five hundred a year afterward."

I was astonished.  I had no idea the little things cost so much.

"There's the trained nurse for your wife," he went on, "at $25.00 a week
for four weeks; and then the trained nurse for your baby, at $15.00 a
week for forty-eight weeks; that makes $820.00.  Then the doctor's
bills, the clothes and so on--with the certified milk--easily take up
the rest."

"Isn't fifteen dollars a week a good deal for a child's nurse?" I asked.

"What do you pay a good stenographer?" he demanded.

"Why, a special one gets $20.00," I admitted.  "But that work needs
training and experience."

"So does taking care of babies!" he cried triumphantly.  "Don't try to
save on babies, Morton; it's poor economy."

I liked his point of view, and admired his family extremely.  His wife
was one of those sympathetic appreciative women who so help a man in his
work.  But the prospects of my own marriage seemed remote.  That was why
I was so glad of a good wholesome companionable friend like Dodo.

We were so calmly intimate that I soon grew to discuss many of my ideas
and plans with her.  She was much interested in the figures given by my
friend, and got me to set them all down for her.  He had twice my
salary, and not a cent left at the year's end; and they were not in
"society" either.  Five hundred dollars was allowed for his personal
expenses, and the same for her; little enough to dress on nowadays, he
had assured me, with all amusements, travel, books and periodicals, and
dentist bills, included.

"I don't think it ought to cost so much," said Dodo.

She was a business woman, and followed the figures closely; and of
course she appreciated the high views I held on the subject, and my
self-denial, too.

I can't tell to this day how it happened; but before I knew it we were
engaged.  I was almost sorry, for a long engagement is a strain on both
parties; but Dodo cheered me up; she said we were really no worse off
than we were before, and in some ways better.  At times I fully agreed
with her.

So we drifted along for about a year, and then, after a good deal of
distant discussion, we suddenly got married.

I don't recall now just why we so hastily concluded to do it; I seemed
to be in a kind of dream; but anyway we did, and were absurdly happy
about it, too.

"Don't be a Goose, dear boy!" she said.  "It isn't wicked to be married.
 And we're _quite_ old enough!"

"But we can't afford it--you know we can't," I said.  This was while we
were camping out on our honey-vacation.

"Mr. Morton Howland," said my wife; "don't you worry one bit about
affording it.  I want you to understand that you've married a business
woman."

"But you've given up your position!" I cried, aghast.  "Surely, you
don't think of going back!"

"I've given up one position," she replied with calmness, "and taken
another.  And I mean to fill it.  Now you go peacefully on earning what
you did before, and leave the housekeeping business to me--will you,
Dear?"

Naturally I had to; for I couldn't keep house; even if I so desired I
didn't know how.  But I had read so much and heard so much and seen so
much of the difficulties of housekeeping for young married people, that
I confess I was a good deal worried.

Toward the end of our trip I began to anticipate the burden of
house-hunting.

"About where do you think we are going to live?" I tentatively inquired.

"At 384 Meter Avenue," she promptly answered.  I nearly dropped the
paddle (we were canoeing at the moment), I was so astonished.

"That's a good location--for cheap flats," I said slowly.  "Do you mean
to say you've rented one, all by yourself?"

She smiled comfortingly.  Lovely teeth had my Dodo, strong and white and
even, though not small.

"Not quite so bad as that, Dear," she answered, "but I've got the
refusal.  My friends the Scallens had it, and are moving out this Fall.
It's a new building, they had it all papered very prettily, and if you
like it we can move in as soon as they leave--say a week after moving
time--it will be cheaper then.  We'll look at it as soon as we return."

We did.  It seemed suitable enough; pleasant, and cheaper than I had
thought possible.  Indeed, I demurred a little on the question of style,
and accessibility to friends; but Dodo said the people who really cared
for us would come, and the people who did not could easily be spared.

We had married so hastily, right on the verge of vacation time, that I
had hardly given a thought to furnishing but Dodo seemed to know just
where to go and what to get; at much less cost than I had imagined.

She produced $250.00 from her bank account, which she had been saving
for years she said.  I put up about the same; and we had that little
flat as pretty and comfortable as any home I ever saw.

She set her foot down about pictures though.  "Time enough for those
things when we can afford it," she said, and we certainly could not
afford it then.

Then was materialized from some foreign clime a neat, strong young woman
to do our house-work, washing and all.

"She's an apprentice," said Dodo.  "She is willing to learn
housekeeping, and I am willing to teach her."

"How do you come to be so competent in house-work?" said I; "I thought
you were a bookkeeper."

Then Dodo smiled her large bright smile.  "Morton, dear," she said, "I
will now tell you a Secret!  I have always intended to marry, and, as
far as possible, I learned the business.  I am a business woman, you
know."

She certainly did know her business.  She kept the household accounts
like--well, like what she was--an expert accountant.  When she furnished
the kitchen she installed a good reliable set of weights and measures.
She weighed the ice and the bread, she measured the milk and the
potatoes, and made firm, definite, accurate protests when things went
wrong; even sending samples of queer cream to the Board of Health for
analysis.  What with my business stationery and her accurate figures our
letters were strangely potent, and we were well supplied, while our
friends sadly and tamely complained of imposture and extortion.

Her largest item of expense in furnishing was a first-class sewing
machine, and a marvellous female figure, made to measure, which stood in
a corner and served as a "cloak tree" when not in use.

"You don't propose to make your own clothes, surely?" said I when this
headless object appeared.

"Some of 'em," she admitted, "you'll see.  Of course I can't dress for
society."

Now I had prepared myself very conscientiously to meet the storms and
shallows of early married life, as I had read about them; I was bound I
would not bring home anybody to dinner without telephoning, and was
prepared to assure my wife verbally, at least twice a day, that I loved
her.  She anticipated me on the dinner business, however.

"Look here!" she said, leading me to the pantry, when it was filled to
her liking, and she showed me a special corner all marked off and
labelled "For Emergencies."  There was a whole outfit of eatables and
drinkables in glass and tin.

"Now do your worst!" she said triumphantly.  "You can bring home six men
in the middle of the night--and I'll feed them!  But you mustn't do it
two nights in succession, for I'd have to stock up again."

As to tears and nervousness and "did I love her," I was almost,
sometimes, a bit disappointed in Dodo, she was so calm.  She was happy,
and I was happy, but it seemed to require no effort at all.

One morning I almost forgot, and left the elevator standing while I ran
back to kiss her and say "I love you, dearest."  She held me off from
her with her two strong hands and laughed tenderly.  "Dear boy!" she
said, "I mean you shall."

I meditated on that all the way downtown.

She meant I should.  Well, I did.  And the next time one of my
new-married friends circuitously asked for a bit of light on what was to
him a dark and perplexing question, I suddenly felt very light-hearted
about my domestic affairs.  Somehow we hadn't any troubles at all.  Dodo
kept well; we lived very comfortably and it cost far less than I had
anticipated.

"How did you know how to train a servant?" I asked my wife.

"Dear," said she, "I have admitted to you that I always intended to be
married, when I found the man I could love and trust and honor."  (Dodo
overestimates my virtues, of course.)

"Lots of girls intend to marry," I interposed.

"Yes, I know they do," she agreed, "they want to love and he loved, but
they don't learn their business!  Now the business of house-work is not
so abstruse nor so laborious, if you give your mind to it.  I took an
evening-course in domestic economy, read and studied some, and spent one
vacation with an aunt of mine up in Vermont who 'does her own work.'
The next vacation I did ours.  I learned the trade in a small way."

We had a lovely time that first year.  She dressed fairly well, but the
smallness of her expense account was a standing marvel, owing to the
machine and the Headless One.

"Did you take a course in dressmaking, too?" I inquired.

"Yes, in another vacation."

"You had the most industrious vacations of anyone I ever knew," said I,
"and the most varied."

"I am no chicken, you see, my dear," was her cheerful reply, "and I like
to work.  You work, why shouldn't I?"

The only thing I had to criticize, if there was anything, was that Dodo
wouldn't go to the theatre and things like that, as often as I wanted
her to.  She said frankly that we couldn't afford it, and why should I
want to go out for amusement when we had such a happy home?  So we
stayed at home a good deal, made a few calls, and played cards together,
and were very happy, of course.

All this time I was in more or less anxiety lest that thousand dollar
baby should descend upon us before we were ready, for I had only six
hundred in the bank now.  Presently this dread event loomed
awe-inspiringly on our horizon.  I didn't say anything to Dodo about my
fears, she must on no account be rendered anxious, but I lay awake
nights and sometimes got up furtively and walked the floor in my room,
thinking how I should raise the money.

She heard me one night.  "Dear!" she called softly.  "What are you
doing?  Is it burglars?"

I reassured her on that point and she promptly reassured me on the
other, as soon as she had made me tell her what I was worrying about.

"Why, bless you, dear," she said, serenely, "you needn't give a thought
to that.  I've got money in the bank for my baby."

"I thought you spent all of it for the furnishings," said I.

"Oh, that was the Furnishing Money!  Cuddle down here, or you'll get
cold, and I'll tell you all about it."

So she explained in her calm strong cheerful way, with a little
contented chuckle now and then, that she had always intended to be
married.

"This is now no news," I exclaimed severely, "tell me something
different."

"Well, in order to prepare for this Great Event," she went on, "I
learned about housework, as you have seen.  I saved money enough to
furnish a small flat and put that in one bank.  And I also anticipated
this not Impossible Contingency and saved more money and put it in
another bank!"

"Why two banks, if a mere man may inquire?"

"It is well," she replied sententiously, "not to have all one's eggs in
one basket."

I lay still and meditated on this new revelation.

"Have you got a thousand dollars, if this Remote Relative may so far
urge for information?"

"I have just that sum," she replied.

"And, not to be impertinent, have you nine other thousands of dollars in
nine other banks for nine other not Impossible Contingencies?"

She shook her head with determination.  "Nine is an Impossible
Contingency," she replied.  "No, I have but one thousand dollars in this
bank.  Now you be good, and continue to practice your business, into the
details of which I do not press, and let me carry on the Baby Business,
which is mine."

It was a great load off my mind, and I slept well from that time on.

So did Dodo.  She kept well, busy, placid, and cheerful.  Once, I came
home in a state of real terror.  I had been learning, from one of my
friends, and from books, of the terrible experience which lay before
her.  She saw that I was unusually intense in my affection and
constantly regarded her with tender anxiety.  "What is the matter with
you, Morton?" said she.  "I'm--worried," I admitted.  "I've been
thinking--what if I should lose you!  Oh Dodo!  I'd rather have you than
a thousand babies."

"I should think you would," said she calmly.  "Now look here, Dear Boy!
What are you worrying about?  This is not an unusual enterprise I've
embarked on; it's the plain course of nature, easily fulfilled by all
manner of lady creatures!  Don't you be afraid one bit, I'm not."

She wasn't.  She kept her serene good cheer up to the last moment, had
an efficient but inexpensive woman doctor, and presently was up again,
still serene, with a Pink Person added to our family, of small size but
of enormous importance.

Again I rather trembled for our peace and happiness, and mentally girded
up my loins for wakeful nights of walking.  No such troubles followed.
We used separate rooms, and she kept the Pink Person in hers.
Occasionally he made remarks in the night, but not for long.  He was
well, she was well--things went along very much as they did before.

I was "lost in wonder, love and praise" and especially in amazement at
the continued cheapness of our living.

Suddenly a thought struck me.  "Where's ths nurse?" I demanded.

"The nurse?  Why she left long ago.  I kept her only for the month."

"I mean the child's nurse," said I, "the fifteen dollar one."

"Oh--I'm the child's nurse," said Dodo.

"You!" said I.  "Do you mean to say you take all the care of this child
yourself?"

"Why, of course," said Dodo, "what's a mother for?"

"But--the time it takes," I protested, rather weakly.

"What do you expect me to do with my time, Morton?"

"Why, whatever you did before--This arrived."

"I will not have my son alluded to as 'This'!" said she severely.
"Morton J. Hopkins, Jr., if you please.  As to my time before?  Why, I
used it in preparing for time to come, of course.  I have things ready
for this youngster for three years ahead."

"How about the certified milk?" I asked.

Dodo smiled a superior smile; "I certify the milk," said she.

"Can you take care of the child and the house, too?"

"Bless you, Morton, 'the care' of a seven-room flat and a competent
servant does not take more than an hour a day.  And I market while I'm
out with the baby.

"Do you mean to say you are going to push the perambulator yourself?"

"Why not?" she asked a little sharply, "surely a mother need not be
ashamed of the company of her own child."

"But you'll be taken for a nurse--"

"I _am_ a nurse!  And proud of it!"

I gazed at her in my third access of deep amazement.  "Do you mean to
say that you took lessons in child culture, _too_?"

"_Too?_  Why, I took lessons in child culture first of all.  How often
must I tell you, Morton, that I always intended to be married!  Being
married involves, to my mind, motherhood, that is what it is for!  So
naturally I prepared myself for the work I meant to do.  I am a business
woman, Morton, and this is my business."

*

That was twenty years ago.  We have five children.  Morton, Jr., is in
college.  So is Dorothea second.  Dodo means to put them _all_ through,
she says.  My salary has increased, but not so fast as prices, and
neither of them so fast as my family.  None of those babies cost a
thousand dollars the first year though, nor five hundred thereafter;
Dodo's thousand held out for the lot.  We moved to a home in the
suburbs, of course; that was only fair to the children.  I live within
my income always--we have but one servant still, and the children are
all taught housework in the good old way.  None of my friends has as
devoted, as vigorous and--and--as successful a wife as I have.  She is
the incarnate spirit of all the Housewives and House-mothers of history
and fiction.  The only thing I miss in her--if I must own to missing
anything--is companionship and sympathy outside of household affairs.
My newspaper work--which she always calls "my business"--has remained a
business.  The literary aspirations I once had were long since laid
aside as impracticable.  And the only thing I miss in life beyond my
home is, well--as a matter of fact, I don't have any life beyond my
home--except, of course, my business.

My friends are mostly co-commuters now.  I couldn't keep up with the set
I used to know.  As my wife said, she could 't dress for society, and,
visibly, she couldn't.  We have few books, there isn't any margin for
luxuries, she says; and of course we can't go to the plays and concerts
in town.  But these are unessentials--of course--as she says.

I am very proud of my home, my family, and my Amazing Dodo.



WHY TEXTS?


I once listened to a sermon in the Temple Church in London; a sermon
delivered with great dignity by an Eminent Divine, a Canon, as I
remember.

Here was this worthy man, in that historic place, in the heart of huge
London, in the fierce whirring center of so many present social
problems, so many aching, hoping human hearts.  He had a chance to speak
to them; with the purpose, presumably, of giving light and cheer and
strength to live better.

There he stood, a conspicuous and powerful figure; and there sat his
audience, waiting.  To say the truth, they did not look particularly
hopeful; having doubtless "sat under" him before.

He took his text from the Nineteenth Chapter of "Acts"--something about
"the town clark" of Ephesus; and how he appeased the people.  There was
some excitement, it appeared, among the citizens, and they raised a
noise comparable to the convention which nominated Bryan; "and all with
one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians."

Well.  She certainly was--is yet, for that matter, though her influence
is not confined to Ephesus.

In the face of this tumult, the "town clark," who seems to have been a
peaceable person, with a strong sense of justice and propriety, quieted
the people with fair words, explaining to them that their vociferous
statement as to the dimensions or efficacy of their goddess were quite
indisputable; and "matters of common knowledge," and that if they had
any complaint against these missionaries they should go to law about it.

Evidently a fair-minded and law-abiding citizen, the "town clark of
Ephesus"; but--what of it?

What shadow of interest, to modern life, has this chatty anecdote about
the attitude of the Ancient Ephesian toward visiting preachers?

It is barely possible; intellectually conceivable, that is, that the
distinguished clergyman was drawing a parallel between these long dead
gentry, and ourselves; in our attitude toward the advocates of new
faiths.

For instance, there come among us persons teaching Socialism; and we all
cry with one voice for about the space of fifty years, "Great is the
Competitive System!"--and are minded to destroy the teachers, no "town
clark" intervening.

But this did not seem to be in his mind at all.  He was talking about
ancient history pure and simple; the only merit in his extract lying in
its location--it was in the Bible.

Whence to my title--Why texts?

Why does a modern sermon to modern people have to be based upon and
buttressed by a quotation from the writings of the ancient Hebrews, or
the more modern group of mixed blood and more mixed language through
whom came the New Testament?

This is no question either verbal or general; but a very sincere
question of the need of such quotation in the religious teaching of the
present time.

Suppose we have a glaring modern instance of good or evil, which every
live minister feels called upon to preach about; to the genuine
edification of his hearers; why must he get out his concordance and
ransack the Scriptures to find an applicable remark?

In the Hebrew Church the Reading is longer and the Exposition closer, I
understand; and in the "Christian Science" church there is Reading
without even that much licence; but in our liberal Christian "services"
the sermon is generally intended to be of immediate use to the hearers,
not merely to give them an extract from "that which is written."

What people want most is to know how to behave, now.

They want teaching that shall explain clearly what they ought to do; why
they want to do it, and how they may best learn to do it.

Clear, strong, simple, convincing Explanations of Life--Directions for
Action; Stimulus and Strength; Courage and Hope; Peace and
Comfort--these are the things we want in our sermons.

Are they any better for the laborious far-fetched text?



THE LITTLE WHITE ANIMALS


Reprinted from "The Conservator," by courtesy of Mr. Horace Traubel.


We who have grown Human--house-bodied, cloth-skinned,
Wire-nerved and steam-heated--alas! we forget
The poor little beasts we have bandaged and pinned
And hid in our carpet-lined prisons!--and yet
Though our great social body be brickwork and steel,
The little white animals in it, can feel!

Humanity needs them.  We cannot disclaim
The laws of the bodies we lived in before
We grew to be Human.  In spite of our frame
Of time-scorning metals, the life at its core,
Controlling its action and guarding its ease,
Is the little white animal out of the trees!

It is true that our soul is far higher than theirs;
We look farther, live longer, love wider--we _know;_
They only can feel for themselves--and their heirs;
We, the life of humanity.  Yet, even so,
We must always remember that soul at its base
Looks out through the little white animal's face.

If they die we are dead.  If they live we can grow,
They ply in our streets as blood corpuscles ply
In their own little veins.  If you cut off the flow
Of these beasts in a city, that city will die.
Yet we heighten our buildings and harden our souls
Till the little white animals perish in shoals.

Their innocent instincts we turn to a curse,
Their bodies we torture, their powers we abuse,
The beast that humanity lives in fares worse
Than the beasts of the forest with nothing to lose.
Free creatures, sub-human--they never have known
The sins and diseases we force on our own.

And yet 'tis a beautiful creature!--tall--fair--
With features full pleasant and hand-wooing hair;
Kind, docile, intelligent, eager to learn;
And the longing we read in its eyes when they burn
Is to beg us to use it more freely to show
To each other the love that our new soul can know.

Our engines drive fast in earth, water and air;
Our resistless, smooth-running machines still unroll,
With brain-work unceasing and handiwork fair,
New material forms for each step on the soul;
But that soul, for the contact without which it dies,
Comes closest of all through that animal's eyes.



WOMEN TEACHERS, MARRIED AND UNMARRIED


We have still active and conspicuous among us, saying and doing foolish
things about women, men, both eminent and ordinary, whose attitude in
this matter will make them a shame to their children, and a laughing
stock to their grandchildren.  We are proud to exhibit name and portrait
of the great-grandfather who signed the Declaration of Independence, but
our descendants will forget as soon as possible those asinine ancestors
who are to-day so writing themselves down--in their attitude in regard
to women teachers, married and unmarried.

For long women were kept out of the schools altogether--education was
for boys.  They were not allowed to teach, save in a small way, in
infant schools, or schools for girls; teaching was a masculine
profession.  Now they have equal educational opportunities--in large
measure, and constitute the majority of pupils; and, what is more
alarming, the majority of teachers.  The "male mind"--essentially and
hopelessly male--sees in this not the natural development of a long
suppressed human being, but the entrance of females upon a masculine
province.

In her relation of pupil, there is a large body of eminent educators
clamoring that girls should be taught female things; that, whether our
universities are turned into trade schools or not, the women's colleges
and "annexes" should teach girls "the duties of wife and mother."  By
this, of course, they mean the duties of house-service, and, perhaps, of
nursing.  Nothing would scandalize these Antique Worthies more than to
have girls taught the real duties of wife and mother!

Also, in the relation of pupils, a man of as high standing as Professor
Barrett Wendell of Harvard claims that teaching girls lowers the
mentality of men!  In coeducational colleges the "male mind," seeing in
the violent games of young men a profound educational influence (and
large profits!), considers that the presence of the purely studious
element--the girls--is an injury to the college, and is even now
endeavoring to eliminate them.

But it is in treatment of women teachers that this sex attitude of mind
is most prominent to-day, most offensive, and most ridiculous.

The first effect is, of course, to give to the woman teacher the lowest
grades of work and the lowest pay.  Even when she has forced her way
into high-grade work, and won a good position over all competitors, her
pay is still measured by her status as a female--not as a teacher.  The
"male mind" can never for a moment forget or overlook the fact that
women are females; and is rigidly incapable of admitting that they are
also human beings as much as he.

In spite of this absurd limitation, women teachers have increased in
numbers and in power; and are pressing steadily up into the higher
positions reserved for men.  An enormous majority of our teaching force
is now composed of women; and, in our public schools, they naturally
teach boys.  Upon this point has arisen, and is still rising, an angry
protest among men.  Women teachers are, they say, unmarried; to be
unmarried is an unnatural state, productive of various mental and
physical morbidities; and as such does not form a suitable atmosphere
for growing boys.

Recently President Hamilton of Tufts College goes even further than
this, and objects to the influence of unmarried teachers upon girls!

To the "male mind," viewing the woman as first, last and always a
female, and marriage and motherhood as her only normal relations, these
crowding thousands of calm, respectable, independent, unmarried women
are in a condition of unrest, of acrimonious rebellion against fate, of
a contemptuous dislike for their unattainable "sour grapes."  They are
assumed to have been queer in the first place, or some gracious
protector would have married them; and to grow queerer as life drags
away, leaving them eternally unsatisfied, bitter and perverse.  This
deadly influence is supposed to have some poisonous effect on the
pupils; just what is not defined.  The unselfish, tireless service of
the "maiden aunt" in the home we all know; but set her to teaching
school, and some strange evil follows from the contact.

President Hamilton says college girls need to have their outlook on life
broadened, not narrowed; and thinks these limited ladies, the teachers,
are fitted only for work in the lower preparatory schools, or in "homes"
and "settlements."

Just how the average male teacher in a college is to broaden the outlook
of his pupils is not explained.  It does not need explanation.  It is
broader because he is a man!

Most of our men teachers are still young men, by the way, and unmarried.
 Is the influence of the unmarried male on classes of girls an unmixed
good?  Is a man by nature a better teacher?  More subtly sympathetic,
more capable of understanding the difficulties of each pupil and meeting
them, more patient and tender?

No--but he is "more methodical," and "a better disciplinarian."  In
other words, he is more male--and therefore a better teacher!  All this
is absurd enough, and injurious enough; false, unjust, pitifully
ignorant.

But the crowning feat of the "logical male mind" is in its exclusion of
married women from schools.  This is what the living children of living
men will laugh at and blush for--that their fathers should have made
themselves thus lamentably conspicuous in present-day history.  Here in
this city of New York, where a system of competitive examination ensures
the required degree of learning and promotion follows on proved
efficiency (or is supposed to); some women teachers, following "that
inexorable law of nature" which so many others successfully evade, have
presumed to marry.  Surely now the stock objection to women teachers is
removed.

All that "narrowness," that "bitterness," that "morbidity" is
transformed by this magic alchemy into breadth and sweetness and all
health.  Now we have for our children the influence of "normal
womanhood"--of "the wife and mother."

No.  Married women are not desired in our schools; not allowed; they are
specifically discriminated against.

Some years ago a woman teacher of New York married, and refused to give
up her position.  There was no reason for discharging her--she fulfilled
every duty as competently as before.  But these historic school
officials withheld her pay!

They had no right to; she had earned the money--it was hers.  But they
had the power, and used it.  After many months of this high-handed
withholding of her legitimate salary, this woman, and another similarly
placed, sued for their back pay, making a test case of it.

They won.  It was a perfectly plain case in law and equity.

Then the Board, naturally displeased, passed a by-law prohibiting the
appointment, or reappointment, of married women.  One woman, already in,
and married, a very efficient teacher, and candidate for promotion to
principalship, was not promoted, for this plain reason: they do not wish
married women to teach in our schools.

Now, why?

What injurious influence exudes from previously competent teachers
merely because they now know this personal, as well as their former
professional, happiness!

Then with bated breath the official male mind suggests that they might
become mothers.

Well?  So they should.  Is there anything about mothers which renders
them unfit persons to teach children?

"You do not understand!" says the official male mind, a little
nervously.  "They would be--about to become mothers--and the children
might notice it!"

Here we have Justice Shallow, Mrs. Grundy and King Canute rolled into
one.  What gross ignorance, what narrow conservatism, what petty and
futile resistance to progress, as well as a low coarseness, prompts this
objection!  If our system of education allows children to grow up in
such neglect that they neither know nor reverence motherhood, it is high
time that the system was changed.

And it will be changed; by women--who are mothers.

Aside from this, and admitting that most married teachers who are in
this dreaded "condition" do rapidly remove themselves from school, and
do not come back for a year or more, the next objection is "the
continued absence" of the married woman teachers.

Since there is a long array of substitutes, excellent substitutes (often
married women, these!) who are paid less than the salary the absent one
does not draw, it is difficult to see the evil of this.  Unless indeed
the merits of the married teacher are so supreme that even her temporary
absence is a real loss.  If that be so, then she is worth keeping, it
would seem, at any cost.

In all this tissue of injustice and absurdity is there no thread of
explanation, no reason better than these for such arbitrary interference
with personal rights?  There is a veritable cable; enough to hang the
whole case on.  It is shown in this provision:

If the married woman teacher can bring a doctor's certificate showing
that her husband is sick--_then_ she can hold her place and draw her
pay, undisturbed!

The plain ordinary un-male mind will say, "What has that to do with it?"

It has nothing to do with it.  The position in question is that of the
teacher; the relation one between the teacher and pupil on the one side,
and teacher and governing officers on the other side.  Whether teacher,
pupil or official is married or unmarried had nothing to do with the
case, unless it can be shown to interfere with the legitimate work
involved.  Are we to suppose that the unseen extraneous husband has,
when well, a malign influence on his wife's proficiency as a teacher,
and, when ill, a beneficent one?  Not at all; there is no such subtlety
involved.  It is not in the least a question of professional efficiency;
it is a question of money.

Money is for men--who should use some of it to take care of their women.
 When a woman marries, she has a claim for support, and no further use
for money of her own, no right to it, in fact!

Now let us temporarily admit that this is so--what has it to do with the
action of school boards?  Is our public school system an institution for
the regulation of married women's property rights?  Does it make
inquiries as to the family relations of men teachers and pay them
according to the number of dependents they have to support?  Among the
unmarried women, are those who are putting brothers through college, or
maintaining invalid sisters or aged parents, paid more than the young
lady living at home and not "having to work" at all?  If there is no
discrimination made in this matter among men teachers, nor among
unmarried women teachers, why does it instantly enter into consideration
in the case of married teachers?

All "systems" grow stiff, case-hardened, difficult to change; but in
America we have the newest and most pliable, and we are bravely used to
altering things.  It is high time we altered our system of education.
The very crown and flower of our best minds and noblest characters are
called for to bring up children:

"That our childhood may pass with the best you can give--
And our manhood so live!"

Men and women both are needed as teachers; education is a social
process--not one of sex.  Yet the woman is, by virtue of her motherhood,
the original teacher; and is more frequently possessed of the teaching
instinct.  All normal women would naturally marry, circumstances
permitting; should marry, and would be no poorer teachers for that new
relationship.  All normal women should be mothers; and as such, would be
_better_ teachers--not worse!

As to payment, so long as we must measure off our services and pay for
them, no form of human work is worthy of higher reward than this.  To
gather the fruit of all our progress, to prepare it for a child's mind,
and lead him to eat that fruit, freely, and so grow to his best and
highest--this is _the_ human work.

It should be so prized, so honored, and so paid.  And the payment should
be for great work done--and bear no relation whatever to age or sex, or
sex-relation; much less to the pathological condition of irrelevant
husbands.

There is now formed in New York City, "The Married Women Teachers'
Association" (secretary, Miss Anna G. Walsh, 22 Harvard Street, Jamaica,
N. Y.), the purpose of which is to resist this unjust and illegitimate
discrimination.

It is unfortunate that more of the unmarried teachers do not cheerfully
assist in the work.

They do not yet seem to realize that all women should make common cause
against what is not only an injustice, but the most insolent and
presuming interference on the part of men, with the private and personal
affairs of women.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER XIII.

ALL THIS.


They laid before her conquering feet
 The spoils of many lands;
Their crowns shone red upon her head
 Their scepters in her hands.

She heard two murmuring at night,
 Where rose-sweet shadows rest;
And coveted the blossom red
 He laid upon her breast.


When Madam Weatherstone shook the plentiful dust of Orchardina from her
expensive shoes, and returned to adorn the more classic groves of
Philadelphia, Mrs. Thaddler assumed to hold undisputed sway as a social
leader.

The Social Leader she meant to be; and marshalled her forces to that
end.  She Patronized here, and Donated there; revised her visiting list
with rigid exclusiveness; secured an Eminent Professor and a Noted
Writer as visitors, and gave entertainments of almost Roman
magnificence.

Her husband grew more and more restive under the rising tide of social
exactions in dress and deportment; and spent more and more time behind
his fast horses, or on the stock-ranch where he raised them.  As a
neighbor and fellow ranchman, he scraped acquaintance with Ross Warden,
and was able to render him many small services in the process of
settling.

Mrs. Warden remembered his visit to Jopalez, and it took her some time
to rearrange him in her mind as a person of wealth and standing.  Having
so rearranged him, on sufficient evidence, she and her daughters became
most friendly, and had hopes of establishing valuable acquaintance in
the town.  "It's not for myself I care," she would explain to Ross,
every day in the week and more on Sundays, "but for the girls.  In that
dreadful Jopalez there was absolutely _no_ opportunity for them; but
here, with horses, there is no reason we should not have friends.  You
must consider your sisters, Ross!  Do be more cordial to Mr. Thaddler."

But Ross could not at present be cordial to anybody.  His unexpected
good fortune, the freedom from hated cares, and chance to work out his
mighty theories on the faithful guinea-pig, ought to have filled his
soul with joy; but Diantha's cruel obstinacy had embittered his cup of
joy.  He could not break with her; she had not refused him, and it was
difficult in cold blood to refuse her.

He had stayed away for two whole weeks, in which time the guinea-pigs
nibbled at ease and Diantha's work would have suffered except for her
mother's extra efforts.  Then he went to see her again, miserable but
stubborn, finding her also miserable and also stubborn.  They argued
till there was grave danger of an absolute break between them; then
dropped the subject by mutual agreement, and spent evenings of
unsatisfying effort to talk about other things.

Diantha and her mother called on Mrs. Warden, of course, admiring the
glorious view, the sweet high air, and the embowered loveliness of the
two ranch houses.  Ross drew Diantha aside and showed her "theirs"--a
lovely little wide-porched concrete cottage, with a red-tiled roof, and
heavy masses of Gold of Ophir and Banksia roses.

He held her hand and drew her close to him.

He kissed her when they were safe inside, and murmured: "Come,
darling--won't you come and be my wife?"

"I will, Ross--whenever you say--but--!"  She would not agree to give up
her work, and he flung away from her in reckless despair.  Mrs. Warden
and the girls returned the call as a matter of duty, but came no more;
the mother saying that she could not take her daughters to a Servant
Girls' Club.

And though the Servant Girls' Club was soon removed to its new quarters
and Union House became a quiet, well-conducted hotel, still the two
families saw but little of each other.

Mrs. Warden naturally took her son's side, and considered Diantha an
unnatural monster of hard-heartedness.

The matter sifted through to the ears of Mrs. Thaddler, who rejoiced in
it, and called upon Mrs. Warden in her largest automobile.  As a mother
with four marriageable daughters, Mrs. Warden was delighted to accept
and improve the acquaintance, but her aristocratic Southern soul was
inwardly rebellious at the ancestorlessness and uncultured moneyed pride
of her new friend.

"If only Madam Weatherstone had stayed!" she would complain to her
daughters.  "She had Family as well as Wealth."

"There's young Mrs. Weatherstone, mother--" suggested Dora.

"A nobody!" her mother replied.  "She has the Weatherstone money, of
course, but no Position; and what little she has she is losing by her
low tastes.  She goes about freely with Diantha Bell--her own
housekeeper!"

"She's not her housekeeper now, mother--"

"Well, it's all the same!  She _was!_  And a mere general servant before
that!  And now to think that when Ross is willing to overlook it all and
marry her, she won't give it up!"

They were all agreed on this point, unless perhaps that the youngest had
her inward reservations.  Dora had always liked Diantha better than had
the others.

Young Mrs. Weatherstone stayed in her big empty house for a while, and
as Mrs. Warden said, went about frequently with Diantha Bell.  She liked
Mrs. Bell, too--took her for long stimulating rides in her comfortable
car, and insisted that first one and then the other of them should have
a bit of vacation at her seashore home before the winter's work grew too
heavy.

With Mrs. Bell she talked much of how Diantha had helped the town.

"She has no idea of the psychic effects, Mrs. Bell," said she.  "She
sees the business, and she has a great view of all it is going to do for
women to come; but I don't think she realizes how much she is doing
right now for women here--and men, too.  There were my friends the
Pornes; they were 'drifting apart,' as the novels have it--and no
wonder.  Isabel was absolutely no good as a housekeeper; he naturally
didn't like it--and the baby made it all the worse; she pined for her
work, you see, and couldn't get any time for it.  Now they are as happy
as can be--and it's just Diantha Bell's doings.  The housework is off
Isabel's shoulders.

"Then there are the Wagrams, and the Sheldons, and the Brinks--and ever
so many more--who have told me themselves that they are far happier than
they ever were before--and can live more cheaply.  She ought to be the
happiest girl alive!"

Mrs. Bell would agree to this, and quite swelled with happiness and
pride; but Mrs. Weatherstone, watching narrowly, was not satisfied.

When she had Diantha with her she opened fire direct.  "You ought to be
the happiest, proudest, most triumphant woman in the world!" she said.
"You're making oodles of money, your whole thing's going well, and look
at your mother--she's made over!"

Diantha smiled and said she was happy; but her eyes would stray off to
the very rim of the ocean; her mouth set in patient lines that were not
in the least triumphant.

"Tell me about it, my friend," said her hostess.  "Is it that he won't
let you keep on with the business?"

Diantha nodded.

"And you won't give it up to marry him?"

"No," said Diantha.  "No.  Why should I?  I'd marry him--to-morrow!"
She held one hand with the other, tight, but they both shook a little.
"I'd be glad to.  But I will not give up my work!"

"You look thin," said Mrs. Weatherstone.

"Yes--"

"Do you sleep well?"

"No--not very."

"And I can see that you don't eat as you ought to.  Hm!  Are you going
to break down?"

"No," said Diantha, "I am not going to break down.  I am doing what is
right, and I shall go on.  It's a little hard at first--having him so
near.  But I am young and strong and have a great deal to do--I shall do
it."

And then Mrs. Weatherstone would tell her all she knew of the intense
satisfaction of the people she served, and pleasant stories about the
girls.  She bought her books to read and such gleanings as she found in
foreign magazines on the subject of organized house-service.

Not only so, but she supplied the Orchardina library with a special
bibliography on the subject, and induced the new Woman's Club to take up
a course of reading in it, so that there gradually filtered into the
Orchardina mind a faint perception that this was not the freak of an
eccentric individual, but part of an inevitable business development,
going on in various ways in many nations.

As the winter drew on, Mrs. Weatherstone whisked away again, but kept a
warm current of interest in Diantha's life by many letters.

Mr. Bell came down from Jopalez with outer reluctance but inner
satisfaction.  He had rented his place, and Susie had three babies now.
Henderson, Jr., had no place for him, and to do housework for himself
was no part of Mr. Bell's plan.

In Diantha's hotel he had a comfortable room next his wife's, and a
capacious chair in the firelit hall in wet weather, or on the shaded
piazza in dry.  The excellent library was a resource to him; he found
some congenial souls to talk with; and under the new stimulus succeeded
at last in patenting a small device that really worked.  With this, and
his rent, he felt inclined to establish a "home of his own," and the
soul of Mrs. Bell sank within her.  Without allowing it to come to an
issue between them, she kept the question open for endless discussion;
and Mr. Bell lived on in great contentment under the impression that he
was about to move at almost any time.  To his friends and cronies he
dilated with pride on his daughter's wonderful achievements.

"She's as good as a boy!" he would declare.  "Women nowadays seem to do
anything they want to!"  And he rigidly paid his board bill with a
flourish.

Meanwhile the impressive gatherings at Mrs. Thaddler's, and the humbler
tea and card parties of Diantha's friends, had a new topic as a
shuttlecock.

A New York company had bought one of the largest and finest blocks in
town--the old Para place--and was developing it in a manner hitherto
unseen.  The big, shabby, neglected estate began to turn into such a
fairyland as only southern lands can know.  The old live-oaks were
untouched; the towering eucalyptus trees remained in ragged majesty; but
an army of workmen was busy under guidance of a master of beauty.

One large and lovely building rose, promptly dubbed a hotel by the
unwilling neighbors; others, smaller, showed here and there among the
trees; and then a rose-gray wall of concrete ran around the whole, high,
tantalizing, with green boughs and sweet odors coming over it.  Those
who went in reported many buildings, and much activity.  But, when the
wall was done, and each gate said "No admittance except on business,"
then the work of genii was imagined, and there was none to contradict.

It was a School of Theosophy; it was a Christian Science College; it was
a Free-Love Colony; it was a Secret Society; it was a thousand wonders.

"Lot of little houses and one big one," the employees said when
questioned.

"Hotel and cottages," the employers said when questioned.

They made no secret of it, they were too busy; but the town was
unsatisfied.  Why a wall?  What did any honest person want of a wall?
Yet the wall cast a pleasant shadow; there were seats here and there
between buttresses, and, as the swift California season advanced, roses
and oleanders nodded over the top, and gave hints of beauty and richness
more subtly stimulating than all the open glory of the low-hedged
gardens near.

Diantha's soul was stirred with secret envy.  Some big concern was about
to carry out her dream, or part of it--perhaps to be a huge and
overflowing rival.  Her own work grew meantime, and flourished as well
as she could wish.

The food-delivery service was running to its full capacity; the girls
got on very well under Mrs. Jessup, and were delighted to have a house
of their own with the parlors and piazzas all to themselves, and a
garden to sit in as well.  If this depleted their ranks by marriage, it
did not matter now, for there was a waiting list in training all the
time.

Union House kept on evenly and profitably, and Diantha was beginning to
feel safe and successful; but the years looked long before her.

She was always cheered by Mrs. Weatherstone's letters; and Mrs. Porne
came to see her, and to compare notes over their friend's success.  For
Mrs. Weatherstone had been presented at Court--at more than one court,
in fact; and Mrs. Weatherstone had been proposed to by a Duke--and had
refused him!  Orchardina well-nigh swooned when this was known.

She had been studying, investigating, had become known in scientific as
well as social circles, and on her way back the strenuous upper layer of
New York Society had also made much of her.  Rumors grew of her
exquisite costumes, of her unusual jewels, of her unique entertainments,
of her popularity everywhere she went.

Other proposals, of a magnificent nature, were reported, with more
magnificent refusals; and Orchardina began to be very proud of young
Mrs. Weatherstone and to wish she would come back.

She did at last, bringing an Italian Prince with her, and a Hoch
Geborene German Count also, who alleged they were travelling to study
the country, but who were reputed to have had a duel already on the
beautiful widow's account.

All this was long-drawn gossip but bore some faint resemblance to the
facts.  Viva Weatherstone at thirty was a very different woman front the
pale, sad-eyed girl of four years earlier.  And when the great house on
the avenue was arrayed in new magnificence, and all Orchardina--that
dared--had paid its respects to her, she opened the season, as it were,
with a brilliant dinner, followed by a reception and ball.

All Orchardina came--so far as it had been invited.  There was the
Prince, sure enough--a pleasant, blue-eyed young man.  And there was the
Count, bearing visible evidence of duels a-plenty in earlier days.  And
there was Diantha Bell--receiving, with Mrs. Porne and Mrs.
Weatherstone.  All Orchardina stared.  Diantha had been at the
dinner--that was clear.  And now she stood there in her soft, dark
evening dress, the knot of golden acacias nestling against the black
lace at her bosom, looking as fair and sweet as if she had never had a
care in her life.

Her mother thought her the most beautiful thing she had ever seen; and
her father, though somewhat critical, secretly thought so, too.

Mrs. Weatherstone cast many a loving look at the tall girl beside her in
the intervals of "Delighted to see you's," and saw that her double
burden had had no worse effect than to soften the lines of the mouth and
give a hint of pathos to the clear depths of her eyes.

The foreign visitors were much interested in the young Amazon of
Industry, as the Prince insisted on calling her; and even the German
Count for a moment forgot his ancestors in her pleasant practical talk.

Mrs. Weatherstone had taken pains to call upon the Wardens--claiming a
connection, if not a relationship, and to invite them all.  And as the
crowd grew bigger and bigger, Diantha saw Mrs. Warden at last
approaching with her four daughters--and no one else.  She greeted them
politely and warmly; but Mrs. Weatherstone did more.

Holding them all in a little group beside her, she introduced her noble
visitors to them; imparted the further information that their brother
was _fiance_ to Miss Bell.  "I don't see him," she said, looking about.
"He will come later, of course.  Ah, Miss Madeline!  How proud you all
must feel of your sister-in-law to be!"

Madeline blushed and tried to say she was.

"Such a remarkable young lady!" said the Count to Adeline.  "You will
admire, envy, and imitate!  Is it not so?"

"Your ladies of America have all things in your hands," said the Prince
to Miss Cora.  "To think that she has done so much, and is yet so
young--and so beautiful!"

"I know you're all as proud as you can be," Mrs. Weatherstone continued
to Dora.  "You see, Diantha has been heard of abroad."

They all passed on presently, as others came; but Mrs. Warden's head was
reeling.  She wished she could by any means get at Ross, and _make_ him
come, which he had refused to do.

"I can't, mother," he had said.  "You go--all of you.  Take the girls.
I'll call for you at twelve--but I won't go in."

Mr. and Mrs. Thaddler were there--but not happy.  She was not, at least,
and showed it; he was not until an idea struck him.  He dodged softly
out, and was soon flying off, at dangerous speed over the moon-white
country roads.

He found Ross, dressed and ready, sulking blackly on his shadowy porch.

"Come and take a spin while you wait," said Mr. Thaddler.

"Thanks, I have to go in town later."

"I'll take you in town."

"Thank you, but I have to take the horses in and bring out my mother and
the girls."

"I'll bring you all out in the car.  Come on--it's a great night."

So Ross rather reluctantly came.

He sat back on the luxurious cushions, his arms folded sternly, his
brows knit, and the stout gentleman at his side watched him shrewdly.

"How does the ranch go?" he asked.

"Very well, thank you, Mr. Thaddler."

"Them Chinks pay up promptly?"

"As prompt as the month comes round.  Their rent is a very valuable part
of the estate."

"Yes," Mr. Thaddler pursued.  "They have a good steady market for their
stuff.  And the chicken man, too.  Do you know who buys 'em?"

Ross did not.  Did not greatly care, he intimated.

"I should think you'd be interested--you ought to--it's Diantha Bell."

Ross started, but said nothing.

"You see, I've taken a great interest in her proposition ever since she
sprung it on us," Mr. Thaddler confided.  "She's got the goods all
right.  But there was plenty against her here--you know what women are!
And I made up my mind the supplies should be good and steady, anyhow.
She had no trouble with her grocery orders; that was easy.  Meat I
couldn't handle--except indirectly--a little pressure, maybe, here and
there."  And he chuckled softly.  "But this ranch I bought on purpose."

Ross turned as if he had been stung.

"You!" he said.

"Yes, me.  Why not?  It's a good property.  I got it all fixed right,
and then I bought your little upstate shop--lock, stock and barrel--and
gave you this for it.  A fair exchange is no robbery.  Though it would
be nice to have it all in the family, eh?"

Ross was silent for a few turbulent moments, revolving this far from
pleasing information.

"What'd I do it for?" continued the unasked benefactor.  "What do you
_think_ I did it for?  So that brave, sweet little girl down here could
have her heart's desire.  She's established her business--she's proved
her point--she's won the town--most of it; and there's nothing on earth
to make her unhappy now but your pigheadedness!  Young man, I tell you
you're a plumb fool!"

One cannot throw one's host out of his own swift-flying car; nor is it
wise to jump out one's self.

"Nothing on earth between you but your cussed pride!" Mr. Thaddler
remorselessly went on.  "This ranch is honestly yours--by a square deal.
 Your Jopalez business was worth the money--you ran it honestly and
extended the trade.  You'd have made a heap by it if you could have
unbent a little.  Gosh!  I limbered up that store some in twelve
months!"  And the stout man smiled reminiscently.

Ross was still silent.

"And now you've got what you wanted--thanks to her, mind you, thanks to
her!--and you ain't willing to let her have what she wants!"

The young man moistened his lips to speak.

"You ain't dependent on her in any sense--I don't mean that.  You earned
the place all right, and I don't doubt you'll make good, both in a
business way and a scientific way, young man.  But why in Hades you
can't let her be happy, too, is more'n I can figure!  Guess you get your
notions from two generations back--and some!"

Ross began, stumblingly.  "I did not know I was indebted to you, Mr.
Thaddler."

"You're not, young man, you're not!  I ran that shop of yours a
year--built up the business and sold it for more than I paid for this.
So you've no room for heroics--none at all.  What I want you to realize
is that you're breaking the heart of the finest woman I ever saw.  You
can't bend that girl--she'll never give up.  A woman like that has got
more things to do than just marry!  But she's pining for you all the
same.

"Here she is to-night, receiving with Mrs. Weatherstone--with those
Bannerets, Dukes and Earls around her--standing up there like a Princess
herself--and her eyes on the door all the time--and tears in 'em, I
could swear--because you don't come!"

*

They drew up with a fine curve before the carriage gate.

"I'll take 'em all home--they won't be ready for some time yet," said
Mr. Thaddler.  "And if you two would like this car I'll send for the
other one."

Ross shook hands with him.  "You are very kind, Mr. Thaddler," he said.
"I am obliged to you.  But I think we will walk."

Tall and impressive, looking more distinguished in a six-year-old
evening suit than even the Hoch Geborene in his uniform, he came at
last, and Diantha saw him the moment he entered; saw, too, a new light
in his eyes.

He went straight to her.  And Mrs. Weatherstone did not lay it up
against him that he had but the briefest of words for his hostess.

"Will you come?" he said.  "May I take you home--now?"

She went with him, without a word, and they walked slowly home, by far
outlying paths, and long waits on rose-bowered seats they knew.

The moon filled all the world with tender light and the orange blossoms
flooded the still air with sweetness.

"Dear," said he, "I have been a proud fool--I am yet--but I have come to
see a little clearer.  I do not approve of your work--I cannot approve
of it--but will you forgive me for that and marry me?  I cannot live any
longer without you?"

"Of course I will," said Diantha.


(To be continued)



THE GOOD MAN


A certain Good Man possessed many Virtues of character by right of
inheritance, so that my Critical Friend remarked, "It is easy for him to
be good."

Now the Good Man was by no means satisfied with his inherited virtues,
and with Ceaseless Diligence and Long Effort he strove to acquire more,
and in due season acquired them, abundantly, so that even my Critical
Friend allowed these virtues were of some credit to him.

Nevertheless, being critical, he criticized the Good Man, to my grief
and amazement.

"How can you criticize this Great White Soul?" I cried.  "He has never
committed a crime."

"Neither have you or I," interrupted my Critical Friend.

"He has never sinned," I continued, "he has not a single vice, he has
not even a fault!  And as to his Virtues!"

"What are his Virtues?" asked my Critical Friend.

Then I considered the Virtues of that Great Man and was lost in
admiration and amazement.  "He is unimpeachably Honest, Trustworthy and
True," said I.  "He is Humble and Modest even in his Superiority, and
has Hope of Improvement; he is Brave in meeting adversity and Patient in
bearing it.  He is Chaste and Temperate, he is Generous and Unselfish
and Self-sacrificing, he is Persevering and Diligent, Faithful and
Enduring.  He is _good_."

"Yes?" said my Critical Friend.  "What good is he?"

"_What_ good?" said I.

"Yes, what good?  What does he _do?_"

"What do you mean?" I asked.  "His business?"

"Of course.  What's his business?  What does he do in the world?"

"He's a business man," said I, "and a very good business man, if that is
what you mean."

My Critical friend grinned unfeelingly.  "What use is he?" he asked.
"Whom does he serve?  Of what use to humanity is his work?  In what may
the human race be benefited by his business?  What will the world lose
when he is gone?"

"They will lose a Good Man," said I, a little angrily.

And my Critical Friend subsided, merely grunting once more, in that
tiresome way of his, "_What_ good?"



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; OR, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


XIII.

INDUSTRY AND ECONOMICS.


The forest of Truth, on the subject of industry and economics, is
difficult to see on account of the trees.

We have so many Facts on this subject; so many Opinions; so many
Traditions and Habits; and the pressure of Immediate Conclusions is so
intense upon us all; that it is not easy to form a clear space in one's
mind and consider the field fairly.

Possibly the present treatment of the subject will appeal most to the
minds of those who know least about it; such as the Average Woman.  To
her, Industry is a daylong and lifelong duty, as well as a natural
impulse; and economics means going without things.  To such untrained
but also unprejudiced minds it should be easy to show the main facts on
these lines.

Let us dispose of Economics first, as having a solemn scientific
appearance.

Physical Economics treats of the internal affairs of the body; the whole
machinery and how it works; all organs, members, functions; each last
and littlest capillary and leucocyte, are parts of that "economy."

Nature's "economy" is not in the least "economical."  The waste of life,
the waste of material, the waste of time and effort, are prodigious, yet
she achieves her end as we see.

Domestic Economics covers the whole care and government of the
household; the maintenance of peace, health, order, and morality; the
care and nourishment of children as far as done at home; the entire
management of the home, as well as the spending and saving of money; are
included in it.  Saving is the least and poorest part of it; especially
as in mere abstinence from needed things; most especially when this
abstinence is mainly "Mother's."  How best to spend; time, strength,
love, care, labor, knowledge, and money--this should be the main study
in Domestic Economics.

Social, or, as they are used to call it, Political Economics, covers a
larger, but not essentially different field.  A family consists of
people, and the Mother is their natural manager.  Society consists of
people--_the same people_--only more of them.  All the people, who are
members of Society, are also members of families--except some incubated
orphans maybe.  Social Economics covers the whole care and management of
the people, the maintenance of peace and health and order and morality;
the care of children, as far as done out of the home; as well as the
spending and saving of the public money--all these are included in it.

This great business of Social Economics is at present little understood
and most poorly managed, for this reason; we approach it from an
individual point of view; seeking not so much to do our share in the
common service, as to get our personal profit from the common wealth.
Where the whole family labors together to harvest fruit and store it for
the winter, we have legitimate Domestic Economics: but where one member
takes and hides a lot for himself, to the exclusion of the others, we
have no Domestic Economics at all--merely individual selfishness.

In Social Economics we have a large, but simple problem.  Here is the
earth, our farm.  Here are the people, who own the earth.  How can the
most advantage to the most people be obtained from the earth with the
least labor?  That is the problem of Social Economics.

Looking at the world as if you held it in your hands to study and
discuss, what do we find at present?

We find people living too thickly for health and comfort in some places,
and too thinly for others; we find most people working too hard and too
long at honest labor; some people working with damaging intensity at
dishonest labor; and a few wretched paupers among the rich and poor,
degenerate idlers who do not work at all, the scum and the dregs of
Society.

All this is bad economics.  We do not get the comfort out of life we
easily could; and work far too hard for what we do get.  Moreover, there
is no peace, no settled security.  No man is sure of his living, no
matter how hard he works, a thousand things may occur to deprive him of
his job, or his income.  In our time there is great excitement along
this line of study; and more than one proposition is advanced whereby we
may improve, most notably instanced in the world-covering advance of
Socialism.

In our present study the principal fact to be exhibited is the influence
of a male culture upon Social Economics and Industry.

Industry, as a department of Social Economics, is little understood.
Heretofore we have viewed this field from several wholly erroneous
positions.  From the Hebrew (and wholly androcentric) religious
teaching, we have regarded labor as a curse.

Nothing could be more absurdly false.  Labor is not merely a means of
supporting human life--it _is_ human life.  Imagine a race of beings
living without labor!  They must be the rudest savages.

Human work consists in specialized industry and the exchange of its
products; and without it is no civilization.  As industry develops,
civilization develops; peace expands; wealth increases; science and art
help on the splendid total.  Productive industry, and its concomitant of
distributive industry cover the major field of human life.

If our industry was normal, what should we see?

A world full of healthy, happy people; each busily engaged in what he or
she most enjoys doing.  Normal Specialization, like all our voluntary
processes, is accompanied by keen pleasure; and any check or
interruption to it gives pain and injury.  Whosoever works at what he
loves is well and happy.  Whoso works at what he does not love is ill
and miserable.  It is very bad economics to force unwilling industry.
That is the weakness of slave labor; and of wage labor also where there
is not full industrial education and freedom of choice.

Under normal conditions we should see well developed, well trained
specialists happily engaged in the work they most enjoyed; for
reasonable hours (any work, or play either, becomes injurious if done
too long); and as a consequence the whole output of the world would be
vastly improved, not only in quantity but in quality.

Plain are the melancholy facts of what we do see.  Following that
pitiful conception of labor as a curse, comes the very old and
androcentric habit of despising it as belonging to women, and then to
slaves.

As a matter of fact industry is in its origin feminine; that is,
maternal.  It is the overflowing fountain of mother-love and
mother-power which first prompts the human race to labor; and for long
ages men performed no productive industry at all; being merely hunters
and fighters.

It is this lack of natural instinct for labor in the male of our
species, together with the ideas and opinions based on that lack, and
voiced by him in his many writings, religious and other, which have
given to the world its false estimate of this great function, human
work.  That which is our very life, our greatest joy, our road to all
advancement, we have scorned and oppressed; so that "working people,"
the "working classes," "having to work," etc., are to this day spoken of
with contempt.  Perhaps drones speak so among themselves of the "working
bees!"

Normally, widening out from the mother's careful and generous service in
the family, to careful, generous service in the world, we should find
labor freely given, with love and pride.

Abnormally, crushed under the burden of androcentric scorn and
prejudice, we have labor grudgingly produced under pressure of
necessity; labor of slaves under fear of the whip, or of wage-slaves,
one step higher, under fear of want.  Long ages wherein hunting and
fighting were the only manly occupations, have left their heavy impress.
 The predacious instinct and the combative instinct weigh down and
disfigure our economic development.  What Veblen calls "the instinct of
workmanship" grows on, slowly and irresistably; but the malign features
of our industrial life are distinctively androcentric: the desire to
get, of the hunter; interfering with the desire to give, of the mother;
the desire to overcome an antagonist--originally masculine, interfering
with the desire to serve and benefit--originally feminine.

Let the reader keep in mind that as human beings, men are able to
over-live their masculine natures and do noble service to the world;
also that as human beings they are today far more highly developed than
women, and doing far more for the world.  The point here brought out is
that as males their unchecked supremacy has resulted in the abnormal
predominance of masculine impulses in our human processes; and that this
predominance has been largely injurious.

As it happens, the distinctly feminine or maternal impulses are far more
nearly in line with human progress than are those of the male; which
makes her exclusion from human functions the more mischievous.

Our current teachings in the infant science of Political Economy are
naively masculine.  They assume as unquestionable that "the economic
man" will never do anything unless he has to; will only do it to escape
pain or attain pleasure; and will, inevitably, take all he can get, and
do all he can to outwit, overcome, and if necessary destroy his
antagonist.

Always the antagonist; to the male mind an antagonist is essential to
progress, to all achievement.  He has planted that root-thought in all
the human world; from that old hideous idea of Satan, "The Adversary,"
down to the competitor in business, or the boy at the head of the class,
to be superseded by another.

Therefore, even in science, "the struggle for existence" is the dominant
law--to the male mind, with the "survival of the fittest" and "the
elimination of the unfit."

Therefore in industry and economics we find always and everywhere the
antagonist; the necessity for somebody or something to be overcome--else
why make an effort?  If you have not the incentive of reward, or the
incentive of combat, why work?  "Competition is the life of trade."

Thus the Economic Man.

But how about the Economic Woman?

To the androcentric mind she does not exist.  Women are females, and
that's all; their working abilities are limited to personal service.

That it would be possible to develop industry to far greater heights,
and to find in social economics a simple and beneficial process for the
promotion of human life and prosperity, under any other impulse than
these two, Desire and Combat, is hard indeed to recognize--for the "male
mind."

So absolutely interwoven are our existing concepts of maleness and
humanness, so sure are we that men are people and women only females,
that the claim of equal weight and dignity in human affairs of the
feminine instincts and methods is scouted as absurd.  We find existing
industry almost wholly in male hands; find it done as men do it; assume
that that is the way it must be done.

When women suggest that it could be done differently, their proposal is
waved aside--they are "only women"--their ideas are "womanish."

Agreed.  So are men "only men," their ideas are "mannish"; and of the
two the women are more vitally human than the men.

The female is the race-type--the man the variant.

The female, as a race-type, having the female processes besides; best
performs the race processes.  The male, however, has with great
difficulty developed them, always heavily handicapped by his maleness;
being in origin essentially a creature of sex, and so dominated almost
exclusively by sex impulses.

The human instinct of mutual service is checked by the masculine
instinct of combat; the human tendency to specialize in labor, to
rejoicingly pour force in lines of specialized expression, is checked by
the predacious instinct, which will exert itself for reward; and
disfigured by the masculine instinct of self-expression, which is an
entirely different thing from the great human outpouring of world force.

Great men, the world's teachers and leaders, are great in humanness;
mere maleness does not make for greatness unless it be in warfare--a
disadvantageous glory!  Great women also must be great in humanness; but
their female instincts are not so subversive of human progress as are
the instincts of the male.  To be a teacher and leader, to love and
serve, to guard and guide and help, are well in line with motherhood.

"Are they not also in line with fatherhood?" will be asked; and, "Are
not the father's paternal instincts masculine?"

No, they are not; they differ in no way from the maternal, in so far as
they are beneficial.  Parental functions of the higher sort, of the
human sort, are identical.  The father can give his children many
advantages which the mother can not; but that is due to his superiority
as a human being.  He possesses far more knowledge and power in the
world, the human world; he himself is more developed in human powers and
processes; and is therefore able to do much for his children which the
mother can not; but this is in no way due to his masculinity.  It is in
this development of human powers in man, through fatherhood, that we may
read the explanation of our short period of androcentric culture.

So thorough and complete a reversal of previous relation, such
continuance of what appears in every way an unnatural position, must
have had some justification in racial advantages, or it could not have
endured.  This is its justification; the establishment of humanness in
the male; he being led into it, along natural lines, by the exercise of
previously existing desires.

In a male culture the attracting forces must inevitably have been, we
have seen, Desire and Combat.  These masculine forces, acting upon human
processes, while necessary to the uplifting of the man, have been
anything but uplifting to civilization.  A sex which thinks, feels and
acts in terms of combat is difficult to harmonize in the smooth bonds of
human relationship; that they have succeeded so well is a beautiful
testimony to the superior power of race tendency over sex tendency.
Uniting and organizing, crudely and temporarily, for the common hunt;
and then, with progressive elaboration, for the common fight; they are
now using the same tactics--and the same desires, unfortunately--in
common work.

Union, organization, complex interservice, are the essential processes
of a growing society; in them, in the ever-increasing discharge of power
along widening lines of action, is the joy and health of social life.
But so far men combine in order to better combat; the mutual service
held incidental to the common end of conquest and plunder.

In spite of this the overmastering power of humanness is now developing
among modern men immense organizations of a wholly beneficial character,
with no purpose but mutual advantage.  This is true human growth, and as
such will inevitably take the place of the sex-prejudiced earlier
processes.

The human character of the Christian religion is now being more and more
insisted on; the practical love and service of each and all; in place of
the old insistence on Desire--for a Crown and Harp in Heaven, and
Combat--with that everlasting adversary.

In economics this great change is rapidly going on before our eyes.  It
is a change in idea, in basic concept, in our theory of what the whole
thing is about.  We are beginning to see the world, not as "a fair field
and no favor"--not a place for one man to get ahead of others, for a
price; but as an establishment belonging to us, the proceeds of which
are to be applied, as a matter of course, to human advantage.

In the old idea, the wholly masculine idea, based on the processes of
sex-combat, the advantage of the world lay in having "the best man win."
 Some, in the first steps of enthusiasm for Eugenics, think so still;
imagining that the primal process of promoting evolution through the
paternity of the conquering male is the best process.

To have one superior lion kill six or sixty inferior lions, and leave a
progeny of more superior lions behind him, is all right--for lions; the
superiority in fighting being all the superiority they need.

But the man able to outwit his follows, to destroy them in physical, or
ruin in financial, combat, is not therefore a superior human creature.
Even physical superiority, as a fighter, does not prove the kind of
vigor best calculated to resist disease, or to adapt itself to changing
conditions.

That our masculine culture in its effect on Economics and Industry is
injurious, is clearly shown by the whole open page of history.  From the
simple beneficent activities of a matriarchal period we follow the same
lamentable steps; nation after nation.  Women are enslaved and captives
are enslaved; a military despotism is developed; labor is despised and
discouraged.  Then when the irresistible social forces do bring us
onward, in science, art, commerce, and all that we call civilization, we
find the same check acting always upon that progress; and the really
vital social processes of production and distribution heavily injured by
the financial combat and carnage which rages ever over and among them.

The real development of the people, the forming of finer physiques,
finer minds, a higher level of efficiency, a broader range of enjoyment
and accomplishment--is hindered and not helped by this artificially
maintained "struggle for existence," this constant endeavor to eliminate
what, from a masculine standard, is "unfit."

That we have progressed thus far, that we are now moving forward so
rapidly, is in spite of and not because of our androcentric culture.



A FREQUENT QUESTION


If women become economically independent, their husbands will stop
working--and depend on them.

Oh, no, they won't.

How do you know they won't?

Because that kind of man will not succeed in getting that kind of woman
to depend on when women are wiser.

What's to prevent the man from becoming a burden on her afterward?

The marriage contract.

You propose a new kind of marriage contract, do you?

Why not?  Marriages may be made in Heaven, but the contract is drawn up
by mere men.  These--and some women to help them--may easily make a
better one.  Why not?



BOYS WILL BE BOYS


"Boys will be boys," and boys have had their day;
 Boy-mischief and boy-carelessness and noise
Extenuated all, allowed, excused and smoothed away,
 Each duty missed, each damaging wild act,
 By this meek statement of unquestioned fact--
  Boys will be boys!

"Now, women will be women."  Mark the change;
 Calm motherhood in place of boisterous youth;
No warfare now; to manage and arrange,
 To nurture with wise care, is woman's way,
 In peace and fruitful industry her sway.
  In love and truth.



MANY WINDOWS


Many minds are many windows,
 Varied are their views;
Each of us, if lonely, knows
Only what one window shows--
 Can no further choose.

Many minds are many windows,
 One the light divine,
We may freely move and range,
Wide our windows may exchange,--
 Come and look through mine!



COMMENT AND REVIEW


Lavina L. Dock is a trained nurse of long and wide experience in more
than one country.  She is the author of "A Text Book of Materia Medica
for Nurses," now in its fourth edition, revised and enlarged, and, in
collaboration with M. D. Nutting, R.N., of "The History of Nursing," in
two volumes.

Miss Dock's present book, "Hygiene and Morality," is of far wider appeal
than either of the former works.  The title is a good one, for it links
two aspects of one subject, and presents the new case without ignoring
the old one.

The work deals in the main, in plain, simple moderate language, with the
pathological aspects of what is called "the social evil"; laying stress
not so much upon the moral danger, long known, as on the physical
danger, to which we are but just awakening.

The first part gives clear descriptions of the venereal diseases, now
known to be caused by specific germs; and to be both infectious and
contagious in the highest degree; giving statistics as to their
prevalence.

The general estimate, in syphilis, she quotes as from five to eighteen
per cent of the population, varying in the different countries.  Taking
the most modest estimate for ours, and allowing our population at
80,000,000--this would give us an army of 4,000,000 syphilitics at large
among us--unknown to the public.

Say they had leprosy, or cholera, or smallpox, and imagine our horror;
yet these diseases are not comparable in their terrible consequences;
not only to the victims, but to their children and grandchildren.

In gonorrhoea, a cause of sterility, blindness of babies, and all manner
of surgical operations and "diseases peculiar to women," so common among
innocent wives, Miss Dock shows us that European records give about
seventy-five per cent of men as infected.  In America things are better,
a conservative estimate giving the proportion of our men having either
syphilis or gonorrhoea as about sixty per cent.

As each of these diseases affects both wife and child, it is specially
necessary that women should be informed about them.

The second part treats of Prostitution; the efforts made at its control
and regulation, and the new widespread movement for its abolition; and
gives melancholy figures to show not only the immense extent of this
evil, but the fact that the large majority of its victims are
_unwilling_ ones.

Abnormal women who might wish to follow this trade are so few that in
order to supply the market, innocent young girls, numbering in America
about fifty thousand a year, must be forced into this profession, into
shame, disease and painful death; hence the "White-Slave traffic."

The third part discusses Prevention; with wise and hopeful words;
telling how chance infection may be avoided, how patients with these
diseases should be isolated; and how all children should be educated in
full knowledge of this danger and its best avoidance.

Miss Dock is also very clear and strong in showing that women can best
reduce this evil through the use of the ballot; and gives conclusive
evidence of what is already accomplished in those states and countries
having equal suffrage.

It is a clean, forcible interesting book, most moderate in tone; and
giving a long list of scientific authorities.

*

Now for an amusing book!

This is "Marriage as a Trade," by Cicely Hamilton, a clever and forcible
English writer, co-author of that delicious little play "How The Vote
Was Won."

A keen and accurate weapon is Miss Hamilton's pen; and in this work she
uses it with delicious dexterity to prick bubbles, to slice off masks,
cut veils and bandages, and dissect ancient idols.

Her special matter in discussion is exactly given in the title, and she
does not stray from her theme; but brings out, sharply and inescapably,
the universal fact, that marriage, to a woman, is not only a happiness
(or a grief!), not only a duty, or at least a natural function, but a
trade--she earns her living by it!

Miss Hamilton points out very forcibly that not all women are fitted by
nature for following the same trade, that not all of them like it; that
it produces low grade work and discontented lives; and that many women
would infinitely prefer working at some other business.

The value of this book is is the sharp light thrown on this large
subject from the woman's view--or at least from a woman's view; and one
that will be shared by many others.

Its amusing quality is for those who like trenchant wit and penetrating
satire.

*

Mary Jonston is a writer of good novels, strong, thrilling, excellent in
workmanship, as all who have read her "To Have and To Hold" will agree;
and it was that quality of literary skill which made me seize upon this,
in the Woman's Journal of October 8th, before I noticed the name of the
author:


THE WISE HOUSEKEEPER:


Will be against
A HOW BUILT ON SAND.
Will be for
THE CATEGORICAL IMPERATIVE.

Will be against
GROUNDS WITHOUT SHADE AND WATER.
Will be for
CONSERVATISM.

Will be against
QUARRELS WITH NEIGHBORS.
Will be for
INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION.

Will be against
EXTRAVAGANT HOUSEKEEPING.
Will be for
ECONOMY IN ADMINISTRATION.

Will be against
PENNY WISDOM AND POUND FOOLISHNESS.
Will be for
LIBERAL APPROPRIATIONS FOR COMMON WELFARE.

Will be against
DISHONEST SERVANTS.
Will be for
INTELLIGENCE AND HONOR IN OFFICE.

Will be against
DIRT.
Will be for
CLEAN POLITICS.

Will be against
MOTHS, RUST AND MILDEW
Will be for
AN END TO GRAFT.

Will be against
UNTRIMMED LAMPS.
Will be for
THE INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.

Will be against
UNPAID BILLS.
Will be for
JUSTICE.

Will be against
DARK CORNERS.
Will be for
COMMON OWNERSHIP IN COMMON NEEDS.

Will be against
DARKENED WINDOWS.
Will be for
COMPULSORY EDUCATION.

Will be against
CANDLES BURNED AT BOTH ENDS.
Will be for
ABOLITION OF CHILD LABOR.

Will be against
CARELESS BREAKAGE.
Will be for
ACTS LOOKING TO PREVENTION OF MINE, RAILWAY AND FACTORY ACCIDENTS.

Will be against
HOUSEHOLD DRUDGES.
Will be for
AN EIGHT-HOUR DAY.

Will be against
BAD DRAINS.
Will be for
A FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.

Will be against
STAINS THAT WILL NOT COME OUT.
Will be for
JUVENILE COURTS.

Will be against
POISONS LEFT WHERE THE CHILDREN CAN GET THEM.
Will be for
WAR AGAINST THE SOCIAL EVIL.
WAR AGAINST ALCOHOL.

Will be against
MISTAKEN PARTNERSHIPS.
Will be for
WISER MARRIAGE LAWS.

Will be against
SPOILED CHILDREN.
Will be for
A FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF EUGENICS.

Will be against
A MISTRESS OF THE HOUSE WITHOUT AUTHORITY.
Will be for
THE FRANCHISE FOR WOMEN.

*

"To-day's Problems" is a good ten cents' worth--or five, if you live in
Chicago.

It is a pocket-size pamphlet, full of short bits from some hundred and
fifty leading writers, workers, and speakers, along lines of Social
Progress.

Ministers, college professors, economists, sociologists, editors,
authors, organizers, poets, orators; a millionaire, a member of
parliament, a prince,--it's a great booklet.  And not a thing in it that
fills one page, even.

_To-day's Problems._  Trade Union Book Concern.  Chicago, Ill.

*

We mean to carry lists of books useful to our readers.  We wish to prove
that it will pay publishers to advertise with us.  If you order any book
reviewed here, please send your order to The FORERUNNER.

"Pure Sociology," by Lester F. Ward, Macmillan, Pub., $4.00.

"Hygiene and Morality," by Lavina L. Dock, R. N., G. P. Putnam's Sons,
Pub., $1.25.

"Marriage as a Trade," by Cicely Hamilton, Moffat, Yard & Co., Pub.,
$1.25.



PERSONAL PROBLEMS


_Question._--A radical woman and conservative man are married, have been
married for years.  The woman now wants to do a share of work for votes
for women.  The man takes it as a personal reflection.  He thinks
outsiders will conclude that a woman suffragist must have a family
grievance at home.  How much suffrage work do you advise her to do?

_Answer._--I advise her to do all the suffrage work she thinks right;
and any other work she thinks right.  What her husband thinks somebody
else will think, is a pretty poor obstacle.

If a woman so lives as to hold the love and respect of her husband, she
can differ from him quite widely--for conscience sake--and not break
their bond.

If he does not love and respect her--why should she mind what he thinks?

*

Here are some earnest questions from an artist:

1. "How shall I be most efficient?

2. "Which of my work is best--what I think best, or what other people
think best?

3. "If my best work is done by accident, what's the use of trying?"

_Answer._--1. Live to your fullest development in all lines--and keep
your health.  Do not so concentrate on art as to neglect life--and your
art will be greater.

2. Do the work you think best, with all your might, accepting others'
judgement only when it convinces yours.

3. Trying, always--that is, doing your best work, life long--is what
allows those happy accidents.  Keep on trying.

*

In this department in August, "E. M. K." asked:

"Would you please outline a plan of organization among married women who
wish to continue practicing their profession, through which they may
arouse other women; and also reach the authorities who have control over
their work?"

I then recommended political organization as the best possible; but have
been called upon since to mention The Married Women Teachers'
Association, of New York, as an instance of what may be done.  The
Secretary is Mrs. Anna G. Walsh, 22 Harvard Avenue, Jamaica, N. Y.



FROM LETTERS OF SUBSCRIBERS


"Charlotte Perkins Gilman: Since the first of January, 1904, I've been
writing you this letter!  'The Women's Journal,' of Boston, presented
you to me--and I've been acknowledging the introduction ever since!!
'-----'  I bought--and read--and re-read your 'Women and Economics' and
'The Home, It's Work and Influence.'  I then as now, _knew_--that I had
known these things always--you had only beat me to its expression."

*

"The magazine is interesting of course, and clever and inspiring.  I
enclose check for $3.00 for my own subscription and for two others,
whose addresses I write on the same card."

*

"The Forerunner has such a cheery, hopeful, even confident tone that it
is fine to read it.  I feel, dear Mrs. Gilman, that as much as I liked
your earlier work, I find even more in this latest.  It touches the
quick more--in me."

*

"Enclosed please find post office order for $1.00, to cover a year's
subscription to The Forerunner, and I sincerely trust that that magazine
will have the influence that it deserves.  The November number alone is
worth the price."

*

"Its going to be well worth a dollar, this Forerunner of yours, if the
forerunner I have received of The Forerunner is to be taken as typical,
I am immensely interested in your philosophy of life.  Your tale of
Diantha I turned over to my eldest daughter and its effect is
pronounced.  She is looking for the next number."

*

"We enjoy the magazine very much, particularly the series of articles
titled 'Our Androcentric Culture.'  It explains very satisfactorily the
present _andriness_ of conditions.  May you live a thousand years--and
longer; to continue good work of enlightenment."

*

"Mrs. H---- has sent me a sample copy of The Forerunner.  It is _fine._
I always run to hear you when you speak,--now I may sit at home and talk
with you!"

*

"_The Barrel_ is delicious.  If Mrs. D---- hasn't already subscribed, do
send her this number.  I enclose stamps therefor."

*

"May I congratulate you on your magazine, The Forerunner.  Of course the
things you say in it are good as everything you ever say is, and added
to that the magazine is attractive in form and in make-up.  I think that
you ought to be happy, indeed, that you are putting forth such a good
looking as well as clever publication.  I was delighted to see some of
your verse again, for no matter what brilliant things you have done
along economic lines, nothing has ever gone to the very bottom with me
more than your verse, 'In this our world.'"

*

"I have been intending to write to congratulate you upon the magazine.
It goes without saying that it is clever and altogether delightful.
Long may it continue."

*

"Permit me to congratulate you on getting up a paper with so much
intellectual food contained within its covers.  Both my wife and self
enjoyed reading No. 3 '-----' particularly 'Androcentric Culture.'  More
power to you!"

*

"Thank you so much for the December and January numbers of The
Forerunner;--I think they are great, _great,_ GREAT!--Every bit of them
makes one grind one's teeth with satisfaction."

*

"We three are familiar with your 'Women and Economics' and regularly
announce to each other by post card;--See such a magazine--an article by
_'our C. P. G.'_  So imagine our satisfaction to learn that 'our Mrs.
Gilman' has now a magazine where _'her policies'_ are so ably presented!
 '-----'  I shall never lose an opportunity to advertise The Forerunner
by word of mouth."

*

"If possible include all numbers of your paper in the following yearly
subscriptions.  We are anxious to have the file from the first.

"The paper is great.  May it be able to outlive the necessity for its
mission."

(Encloses three subscriptions).

*

"In our family circle we have read aloud The Forerunner for November and
December with much interest and enjoyment.  We were particularly pleased
with your article on Christmas and the Santa Claus myth."

*

"Hurrah for The Forerunner--He is a bully little youngster--Or is he a
_she?_--Sex on cover seems indeterminate.  Is he _just human?_  I
enclose $5.00 for five subscriptions to following list--(if any are
already subscribers they can be omitted).  J---- tells me that he has
already negotiated for a copy for _us._  All good wishes from us both."

*

"I have read the January issue.  Of course I heartily endorse it all,
since I was long ago converted by your books."

*

"Congratulations on The Forerunner, two copies just received,--the
magazine is better than I expected and I knew it would be good.  Our
dinner table was much enlivened that night, with comments and
expressions of approval from all, even to G----, my very conservative
son."

*

"I devoured The Forerunner from 'Volume 1' to 'The pain from a raw
wound,' and am not yet satisfied.  Please take my check for 'more.'"

*

"How much liberty do you wish us to take in the matter of quotations
from The Forerunner '-----' Both January copies have just come to hand.
Your stories are more interesting than any I've read for a long time.  I
hope you will continue these 'Housekeeping Problems.'

*

"I find The Forerunner on our club table far too exciting to pick up and
skim.  Therefore I enclose a year's subscription."

*

"I am very much interested in your opinions and convictions as set forth
in the books I have seen and am hoping to find a guide and friend in the
above publication, which has recently come to my notice."

*

"The address was incorrect and so am sending the correct one at the top
of this page, as I do not want to chance losing any of the numbers, I
enjoy it so thoroughly."

*

"Your January number was fine.  Mrs. D---- thinks it is worth the price
for the year."

*

"The January Forerunner is especially rich.  'Here is the earth,' is
worth the subscription price, to put it mildly."

*

"Mother's copy of The Forerunner has just come, and I want to subscribe
right off, before I read it!  I know it will be the very cleverest and
most stimulating thing in print.  I want to lend it to the other girls
at college."

*

"I _must_ take a few moments to say how much I enjoy The Forerunner."

*

"To speak commercially, I never saw so much value given for the price,
in my life!  And then the stuff itself!  Well;

"'Her Housekeeper,' gave me such joy that I read it four times, to be
sure I had extracted _all_ the juice.  A _real_ love story!  I suppose
perhaps the only one that was ever written!  I, at least, do not recall,
in all the tons of fiction I have swum through a story of real LOVE
before. * * * Apropos of this not seeing--not grasping the idea--comes
'The Barrel.'  Oh fine!  More power to your right arm."

*

"My sister and I have greatly enjoyed your publication, its articles,
its poetry, its question box, its _advertisements._  Better send the two
subscriptions from January number--we have the magazine at home, but I
want my patients to regale themselves with it when they are waiting for
me at the office."

*

"The magazine is fine!  A real Forerunner.  I was in Connecticut when it
came, but rushed head first into it on the evening of my return.  I hope
it will grow and _grow_ and GROW! until you have to call a halt on
subscribers.  I enclose a dollar to have a copy sent regularly to Miss
----- -----.  It will do them _good."_

*

"We are having _great_ amusement over your magazine.  For the enclosed
please send it to Miss ----- ----- and to me."

*

"I cannot refrain from expressing to you the great pleasure and
satisfaction I got from the one copy of The Forerunner that I have seen.
 I hope there are many that are as hungry for it as I am.  A dollar
seems such a ridiculously low amount to give for what this means in
study, thought, foresight, courage and independence."

*

"I enclose a dollar for a year's subscription to Charlotte's monthly,
The Forerunner.  Having read one issue, I am sure a year's subscription
will be a good investment."

*
"Will it be presumptuous in me to take enough of your time to tell you
how much The Forerunner means to an ordinary woman out West?  It is
defining and putting into shape so many of my vague feelings and muddy
ideas. * * * Your books and magazine have been among the few great
inspirations of my life that have made all life look big and splendid
and worth while."

*

"A word or two of appreciation from Iowa!  Your magazine The Forerunner
is splendid and no mere words can tell you how I have enjoyed it.  The
whole thing, from cover to cover, is excellent and vigorous."

*

"The first number came.  And I devoured it from cover to cover and back
again before I let anyone else see it.  Now they are all reading it and
chuckling over 'How doth the Hat,' and discussing the serious parts with
great gusto.  It makes me glad when I think that more numbers are coming
regularly now and I can look forward to the next one and waylay the
postman when the time comes.  Certainly this number has made me (for
one), sit up and think a bit.  I wish the next one were due to-morrow."

*

"I want to thank you for the January number of The Forerunner--both Mrs.
R----- and myself have enjoyed it immensely, as we have enjoyed
everything you have written.  We want more of it, so here goes my
subscription."

*

"Accept my hearty congratulations upon The Forerunner.  The first number
is delightful, and exceedingly clever.  'What Diantha did,' and
'Androcentric Culture,' are deep and clear and stimulating, and 'How
doth the hat' should make all who read it sit up and take notice.  It
seems to me that every thinking woman who sees this copy will become a
subscriber.  I enclose a check for my subscription and that of my
mother, Mrs. ----- -----."

*

"You astonishing woman!  To write, edit and publish a magazine all by
your lonesome!  It seems to me a tremendous undertaking, which by its
very courage should appeal to everyone.  I do not know that I agree with
you in the theory on which The Forerunner stands--I don't know enough
about it to agree or disagree--but it's certainly interesting.  I like
the stories, and the short, clever things by the way.  May the magazine
be the success it deserves to be!  I enclose $1.00 for the year, and I
shall look for it with interest."

*

"Kindly send to Mrs. F----, your magazine beginning with Vol. 1 No. 1
for the year.  (One dollar enclosed.)  I saw the little magazine at Mr.
-----'s, and was much interested in it."

*

"My mother wants you to know of her enthusiasm over the second issue of
The Forerunner, which she thinks an advance even over the first number.
Her points were these: 1. Such a pleasure to read a homogeneous magazine
instead of having to skip from lion hunting to Christian Science and
from that to flying machines.  2. Admires the way you take the
individual problems of individual women, and by means of the individual
problems lead these women into the larger view of life and into an
understanding of the androcentric culture.  3. Article on Socialism most
concise, clearest and most convincing she has ever read.  In this I
heartily agree." * * * "4. The trite phrase about 'not one dull word
from cover to cover' applies literally and without the slightest
exaggeration to this number of The Forerunner."

*

"I enclosed a dollar; please send your magazine for a year to the
following address, beginning if possible with the first number, Vol. 1,
No. 1.  If that cannot be, then start with January.  It is to go to my
daughter, her husband, and brand new grand-baby; and I am sure it will
do them all good."

*

"I am enclosing $1.00 for the paper--I have mislaid the circular, and if
I have not the amount right, I will be very happy to send the
difference.  If it is practicable, I'd rather you'd send the first
number of The Forerunner, instead of beginning with the current
number--I'll gladly pay more for the back numbers, if I can get them."

*

"As your lectures and books always appealed to my best judgment, I am
anxious to have it a monthly visitor, beginning with the first number."

*

"It has the spirit of making people think and wish to see things go on."

*

"To say that we greatly appreciate it is to only hint our mood.  It is
by far the strongest and best expressed word on these problems of
society in which are inextricably mingled the position of woman.  We
read it with the greatest satisfaction and feel sure that your message
is coming most timely." * * *

*

"Here is my subscription to The Forerunner--one of the most cheerful
purchases I ever made, and certainly a bargain!  Success attend your
efforts, for they mean _much_ to mankind."

*

"Let me compliment you on your excellent articles on Androcentric
Culture.  They contain knowledge combined with so much beauty of
expression that they feed and charm the mind alike."

*

"I hope that The Forerunner will meet all the success it deserves and
that it will go to the many men and women who are in sore need of it."

*

"Can't be without it any longer.  Send Forerunner, and you may begin as
far back as you like."



A FRIENDLY RESPONSE


The editor wishes to acknowledge with cordial thanks the warm response
to the appeal to subscribers to "renew, and get another."

They are doing it, quite rapidly, and only three or four--so far--have
discontinued.  One of these did it twice!  Evidently The Forerunner was
_non persona grata_ there.

We begin to feel that we have more friends--and warmer ones--than at
first appeared.



OUR BOUND VOLUME AS A CHRISTMAS PRESENT


The first year comprises fourteen issues--November, 1909, to December,
1910, inclusive.

In it is the Housekeeping novel--"What Diantha Did"--which will interest
many, both men and women.  It offers a very practical solution to the
Servant Question.

In it is also the Book About Men--"The Man-Made World, or Our
Androcentric Culture."

There have been books and books about women--mostly, unpleasant.  This
is the first one about men, as such; men as distinguished from Human
Beings--as women have always been distinguished from Human Beings.

You won't wholly like the book--just consider whether it is true!

The novel separately, or the book separately, would also make good
presents, but the date of their publication is not settled, while in the
bound volume of the magazine you get them both for only 25c. more than
one would cost.

This set, making a volume of some 420 pages, with its twelve short
stories, its articles, fables, verse, and other matter, will make a very
good gift--for some people.  Ready early in December.  $1.25.



TO THOSE SPECIALLY INTERESTED IN THiS MAGAZINE, OR SPECIALLY INTERESTED
IN FIFTY DOLLARS


This is not a "Popular Magazine."  It does not try to be.  It is a
magazine which meets the needs of a comparatively few, but they like it
immensely--as is shown by the extracts from their letters we are now
publishing.

We want to reach, if possible, all the people who would like The
Forerunner if they knew about it.

For the rest of this year we are making a special offer to anyone who
will get us new subscribers; the regular commission of 25 per cent., and
a rising premium which goes up to a total of 50 per cent. for a hundred
new paid year's subscriptions.

$50.00 for one hundred new subscribers!

For a girl in college who wants to help herself;

For a woman in a liberal church, or with a wide acquaintance among
progressive thinkers;

For a Suffragist in touch with similar believers;

For any man or woman who can reach organizations of liberal-minded
people;

For anybody who thinks they would like to earn $50.00 that way--it is a
good offer.

Write for full terms, samples, etc.



IF YOU RENEW


The first year runs through December; fourteen copies.

Renew from January, 1911, and get the whole of next year.



IF YOU DISCONTINUE


So far one subscriber has discontinued.

She will get the magazine two months more.

If you must discontinue, please let us know.



[Advertisement]


Subscribe for

The Woman's Journal
585 Boylston St., Boston, Mass.

Official Organ of the National American Woman Suffrage Association

A weekly newspaper devoted to winning the ballot for women
Contains all the best news about women and their progress

FOUNDED 1870 BY LUCY STONE AND HENRY B. BLACKWELL

Edited by
Alice Stone Blackwell

The Woman's Journal is published in Boston and controlled by the
National American Woman Suffrage Association whose headquarters are at
505 Fifth Avenue, New York City.  It gives suffrage news from every
state in the Union, and especially from the states where campaigns are
under way; it gives important suffrage news from all the countries where
the women have the full right of suffrage, and from the countries where
the battle is waging; it gives official announcements and rousing news.

Thousands of women read it every week from beginning to end.  Nobody who
has read it one month can ever do without it.  It is the only paper of
its kind in this country.

Send for sample copies for yourself and ask us to send them to your
friends.


Try our four months trial subscription for 25 cents


REGULAR SUBSCRIPTION RATES

DOMESTIC

1 year . . . $1.00
6 months . . . $.50
4 months on trial . . . $.25
Single copies . . . $.05

CANADIAN

1 year . . . $1.50

FOREIGN

1 year . . . $1.50

A full year's subscription costs only . . . $1.00

CAN YOU AFFORD TO BE WITHOUT IT?



[Advertisement]


SOME OF OUR EXCHANGES


We print The Forerunner

The Co-operative Press
In Spruce Street New York

May we do some of YOUR printing?


The Englishwoman
A MONTHLY MAGAZINE FOR WOMEN

$3.50 post free per annum to any part of the United States

"The Englishwoman" is intended to reach the cultured public and bring
before it, in a convincing and moderate form, the case for the
Enfranchisement of Women.  No support will be given to any particular
party in politics.

The magazine will be inspired from the first page to the last by one
continuous policy, which is to further the Enfranchisement of Women.

It will try to do so, first by securing the sympathy and holding the
attention of that public which is interested in letters, art and culture
generally.  and by an impartial statement of facts.  Its chief features
will be:

Articles dealing with the Women's Movement in England and other
countries.

Notes on parliamentary bills as affecting women and children.

Articles on Women's Work in Professions and Trades.

Sociological questions and their influence on the status of women.

Stories, poems, scientific articles, and short plays.

Criticisms of music, painting, sculpture, and current literature.

Editorial Offices: 11 Haymarket, London, S.W., England.

Publishers: Messrs. SIDGWICK & JACKSON.
3 Adam Street, Adelphi, London, W.C., England.

Every American woman interested in the suffrage should read

THE ENGLISHWOMAN


The Common Cause

WHAT IS IT?

There are in England something like twenty-five National Societies for
promoting the enfranchisement of women.  The oldest of these is the
National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, which was started in 1861
and whose President is Mrs. Fawcett, LL.D.  The National Union has over
two hundred branches in Great Britain, and a total membership of about
20,000.  It is the only British Woman's Suffrage Society affiliated to
the International Woman Suffrage Alliance.

The Common Cause
Is the Organ of the National Union.

It contains leaders and articles on political, social, legal and
industrial matters affecting women, and is a complete record or the work
done by the National Union for the enfranchisement of women in England.

The Common Cause
Is the Paper of Thinking Women.

Subscriptions should be sent to

64 DEANSCATE ARCADE,
MANCHESTER, ENGLAND

3 months, post free --- 1 shilling 9 pence
6 months, post free --- 3 shillings 3 pence
12 months, post free --- 6 shillings 6 pence

Every Thursday, 1 Penny


The Progressive Woman

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

Edited and Pubilshed by
JOSEPHINE CONGER-KANEKO
at Girard, Kansas, U.S.A.

Price, 50 cents a year.

The Progressive Woman stands for a better race through the political and
economic freedom of womankind.  Its contributors are among the cleverest
of the more advanced thinkers, and its readers endeavor to keep up with
its writers.

This is the great charm about The Progressive Woman--it does not stand
still: it leads.

Send to-day for sample copy.


Woman's Era

The New Magazine of Inspiration for the American Woman.

A World-wide Review
With Original Articles on

ECONOMICS,
ETHICS,
CIVICS,
ARTS AND CRAFTS,
MUSIC,
LITERATURE,
CLUB WORK,
Etc.

SPECIAL ARTS AND CRAFTS NUMBER FOR SEPTEMBER.

Sample copy . . . 10 cents
6 months . . . 75 cents
12 months . . . $1.50

(Worth a good deal more)

Address,

WOMAN'S ERA
New Orleans, La.


Up the Divide

A MONTHLY PERIODICAL

Asking:
Why not see Social and Religious Things from Higher Altitudes?

EDITED BY

DUREN J. H. WARD, A.M. (Harvard), Ph.D. (Leipsig) and WM. THURSTON
BROWN, A.B. (Yale).

IT IS A KIND BY ITSELF
UNIQUE IN EVERY WAY
A BRAND NEW THING IN MAGAZINES

SECOND YEAR

IS CALLED:

"Breezy, vigorous."
"Brusher away of cobwebs."
"Full of burning words."
"Blazes the trail."
"Crisp and bold thoughts."
"An eye-opener."
"The new spirit and new conscience shine on each page."
"Place not filled by any other."
"Speaks not as the Scribes and Pharisees."
"Charged with the gunpowder of progress."

$1.00 a year.  10 cents a copy.
With _The Forerunner,_ $1.80.

2442 Glenarm Pl., Denver, Colorado.


The Star

San Francisco, California.

JAMES H. BARRY, Editor.

A WIDE-AWAKE, UP-TO-DATE PAPER
FEARLESS, FRANK AND FREE

The First in the Land to Advocate Direct Legislation.  Stands for Human
Rights, including Votes for Women.  Considers all Questions of Public
Moment, such as Public Ownership, the Single Tax, the Tariff, etc.
Contains good Miscellaneous Matter.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY

Per year . . . $1.50
Six months . . . 75 cents

in advance

THE STAR

1122-1124 Mission Street, San Francisco, Cal.


READ

The Forecast

PHILADELPHIA'S ONLY MAGAZINE

Is right there every time on every topic uppermost in the minds of the
public.

THE SEPTEMBER NUMBER

contains many special features that are readable, timely, lively.

ELLA WHEELER WILCOX tells of "The Influences Which Shaped My Career."

ANTOINETTE E. GAZZAM contributes an original article on "Clothes" which
is most beautifully illustrated and full of valuable suggestions and
pleasing surprises.

THOMAS MARTINDALE, the renowned sportsman and author of "Sport Royal,"
and other fascinating sporting tales, tells of "The Lure of Hunting."
Mr. Martindale never wrote more entertainingly than in this article.

EDWENA LAWRENCE reveals inside information in an article, especially
pleasing to theatre-goers, on "The Educational Value of a Theatrical
Stock Company," an article that will be appreciated by both the actor
and auditor.

SPLENDID FICTION, intimate sketches of the personalities of the day,
able book reviews, able articles on political, social, civic and
national phases of the leading questions of the day, and an entertaining
department of Fun, Fact and Fiction, as well as

CHARLES HOUSTON GOUDISS'S splendid eugenism in an article treating of
the most important phase of the prevention of child degradation, combine
in making The Forecast the most attractive ten cent magazine published.

THE FORECAST,

423 Lafayette Building, Philadelphia.



[Advertisement]


Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman


Sent postpaid by

THE CHARLTON COMPANY
67 WALL STREET, NEW YORK


"Women and Economics"  $1.50

Since John Stuart Mill's essay there has been no book dealing with the
whole position of women to approach it in originality of conception and
brilliancy of exposition.--_London Chronicle._

A remarkable book.  A work on economics that has not a dull page--the
work of a woman about women that has not a flippant word.--_Boston
Transcript._

Will be widely read and discussed as the cleverest, fairest, most
forcible presentation of the view of the rapidly increasing group who
look with favor on the extension of industrial employment to
women.--_Political Science Quarterly._


"Concerning Children"  $1.25

WANTED:--A philanthropist, to give a copy to every English-speaking
parent.--_The Times,_ New York.

Should be read by every mother in the land.--_The Press,_ New York.

Wholesomely disturbing book that deserves to be read for its own
sake.--_Chicago Dial._


"In This Our World" (Poems)  $1.25

There is a joyous superabundance of life, of strength, of health, in
Mrs. Gilman's verse, which seems born of the glorious sunshine and rich
gardens of California.--_Washington Times._

The poet of women and for women, a new and prophetic voice in the world.
 Montaigne would have rejoiced in her.--_Mexican Herald._


"The Yellow Wall Paper"  $0.50

Worthy of a place beside some of the weird masterpieces of Hawthorne and
Poe.--_Literature._

As a short story it stands among the most powerful produced in
America.--_Chicago News._


"The Home"  $1.00

Indeed, Mrs. Gilman has not intended her book so much as a treatise for
scholars as a surgical operation on the popular mind.--_The Critic,_ New
York.

It is safe to say that no more stimulating arraignment has ever before
taken shape and that the argument of the book is noble, and, on the
whole, convincing.--_Congregationalist,_ Boston.


"Human Work"  $1.00

Charlotte Perkins Stetson Gilman has been writing a new book, entitled
"Human Work."  It is the best thing that Mrs. Gilman has done, and it is
meant to focus all of her previous work, so to speak.--_Tribune,_
Chicago.

In her latest volume, "Human Work," Charlotte Perkins Gilman places
herself among the foremost students and elucidators of the problem of
social economics.--"San Francisco Star._

It is impossible to overestimate the value of the insistence on the
social aspect of human affairs as Mrs. Gilman has outlined it.--_Public
Opinion._


IN PREPARATION:


"What Diantha Did" (A Novel)  $1.00

"The Man Made World": or, "Our Androcentric Culture"  $1.00


Orders taken for Bound Vols. THE FORERUNNER, $1.25



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER

A Monthly Magazine

WRITTEN, EDITED, OWNED AND PUBLISHED
By Charlotte Perkins Gilman


"THE CRUX"


Mrs. Gilman's new novel, will appear in
THE FORERUNNER, of 1911.

This touches upon one of the most vivid and vital of our age problems;
and has more than one kind of love story in it.  Also, published
serially, her next book,


"Moving the Mountain"


Those who believe this world is a good place, easily made better, and
who wish to know how to help it, will enjoy reading this book.  Those
who do not so believe and wish may not enjoy it so much, but it will do
them good.

The Forerunner carries Mrs. Gilman's best and newest work; her social
philosophy, her verse, satire, fiction, ethical teaching, humor, and
comment.  It stands for Humanness in Women, and in Men; for better
methods in Child-culture; for the Home that is no Workshop; for the New
Ethics, the New Economics, the New World we are to make--are making.


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________

$1.00 a year
$0.10 a copy





THE FORERUNNER

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

BY

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN
AUTHOR, OWNER & PUBLISHER

1.00 A YEAR
.10 A COPY

Volume 1. No. 14
DECEMBER, 1910
Copyright for 1910
C. P. Gilman

You can't give what you haven't got.
The best gifts are love and wisdom, courage and power.
Lay in some!




IN AS MUCH


The Christian arose upon Christmas Day
 And solemnly cleared his score:
He called on the sick, to the needy gave alms,
 And entered the prison door.

He lent to his friends, gave away his old coat
 Was never by sinners enticed,
And handed the man who complained of a throat
 A cup of cold water--iced.

He bestowed on a newsboy a new pair of shoes,
 And quoted in pious glee:
"In as much as ye've done it to one of these least
 Ye have done it unto me."

*

That night he dreamed upon judgment Day:
 Men's hearts were all in their throats;
To his pained surprise he was hustled away
 And herded among the goats!

"Oh Lord," he cried, "there is some mistake,
 I have always remembered Thee!"
But the world's neglected children rose
 And gazed reproachfully.

And a voice replied, "Thy punishment take;
 Thy duty thou didst not see!
In as much as ye have NOT done it to ONE
 Ye have NOT done it unto me."



A WORD IN SEASON


"Children pick up words like pigeons peas,
And utter them again as God shall please."


When Grandma came to the breakfast table with her sour little smile and
her peremptory "Good morning," every one said "good morning" as politely
and pleasantly as they could, but they didn't say very much else.  They
attempted bravely.

"A fine morning, Mother," Papa observed, but she only answered "Too
cold."

"Did you sleep well, Mother?" ventured Mama; and the reply to that was,
"No, I never do!"

Then Uncle John tried--he always tried once.

"Have you heard of our new machine, Mrs. Grey?  We've got one now
that'll catch anything in a room--don't have to talk right into it."

Mrs. Grey looked at him coldly.

"I do not take the least interest in your talking machines, Henry, as I
have told you before."

She had, many times before, but Uncle Henry never could learn the
astonishing fact.  He was more interested in his machines than he was in
his business, by far; and spent all his spare time in tinkering with
them.

"I think they are wonderful," said little Josie.

"You're my only friend, Kid!  I believe you understand 'em almost as
well is I do," her Uncle answered gaily; and finished his breakfast as
quickly as possible.

So did everybody.  It was not appetizing to have Grandma say "How you do
dawdle over your meals, Louise!"

Little Josephine slipped down from her chair, with a whispered "Scuse me
Mama!" and whisked into her play room.

"How you do spoil that child!" said Grandma, and Mama closed her lips
tight and looked at her husband.

"Now Mother, don't you fret about Josie," said he.  "She's a good little
girl and quiet as a mouse."

"Anything I can do for you downtown, Mother?"

"No thank you Joseph.  I'll go to my room and be out of Louise's way."

"You're not in my way at all, Mother--won't you sit down stairs?"

Young Mrs. Grey made a brave effort to speak cordially, but old Mrs.
Grey only looked injured, and said "No thank you, Louise," as she went
upstairs.

Dr. Grey looked at his wife.  She met his eyes steadily, cheerfully.

"I think Mother's looking better, don't you dear?" she said.

"There's nothing at all the matter with my mother--except--" he shut his
mouth hard.  "There are things I cannot say, Louise," he continued, "but
others I can.  Namely; that for sweetness and patience and gentleness
you--you beat the Dutch!  And I do appreciate it.  One can't turn one's
Mother out of the house, but I do resent her having another doctor!"

"I'd love your Mother, Joseph, if--if she was a thousand times worse!"
his wife answered; and he kissed her with grateful love.

Sarah came in to clear the table presently, and Ellen stood in the
pantry door to chat with her.

"Never in my life did I see any woman wid the patience of her!" said
Ellen, wiping her mouth on her apron.

"She has need of it," said Sarah.  "Any Mother-in-law is a trial I've
heard, but this wan is the worst.  Why she must needs live with 'em I
don't see--she has daughters of her own."

"Tis the daughter's husbands won't put up wid her," answered Ellen,
"they havin' the say of course.  This man's her son--and he has to keep
her if she will stay."

"And she as rich as a Jew!" Sarah went on.  "And never spendin' a cent!
And the Doctor workin' night and day!"--

Then Mama came in and this bit of conversation naturally came to an end.

A busy, quiet, sweet little woman was Mama; and small Josie flew into
her arms and cuddled there most happily.

"Mama Dearest," she said, "How long is it to Christmas?  Can I get my
mat done for Grandma?  And _do_ you think she'll like it?"

"Well, well dear--that's three _questions!_  It's two weeks yet to
Christmas; and I think you can if you work steadily; and I hope she'll
like it."

"And Mama--can I have my party?"

"I'm afraid not, dearest.  You see Grandma is old, and she hates a noise
and confusion--and parties are expensive.  I'm sorry, childie.  Can't
you think of something else you want, that Mother can give you?"

"No," said the child, "I've wanted a party for three years, Mama!
Grandma just spoils everything!"

"No, no, dear--you must always love Grandma because she is dear Papa's
mother; and because she is lonely and needs our love.

"We'll have a party some day, Dearest--don't feel badly.  And _we_
always have a good time together, don't we?"

They did; but just now the child's heart was set on more social
pleasures, and she went sadly back to her playroom to work on that mat
for Grandma.

It was a busy day.  Mama's married sister came to see her, and the child
was sent out of the room.  Two neighbors called, and waited, chatting,
some time before Mama came down.

Grandma's doctor--who was not Papa--called; and her lawyer too; and they
had to wait some time for the old lady to dress as she thought fitting.

But Grandma's doctor and lawyer were very old friends, and seemed to
enjoy themselves.

The minister came also, not Grandma's minister, who was old and thin and
severe and wore a long white beard; but Mama's minister, who was so
vigorous and cheerful, and would lift Josephine way up over his head--as
if she was ten years old.  But Mama sent her out of the room this time,
which was a pity.

To be sure Josephine had a little secret trail from her playroom
door--behind several pieces of furniture--right up to the back of the
sofa where people usually sat, but she was not often interested in their
conversation.  She was a quiet child, busy with her own plans and ideas;
playing softly by herself, with much imaginary conversation.  She set up
her largest doll, a majestic personage known as "The Lady Isobel," and
talked to her.

"Why is my Grandma so horrid?  And why do I have to love her?  How can
you love people--if you don't, Lady Isobel?

"Other girls' Grandmas are nice.  Nelly Elder's got a lovely Grandma!
She lets Nelly have parties and everything.  Maybe if Grandma likes my
mat she'll--be pleasanter.

"Maybe she'll go somewhere else to live--sometime.  Don't you think so,
Lady Isobel?"

The Lady Isobel's reply, however, was not recorded.

Grandma pursued her pious way as usual, till an early bedtime relieved
the family of her presence.  Then Uncle Harry stopped puttering with his
machines and came out to be sociable with his sister.  If Papa was at
home they would have a game of solo--if not, they played cribbage, or
quiet.

Uncle Harry was the life of the household--when Grandma wasn't around.

"Well, Lulu," he said cheerfully, "What's the prospect?  Can Joe make
it?"

"No," said Mama.  "It's out of the question.  He could arrange about his
practice easily enough but it's the money for the trip.  He'll have to
send his paper to be read."

"It's a shame!" said the young man, "He ought to be there.  He'd do
those other doctors good.  Why in the name of reason don't the old lady
give him the money--she could, easy enough."

"Joe never'll ask her for a cent," answered Mrs. Grey, "and it would
never occur to her to give him one!  Yet I think she loves him best of
all her children."

"Huh!  _Love!_" said Uncle Harry.

*

Grandma didn't sleep well at night.  She complained of this
circumstantially and at length.

"Hour after hour I hear the clock strike," she said.  "Hour after hour!"

Little Josephine had heard the clock strike hour after hour one terrible
night when she had an earache.  She was really sorry for Grandma.

"And nothing to take up my mind," said Grandma, as if her mind was a
burden to her.

But the night after this she had something to take up her mind.  As a
matter of fact it woke her up, as she had napped between the clock's
strikings.  At first she thought the servants were in her room--and
realized with a start that they were speaking of her.

"Why she must live with 'em I don't see--she has daughters of her own--"

With the interest of an eavesdropper she lay still, listening, and heard
no good of herself.

"How long is it to Christmas?" she presently heard her grandchild ask,
and beg her mother for the "party"--still denied her.

"Grandma spoils everything!" said the clear childish voice, and the
mother's gentle one urged love and patience.

It was some time before the suddenly awakened old lady, in the dark,
realized the source of these voices--and then she could not locate it.

"It's some joke of that young man's" she said grimly--but the joke went
on.

It was Mrs. Grey's sister now, condoling with her about this
mother-in-law.

"Why do you have to put up with it Louise?  Won't any of her daughters
have her?"

"I'm afraid they don't want her," said Louise's gentle voice.  "But Joe
is her son, and of course he feels that his home is his mother's.  I
think he is quite right.  She is old, and alone--she doesn't _mean_ to
be disagreeable."

"Well, she achieves it without effort, then!  A more disagreeable old
lady I never saw, Louise, and I'd like nothing better than to tell her
so!"

The old lady was angry, but impressed.  There is a fascination in
learning how others see us, even if the lesson is unpleasant.  She heard
the two neighbors who talked together before Mama came down, and their
talk was of her--and of how they pitied young Mrs. Grey.

"If I was in her shoes," said the older of the two, "I'd pick up and
travel!  She's only sixty-five--and sound as a nut."

"Has she money enough?" asked the other.

"My, yes!  Money to burn!  She has her annuity that her father left her,
and a big insurance--and house rents.  She must have all of three
thousand a year."

"And doesn't she pay board here?"

"Pay board!  Not she.  She wouldn't pay anything so long as she has a
relative to live on.  She's saved all her life.  But nobody'll get any
good of it till she's dead."

This talk stopped when their hostess entered, changing to more general
themes; but the interest revived when men's voices took up the tale.

"Yes--wants her will made again.  Always making and unmaking and
remaking.  Harmless amusement, I suppose."

"She wastes good money on both of us--and I tell her so.  But one can't
be expected to absolutely refuse a patient."

"Or a client!"

"No.  I suppose not."

"She's not really ill then?"

"Bless you, Ruthven, I don't know a sounder old woman anywhere.  All she
needs is a change--and to think of something besides herself!  I tell
her that, too--and she says I'm so eccentric."

"Why in all decency don't her son do her doctoring?"

"I suppose he's too frank--and not quite able to speak his mind.  He's a
fine fellow.  That paper of his will be a great feature of our
convention.  Shame he can't go."

"Why can't he?  Can't afford it?"

"That's just it.  You see the old lady don't put up--not a cent--and he
has all he can do to keep the boys in college."  And their conversation
stopped, and Grandma heard her own voice--inviting the doctor up to her
room--and making another appointment for the lawyer.

Then it was the young minister, a cheerful, brawny youth, whom she had
once described as a "Godless upstart!"

He appeared to be comforting young Mrs. Grey, and commending her.  "You
are doing wonders," he said, as their voices came into hearing, "and not
letting your right hand know it, either."

"You make far too much of it, Mr. Eagerson," the soft voice answered, "I
am so happy in my children--my home--my husband.  This is the _only_
trouble--I do not complain."

"I know you don't complain, Mrs. Grey, but I want you to know that
you're appreciated!  'It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop,
than with a woman in a wide house'--especially if she's your
mother-in-law."

"I won't allow you to speak so--if you are my minister!" said young Mrs.
Grey with spirit; and the talk changed to church matters, where the
little lady offered to help with time and service, and regretted that
she had no money to give.

There was a silence, save for small confused noises of a day time
household; distant sounds of doors and dishes; and then in a sad,
confidential voice--"Why is Grandma so horrid?  And why do I have to
love her?  How can you love people you don't, Lady Isobel?"

Grandma was really fond of quiet little Josephine, even if she did
sometimes snub her as a matter of principle.  She lay and listened to
these strictly private remarks, and meditated upon them after they had
ceased.  It was a large dose, an omnibus dose, and took some time to
assimilate; but the old lady had really a mind of her own, though much
of it was uninhabited, and this generous burst of light set it to
working.

She said nothing to anyone, but seemed to use her eyes and ears with
more attention than previously, and allowed her grand-daughter's small
efforts toward affection with new receptiveness.  She had one talk with
her daughter-in-law which left that little woman wet-eyed and smiling
with pleasure, though she could not tell about it--that was requisite.

But the family in general heard nothing of any change of heart till
breakfast time on Christmas morning.  They sat enjoying that pleasant
meal, in the usual respite before the old lady appeared, when Sarah came
in with a bunch of notes and laid one at each plate, with an air of
great importance.

"She said I was to leave 'em till you was all here--and here they are!"
said Sarah, smiling mysteriously, "and that I was to say nothing--and I
haven't!"  And the red-cheeked girl folded her arms and waited--as
interested as anybody.

Uncle Harry opened his first.  "I bet it's a tract!" said he.  But he
blushed to the roots of his thick brown hair as he took out, not a
tract, but a check.

"A Christmas present to my son-in-law-by-marriage; to be spent on the
improvement of talking machines--if that is necessary!"

"Why bless her heart!" said he, "I call that pretty handsome, and I'll
tell her so!"

Papa opened his.

"For your Convention trip, dear son," said this one, "and for a new
dress suit--and a new suit case, and a new overcoat--a nice one.  With
Mother's love."

It was a large check, this one.  Papa sat quite silent and looked at his
wife.  She went around the table and hugged him--she had to.

"You've got one, too, Louise," said he--and she opened it.

"For my dear daughter Louise; this--to be spent on other people; and
_this_" (_this_ was much bigger) "to be inexorably spent on
herself--every cent of it!  On her own special needs and pleasures--if
she can think of any!"

Louise was simply crying--and little Josephine ran to comfort her.

"Hold on Kiddie--you haven't opened yours," said Uncle Harry; and they
all eagerly waited while the child carefully opened her envelope with a
clean knife, and read out solemnly and slowly, "For my darling
Grand-child Josephine, to be spent by herself, for herself, with Mama's
advice and assistance; and in particular to provide for her party!"

She turned over the stiff little piece of paper--hardly understanding.

"It's a check, dear," said Papa.  "It's the same as money.  Parties cost
money, and Grandma has made you a Christmas present of your party."

The little girl's eyes grew big with joy.

"Can I?--Is there really--a party?"

"There is really a party--for my little daughter, this afternoon at
four!"

"O where is Grandma!" cried the child--"I want to hug her!"

They all rose up hurriedly, but Sarah came forward from her scant
pretense of retirement, with another note for Dr. Grey.

"I was to give you this last of all," she said, with an air of one
fulfilling grave diplomatic responsibility.

"My dear ones," ran the note, "I have gathered from my family and
friends, and from professional and spiritual advisers the idea that
change is often beneficial.  With this in mind I have given myself a
Christmas present of a Cook's Tour around the world--and am gone.  A
Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to you all!"

She was gone.

Sarah admitted complicity.

"Sure she would have no one know a thing--not a word!" said Sarah.  "And
she gave us something handsome to help her!  And she's got that young
widder Johnson for a companion--and they went off last night on the
sleeper for New York!"

The gratitude of the family had to be spent in loving letters, and in
great plans of what they would do to make Grandma happy when she came
back.

No one felt more grateful than little loving Josephine, whose dearest
wishes were all fulfilled.  When she remembered it she went very
quietly, when all were busy somewhere else, climbed up on the step
ladder, and took down the forgotten phonograph from the top of the
wardrobe.

"Dear Grandma!" she said.  "I do hope she liked it!"



CHRISTMAS LOVE


When the Writer or the Preacher or one who chances to be both considers
a Christmas sermon, a Christmas story, what is the idea that comes
uppermost?

Love, of course.  Not sex-love: that's for every day.  Not Mother-love:
that's always and always.  Not any of the minor brands of admiring
devotion, gratitude, sympathy, friendship, attraction of any sort.  No.
When we say "Love" at Christmas time we mean Love, the Spirit of Life.

About once a year we give thought to it.  About once a year we seek to
express it; and, pitiful and limited though that expression be, its
forms are right.

These main forms of Christmas expressions are two-fold: the Spirit of
Joy, of Celebration, of High Festival--the highest of all; and the
Spirit of Giving.  These are found wherever Christmas is kept, and make
it, as it should be, the glory of the year.  In joy and in giving we are
most absolutely in line with the mainspring of the Universe: unmeasured
happiness--happiness that cannot be quenched--cannot be kept to
ourselves.  What must run over and pour forth on other people: that is
real Love, Christmas Love--and that, of course, finds physical
expression in gay festivities and showering gifts.

Light, color, music--all that is sweet and gay and comforting; games,
dances and performances that show the happy heart; and always the
overflow--giving, giving, giving.  That is the Spirit of Life.

It is the children's festival because children are more in line with the
Life Spirit than weazened old folk: the child has the passionate thirst
for joy which marks his high parentage.

Whatever else is true about the Central Power of the Universe, this is
true: it _is_ power.  And it pours forth in Radiant Energy.  All
"inanimate nature," so called, expresses this Power, each form after its
kind; and all animate nature, crowned with consciousness, not only
expresses it, but _feels_ it,--which is called "Living."

We human beings are the highest, finest, subtlest instrument on this
planet to receive and to transmit these waves of pouring Power.  When we
feel it most we call it Happiness.  In two ways it reaches our
consciousness, as it comes in and as it goes out, via the sensory and
motor nerves.  The joy of receiving power is great: "stimulus" we call
it.  It comes to us along the avenues of sense and thrills us with
increased well being.  But this kind of pleasure is sadly limited by
those sense nerves of ours.  We are but a little tea-cup: we cannot hold
much.  The Music of the Spheres might pour round us; the light of a
thousand suns, the sweetness of piled banks of flowers, and all honey
and sugar and rich food: every sense can be fed to its little limit
only--and there the Happiness stops.

We can only feel so much--coming in.  But there seems to be no limit to
the joy we feel when Power goes out through us.  It seems so
self-evident, so needless, to say "It is more blessed to give than to
receive."  Why _of course_ it is: any child even knows that.

True, a child, having a fresh, unsated sensorium, can receive with more
vivid pleasure than an adult--for a while.  But it is easily over-tired,
easily over-fed with sensation, easily bored and weary with receiving.

Not with giving!  Every child delights to let out the Power which is in
him--in her; delights to make and delights to give.  Therefore, to
children is this their festival: the busy weeks of happiness in making
gifts, the swelling, glowing pride of giving them!

It's all right as far as it goes, but why, when such a thing is such
transcendent splendid blessedness, why only once a year?  Why should
this beautiful experience in which we not only remember the birth of the
man who taught the world most of love but even try to practise what He
preached--why should it be limited to a mere memorial of His birthday,
plastered over the remnants of ancient festivals of the return of the
Sun God--the Goodness of the Earth Mother?

If Christmas is good, why not more of it?  Then we smile, wryly, and
say, "Why, of course, we couldn't.  The rest of life isn't like
that--and we have to live, you see."

Ah, that is where we are wrong--utterly wrong.  The rest of life _is_
like that.  That is _life_--Loving and Giving.

"Tut! Tut!" says the Practical Man.  "That's emotional nonsense.  That's
womanish."  Two-thirds right, my practical friend.  It is not nonsense,
but it is "emotional" and it is "womanish."

Emotion is _consciousness under pressure._  When we feel Power, we call
it emotion.  Emotions vary: some are helpful and some hateful, according
to the nature of the instrument; but not to be emotional at all is not
to be alive.  Those who spend their lives lit by a blaze of emotion,
warmed by a deep, slow-burning fire of emotion, pouring forth that
emotion in great works--we call Geniuses.  Genius is simply more Power.

As to being womanish: that word is no longer a term of reproach or
belittlement.  To be womanish is to be human, and we may now turn round
and pitifully dismiss much old world folly and passion as merely
"mannish."  To be womanish--and practical--let us repeat, Life _is_
Loving and Giving.  When we realize this, intelligently and completely,
we shall have a "continuous performance" of Christmases and a higher
level of happiness the year round, varied by greater heights.  At
present the natural flood of Life Force, pouring through us in unbounded
creative energy, resulting in the myriad forms of human achievement and
manufacture, is sadly thwarted in its output by lingering remains of our
old period.

For a long time we lived by getting: to hunt, to catch, to kill, to eat
was all we knew: no loving or giving there save as the mother fulfilled
the law.  But since our Humaness began, since all our thousand powers
and talents grew for mutual service, since we learned to do things for
each other--to make things for each other, to give things to each
other--then grew in us that rising tide of Power which lives out in
expression.

In spite of our old world perverseness, that Power pours on.  Though we
scorn the gifts of those who make the comforts of life for us, though we
despise their service and so cruelly use them as to greatly thwart their
love--still we are fed and housed and clothed and carried by the love
and service of our kind, the daily, hourly gifts of those who work.

"They are not gifts," cries the Practical Man.  "They are paid
for--every bit of 'em."  Yes, Brother.  And how paid for?  Paid how
much?  What scant reward, what meagre living, what miserable houses,
what stinted food, what limited education, and what poisoned pleasures
do we pay to those who make every necessity, comfort, convenience and
luxury for us!

Pay indeed!  If a man "saves your life" once, and you give him twenty
cents an hour for his exertions in your behalf--have you paid him?  By
the life-long labor of the human race--all those dead workers who built
up the structure of our present world, all those living workers who keep
the wheels revolving now--by these labors we live, all of us, all the
time.

Pay?  Pay for daily--hourly--maintenance, protection, food, shelter,
safety, comfort?  Pay for being kept alive?

Life is giving--Loving and Giving.  You can't pay for it.  You don't pay
for it.  But this you do: you hinder it, by your paying.  This pitiful
trickle of measurement, this ticking and pricing and holding back the
world's flood of outpouring energy by our wretched turnstiles--this is
what keeps us poor!

We need to let loose the Power that is in us.  We need to Love more and
Give more--a plain truth, Jesus taught some centuries ago, largely in
vain.  We have but to let out the love that is in us: there is no limit
to its flood.

To so love every child that is born on earth as to provide that child
with all that it needs for richest growth, for full appreciation of the
splendor of human life--of conscious citizenship!  Children so reared
will have a thousandfold more to give, and a thousandfold greater joy in
giving.  Then life will roll out through our glad hearts and willing
hands as the sun's light pours abroad--only that we are conscious, we
feel this light, this heat, this radiant energy.  We call it--_love._



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER XIV.

AND HEAVEN BESIDE.


They were married while the flowers were knee-deep over the sunny slopes
and mesas, and the canyons gulfs of color and fragrance, and went for
their first moon together to a far high mountain valley hidden among
wooded peaks, with a clear lake for its central jewel.

A month of heaven; while wave on wave of perfect rest and
world-forgetting oblivion rolled over both their hearts.

They swam together in the dawn-flushed lake, seeing the morning mists
float up from the silver surface, breaking the still reflection of thick
trees and rosy clouds, rejoicing in the level shafts of forest filtered
sunlight.  They played and ran like children, rejoiced over their picnic
meals; lay flat among the crowding flowers and slept under the tender
starlight.

"I don't see," said her lover, "but that my strenuous Amazon is just as
much a woman as--as any woman!"

"Who ever said I wasn't?" quoth Diantha demurely.

A month of perfect happiness.  It was so short it seemed but a moment;
so long in its rich perfection that they both agreed if life brought no
further joy this was Enough.

Then they came down from the mountains and began living.

*

Day service is not so easily arranged on a ranch some miles from town.
They tried it for a while, the new runabout car bringing out a girl in
the morning early, and taking Diantha in to her office.

But motor cars are not infallible; and if it met with any accident there
was delay at both ends, and more or less friction.

Then Diantha engaged a first-class Oriental gentleman, well recommended
by the "vegetable Chinaman," on their own place.  This was extremely
satisfactory; he did the work well, and was in all ways reliable; but
there arose in the town a current of malicious criticism and
protest--that she "did not live up to her principles."

To this she paid no attention; her work was now too well planted, too
increasingly prosperous to be weakened by small sneers.

Her mother, growing plumper now, thriving continuously in her new lines
of work, kept the hotel under her immediate management, and did
bookkeeping for the whole concern.  New Union Home ran itself, and
articles were written about it in magazines; so that here and there in
other cities similar clubs were started, with varying success.  The
restaurant was increasingly popular; Diantha's cooks were highly skilled
and handsomely paid, and from the cheap lunch to the expensive banquet
they gave satisfaction.

But the "c. f. d."  was the darling of her heart, and it prospered
exceedingly.  "There is no advertisement like a pleased customer," and
her pleased customers grew in numbers and in enthusiasm.  Family after
family learned to prize the cleanliness and quiet, the odorlessness and
flylessness of a home without a kitchen, and their questioning guests
were converted by the excellent of the meals.

Critical women learned at last that a competent cook can really produce
better food than an incompetent one; albeit without the sanctity of the
home.

"Sanctity of your bootstraps!" protested one irascible gentleman.  "Such
talk is all nonsense!  I don't want _sacred_ meals--I want good
ones--and I'm getting them, at last!"

"We don't brag about 'home brewing' any more," said another, "or 'home
tailoring,' or 'home shoemaking.'  Why all this talk about 'home
cooking'?"

What pleased the men most was not only the good food, but its clock-work
regularity; and not only the reduced bills but the increased health and
happiness of their wives.  Domestic bliss increased in Orchardina, and
the doctors were more rigidly confined to the patronage of tourists.

Ross Warden did his best.  Under the merciless friendliness of Mr.
Thaddler he had been brought to see that Diantha had a right to do this
if she would, and that he had no right to prevent her; but he did not
like it any the better.

When she rolled away in her little car in the bright, sweet mornings, a
light went out of the day for him.  He wanted her there, in the
home--his home--his wife--even when he was not in it himself.  And in
this particular case it was harder than for most men, because he was in
the house a good deal, in his study, with no better company than a
polite Chinaman some distance off.

It was by no means easy for Diantha, either.  To leave him tugged at her
heart-strings, as it did at his; and if he had to struggle with
inherited feelings and acquired traditions, still more was she beset
with an unexpected uprising of sentiments and desires she had never
dreamed of feeling.

With marriage, love, happiness came an overwhelming instinct of
service--personal service.  She wanted to wait on him, loved to do it;
regarded Wang Fu with positive jealousy when he brought in the coffee
and Ross praised it.  She had a sense of treason, of neglected duty, as
she left the flower-crowned cottage, day by day.

But she left it, she plunged into her work, she schooled herself
religiously.

"Shame on you!" she berated herself.  "Now--_now_ that you've got
everything on earth--to weaken!  You could stand unhappiness; can't you
stand happiness?"  And she strove with herself; and kept on with her
work.

After all, the happiness was presently diluted by the pressure of this
blank wall between them.  She came home, eager, loving, delighted to be
with him again.  He received her with no complaint or criticism, but
always an unspoken, perhaps imagined, sense of protest.  She was full of
loving enthusiasm about his work, and he would dilate upon his harassed
guinea-pigs and their development with high satisfaction.

But he never could bring himself to ask about her labors with any
genuine approval; she was keenly sensitive to his dislike for the
subject, and so it was ignored between them, or treated by him in a vein
of humor with which he strove to cover his real feeling.

When, before many months were over, the crowning triumph of her effort
revealed itself, her joy and pride held this bitter drop--he did not
sympathize--did not approve.  Still, it was a great glory.

The New York Company announced the completion of their work and the
_Hotel del las Casas_ was opened to public inspection.  "House of the
Houses!  That's a fine name!" said some disparagingly; but, at any rate,
it seemed appropriate.  The big estate was one rich garden, more
picturesque, more dreamily beautiful, than the American commercial mind
was usually able to compass, even when possessed of millions.  The hotel
of itself was a pleasure palace--wholly unostentatious, full of gaiety
and charm, offering lovely chambers for guests and residents, and every
opportunity for healthful amusement.  There was the rare luxury of a big
swimming-pool; there were billiard rooms, card rooms, reading rooms,
lounging rooms and dancing rooms of satisfying extent.

Outside there were tennis-courts, badminton, roque, even croquet; and
the wide roof was a garden of Babylon, a Court of the Stars, with views
of purple mountains, fair, wide valley and far-flashing rim of sea.
Around it, each in its own hedged garden, nestled "Las Casas"--the
Houses--twenty in number, with winding shaded paths, groups of rare
trees, a wilderness of flowers, between and about them.  In one corner
was a playground for children--a wall around this, that they might shout
in freedom; and the nursery thereby gave every provision for the
happiness and safety of the little ones.

The people poured along the winding walls, entered the pretty cottages,
were much impressed by a little flock of well-floored tents in another
corner, but came back with Ohs! and Ahs! of delight to the large
building in the Avenue.

Diantha went all over the place, inch by inch, her eyes widening with
admiration; Mr. and Mrs. Porne and Mrs. Weatherstone with her.  She
enjoyed the serene, well-planned beauty of the whole; approved heartily
of the cottages, each one a little different, each charming in its quiet
privacy, admired the plentiful arrangements for pleasure and gay
association; but her professional soul blazed with enthusiasm over the
great kitchens, clean as a hospital, glittering in glass and copper and
cool tiling, with the swift, sure electric stove.

The fuel all went into a small, solidly built power house, and came out
in light and heat and force for the whole square.

Diantha sighed in absolute appreciation.

"Fine, isn't it?" said Mr. Porne.

"How do you like the architecture?" asked Mrs. Porne.

"What do you think of my investment?" said Mrs. Weatherstone.  Diantha
stopped in her tracks and looked from one to the other of them.

"Fact.  I control the stock--I'm president of the Hotel del las Casas
Company.  Our friends here have stock in it, too, and more that you
don't know.  We think it's going to be a paying concern.  But if you can
make it go, my dear, as I think you will, you can buy us all out and own
the whole outfit!"

It took some time to explain all this, but the facts were visible
enough.

"Nothing remarkable at all," said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "Here's Astor with
three big hotels on his hands--why shouldn't I have one to play with?
And I've got to employ _somebody_ to manage it!"

*

Within a year of her marriage Diantha was at the head of this pleasing
Centre of Housekeeping.  She kept the hotel itself so that it was a joy
to all its patrons; she kept the little houses homes of pure delight for
those who were so fortunate as to hold them; and she kept up her "c. f.
d." business till it grew so large she had to have quite a fleet of
delivery wagons.

Orchardina basked and prospered; its citizens found their homes happier
and less expensive than ever before, and its citizenesses began to wake
up and to do things worth while.

*

Two years, and there was a small Ross Warden born.

She loved it, nursed it, and ran her business at long range for some six
months.  But then she brought nurse and child to the hotel with her,
placed them in the cool, airy nursery in the garden, and varied her busy
day with still hours by herself--the baby in her arms.

Back they came together before supper, and found unbroken joy and peace
in the quiet of home; but always in the background was the current of
Ross' unspoken disapproval.

Three years, four years.

There were three babies now; Diantha was a splendid woman of thirty,
handsome and strong, pre-eminently successful--and yet, there were times
when she found it in her heart to envy the most ordinary people who
loved and quarreled and made up in the little outlying ranch houses
along the road; they had nothing between them, at least.

Meantime in the friendly opportunities of Orchardina society, added to
by the unexampled possibilities of Las Casas (and they did not scorn
this hotel nor Diantha's position in it), the three older Miss Wardens
had married.  Two of them preferred "the good old way," but one tried
the "d. s."  and the "c. f. d." and liked them well.

Dora amazed and displeased her family, as soon as she was of age, by
frankly going over to Diantha's side and learning bookkeeping.  She
became an excellent accountant and bade fair to become an expert manager
soon.

Ross had prospered in his work.  It may be that the element of
dissatisfaction in his married life spurred him on, while the unusual
opportunities of his ranch allowed free effort.  He had always held that
the "non-transmissability of acquired traits" was not established by any
number of curtailed mice or crop-eared rats.  "A mutilation is not an
acquired trait," he protested.  "An acquired trait is one gained by
exercise; it modifies the whole organism.  It must have an effect on the
race.  We expect the sons of a line of soldiers to inherit their
fathers' courage--perhaps his habit of obedience--but not his wooden
leg."

To establish his views he selected from a fine family of guinea-pigs two
pair; set the one, Pair A, in conditions of ordinary guinea-pig bliss,
and subjected the other, Pair B, to a course of discipline.  They were
trained to run.  They, and their descendants after them, pair following
on pair; first with slow-turning wheels as in squirrel cages, the wheel
inexorably going, machine-driven, and the luckless little gluttons
having to move on, for gradually increasing periods of time, at
gradually increasing speeds.  Pair A and their progeny were sheltered
and fed, but the rod was spared; Pair B were as the guests at
"Muldoon's"--they had to exercise.  With scientific patience and
ingenuity, he devised mechanical surroundings which made them jump
increasing spaces, which made them run always a little faster and a
little farther; and he kept a record as carefully as if these little
sheds were racing stables for a king.

Several centuries of guinea-pig time went by; generation after
generation of healthy guinea-pigs passed under his modifying hands; and
after some five years he had in one small yard a fine group of the
descendants of his gall-fed pair, and in another the offspring of the
trained ones; nimble, swift, as different from the first as the
razor-backed pig of the forest from the fatted porkers in the sty.  He
set them to race--the young untrained specimens of these distant
cousins--and the hare ran away from the tortoise completely.

Great zoologists and biologists came to see him, studied, fingered,
poked, and examined the records; argued and disbelieved--and saw them
run.

"It is natural selection," they said.  "It profited them to run."

"Not at all," said he.  "They were fed and cared for alike, with no gain
from running."

"It was artificial selection," they said.  "You picked out the speediest
for your training."

"Not at all," said he.  "I took always any healthy pair from the trained
parents and from the untrained ones--quite late in life, you understand,
as guinea-pigs go."

Anyhow, there were the pigs; and he took little specialized piglets
scarce weaned, and pitted them against piglets of the untrained lot--and
they outran them in a race for "Mama."  Wherefore Mr. Ross Warden found
himself famous of a sudden; and all over the scientific world the
Wiesmanian controversy raged anew.  He was invited to deliver a lecture
before some most learned societies abroad, and in several important
centers at home, and went, rejoicing.

Diantha was glad for him from the bottom of her heart, and proud of him
through and through.  She thoroughly appreciated his sturdy opposition
to such a weight of authority; his long patience, his careful, steady
work.  She was left in full swing with her big business, busy and
successful, honored and liked by all the town--practically--and quite
independent of the small fraction which still disapproved.  Some people
always will.  She was happy, too, in her babies--very happy.

The Hotel del las Casas was a triumph.

Diantha owned it now, and Mrs. Weatherstone built others, in other
places, at a large profit.

Mrs. Warden went to live with Cora in the town.  Cora had more time to
entertain her--as she was the one who profited by her sister-in-law's
general services.

Diantha sat in friendly talk with Mrs. Weatherstone one quiet day, and
admitted that she had no cause for complaint.

"And yet--?" said her friend.

Young Mrs. Warden smiled.  "There's no keeping anything from you, is
there?  Yes--you're right.  I'm not quite satisfied.  I suppose I ought
not to care--but you see, I love him so!  I want him to _approve_ of
me!--not just put up with it, and bear it!  I want him to _feel_ with
me--to care.  It is awful to know that all this big life of mine is just
a mistake to him--that he condemns it in his heart."

"But you knew this from the beginning, my dear, didn't you?"

"Yes--I knew it--but it is different now.  You know when you are
_married_--"

Mrs. Weatherstone looked far away through the wide window.  "I do know,"
she said.

Diantha reached a strong hand to clasp her friend's.  "I wish I could
give it to you," she said.  "You have done so much for me!  So much!
You have poured out your money like water!"

"My money!  Well I like that!" said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "I have taken my
money out of five and seven per cent investments, and put it into ten
per cent ones, that's all.  Shall I never make you realize that I am a
richer woman because of you, Diantha Bell Warden!  So don't try to be
grateful--I won't have it!  Your work has _paid_ remember--paid me as
well as you; and lots of other folks beside.  You know there are
eighteen good imitations of Union House running now, in different
cities, and three 'Las Casas!' all succeeding--and the papers are
talking about the dangers of a Cooked Food Trust!"

They were friends old and tried, and happy in mutual affection.  Diantha
had many now, though none quite so dear.  Her parents were
contented--her brother and sister doing well--her children throve and
grew and found Mama a joy they never had enough of.

Yet still in her heart of hearts she was not wholly happy.

*

Then one night came by the last mail, a thick letter from Ross--thicker
than usual.  She opened it in her room alone, their room--to which they
had come so joyously five years ago.

He told her of his journeying, his lectures, his controversies and
triumphs; rather briefly--and then:

"My darling, I have learned something at last, on my travels, which will
interest you, I fancy, more than the potential speed of all the
guinea-pigs in the world, and its transmissability.

"From what I hear about you in foreign lands; from what I read about you
wherever I go; and, even more, from what I see, as a visitor, in many
families; I have at last begun to grasp the nature and importance of
your work.

"As a man of science I must accept any truth when it is once clearly
seen; and, though I've been a long time about it, I do see at last what
brave, strong, valuable work you have been doing for the world.  Doing
it scientifically, too.  Your figures are quoted, your records studied,
your example followed.  You have established certain truths in the
business of living which are of importance to the race.  As a student I
recognize and appreciate your work.  As man to man I'm proud of
you--tremendously proud of you.  As your husband!  Ah! my love!  I am
coming back to you--coming soon, coming with my Whole Heart, Yours!
Just wait, My Darling, till I get back to you!

"Your Lover and Husband."

Diantha held the letter close, with hands that shook a little.  She
kissed it--kissed it hard, over and over--not improving its appearance
as a piece of polite correspondence.

Then she gave way to an overmastering burst of feeling, and knelt down
by the wide bed, burying her face there, the letter still held fast.  It
was a funny prayer, if any human ear had heard it.

"Thank you!" was all she said, with long, deep sobbing sighs between.
"Thank you!--O--thank you!"


The End



OUR OVERWORKED INSTINCTS


Instinct is a good thing in its place.  We, in common with other
animals, have instincts, especially in our racial youth; but as reason
waxes, instinct wanes.  At present, thanks to the development of the
brain and even the beginnings of education, we have few instincts left.
What we have, we work pretty hard.

Among both men and women, the most primal instincts are still deified.
The instinct of self-preservation, which in every species is promptly
subordinated to race preservation, we solemnly hail as "Nature's First
Law!" It may be first, as creeping comes before walking, but is no more
honorable for that!

Then there is the sex instinct, a good second to this first, an ancient,
useful and generally pleasant incentive to action; but we, in our
simplicity, have set up this contributive impulse as the Lord of Life.
"The Life Force," we call it; when it is only one form of expression for
the Life Force, and a limited one.

Self-preservation does very well to keep the cards on the table, and
race preservation goes on giving us a new deal, but neither of them
alone, nor both of them together, is The Game.

What we are really here for is Growth, Improvement, Progress--and we
have a deep and UNIVERSAL instinct towards that, too; but little is said
about it!  It is our primitive animal instincts we are so proud of: our
social instincts we scarcely recognize.

Men have the instinct of combat, a very useful thing in its place.  But
in their exclusive preoccupation of being men, they have assumed this
masculine proclivity to be something of universal importance and
solemnly assure us that "Life is a Struggle."

Life is a Growth, a Progress, a Journey, if you will.  It may be
interrupted by having.to stop and struggle, but the struggling is at its
best only incidental.  Nature, seeking always the line of least
resistance, avoids opposition when possible: the masculine instinct of
combat courts it, and he idealizes his own instincts.

So also the woman.  She has her one, great original maternal instinct;
and both man and woman worship it.  They assume something intrinsically
holy in the feelings of a mother, and something superlatively
efficacious in her ministrations.  Motherhood is a beautiful and useful
institution, but it is not enough to take right care of children.

Every furry animal has a mother: every naked savage has a mother: every
ignorant peasant has a mother; and every mother has a compelling
instinct which causes her to love and protect her young.  But furry
animal, naked savage, ignorant peasant they remain for all of their
mothers.

Evolution needs more than mothers!  It is not enough to live, not enough
to reproduce one's kind: we have to change, progress, improve--and
instinct is no help here.  Instinct is nothing but inherited habit.  It
always dates a long way behind us.  It is never any guide in new
conditions or a incentive to betterment.  Instinct holds us in chains to
the past; or it would if it could.

In human life--especially in modern human life--conditions change so
rapidly that we have scant time to form individual habits, much less
develop instincts.  What we have left are very old ones, prehuman or
savage in origin and mostly applying to physical relations.  Suppose we
recognize these early assistants, regard them with respect as once
useful, and lay them where they belong--on the shelf.

Instinct is no guide to proper food to-day: we have to use our brains
and learn what is right to eat.  It is no guide to proper clothing--as
witness the unhealthy, uncomfortable, unbeautiful garments we wear.  It
is no guide to success in any kind of human industry, business, science
or art.  These things have to be learned: they do not come "by
instinct."  It is no suitable guardian of our behavior, either in public
or private: all good manners and established government are achieved at
considerable expense to "our natural instinct."  And assuredly our
instincts are not reliable as leaders in education, religion or
morality.

Why then, seeing the inadequacy of instinct in all these lines, are we
so sure of its infallible guidance in the care of babies?  A modern
human mother has far less instinct to guide her than her arboreal
ancestors: the real advantage her babies profit by are obtained through
the development of the father--in reason, in knowledge, in skill, in the
prosperity and progress of the world he makes.

He prepares for his children a Home, a School, a Church, a Government, a
Nation: he provides them all manufactured articles--each last and least
dish, utensil, piece of furniture, tool, weapon, safeguard, convenience,
ship, bridge, plaything, jewel.  He makes the world.

Into this world of reason, knowledge, skill, training and experience
comes the baby, richer in each generation by a new and improved father.
He is born and cherished, however, by the same kind of mother, bringing
to her tremendous task no new tool worthy of the time, but merely the
same old dwindling, overworked "maternal instinct."

The children of today need mothers of today, and they must begin to
supplement their primitive impulse by the very fullest, highest, richest
powers of the human intellect and the human heart--the real human heart,
which cannot be satisfied until every child on earth is more than
mothered.



LOVE'S HIGHEST


Love came on earth, woke, laughed and began his dominion.
Strong?  Just the Force of Creation.  Glad?  Merely Joy of Existence.
Love cast about for Expression--for work, which is Love in Expression,
And the fluctuant tissues of life began burgeoning, blooming and
fruiting.
Up through dim ages laughed Love, flowing through life like a fountain,
Pouring new forms and yet newer, filling each form with new passion,
Playing with lives like a juggler, life after life, never dropping;
Till a new form was developed: Humanity came: it was daylight.

Love laughed aloud, rose in splendor, offered up hymns of thanksgiving.
"Now I have room for expression!  Here is a vehicle worthy!
Life that is lovelier far than all these poor blossoms and creatures;
Life that can grow on forever, unlimited, changeful, immortal.
Here I can riot and run through a thousand warm hearts in a moment,
I can flash into glories of art!  I can flow into marvels of music!
I can stand in Cathedrals and Towers, and sit splendid, serene, in fair
cities!
These exquisite, limitless beings shall radiate love from their faces,
Shall uphold it with emulous arms, and scatter it wide with their
fingers,
Shall build me, through ages and ages, new forms and new fields of
expression!
I have worked through the mosses and grasses till the world was all
sweetened with roses,
Warm-clothed with the soft-spreading forests, and fed with ripe wheat
and red apples;
I have worked with fur-children and feathered, till they knew the
delights of my kingdom;
I have shown, thousand-fold, throughout Nature, my
Masterpiece--Glory--the Mother!
Now love shall pour like the sunlight, shall cover the earth like the
ocean,
Love encompassing all, as the air does, not only in fragrance and color,
Not only in Nature and Mothers, but now, in this Crown of Creation--
Latest fruit of the Tree Everlasting, this myriad-featured fulfillment--
With unlimited force I shall fill them, in unnumbered new voices be
uttered,
By millions and millions and millions they shall pour out their love in
their labor,
And the millions shall love one another.



THE PERMANENT CHILD


I sat watching my baby, my little son, who was asleep--a year old child,
fair and strong; and it did not seem a day since he was a tiny red
creature, helpless and faintly groping.

As I looked and loved, I thought how it would not seem another day till
he was a sturdy boy--a tall youth--a man grown; and I should lose my
baby forever!

Then I thought of all the other mothers whose babies were flying from
them by day and night--growing up, pushing away; of how we loved our
babies and could not keep them even if we would.  And I seemed to see
the million babies of mankind all over the earth--black and white and
yellow and brown, well-loved little ones of a million mothers--breaking
into life like bubbles, blossoming, sprouting, coming into being
everywhere, every hour, every minute, every second--this budding glory
of babyhood--all over the earth: human life springing up in babies, like
the Spring grass.  And they fled as fast as they came.  The days flew
by--the weeks, the months, the years--and the babies changes and grew
like a transformation scene; taking new shape, new size, new power;
disappearing as I watched them, and becoming boys and girls, men and
women.

But while I watched this millionfold swift flutter of unceasing change,
suddenly something happened to it.  The million and million all seemed
to coalesce and become one--one little child; and the swift flutter of
change grew vague and faint around it, so that although there was a soft
uncertainty around the child and a half-visible smoke of growing forms
arising from it, yet that small, dimpled shape remained, a little
uncertain in outline as in a composite photograph, but steady and
changeless as to the eyes--the clear, deep, searching eyes of a child.

My whole heart yearned to him: something rose and swelled within me,
deeper, wider, stronger than anything I had ever felt before.  I loved
him as I had never loved my own, as I had never known I could love--and
suddenly I felt that I too had changed, and that I was now not only a
mother but THE MOTHER; and I saw what it was I loved: it was THE CHILD.
And I longed to feed and guard and shelter and serve that Child as might
a million mothers made into one, with all the sweet helplessness, all
the glorious promise of a million children made one for her to love.

Then as I watched those deep child eyes: as my heart swelled and ached
with that great love: I saw--I felt--I knew--what had been borne, and
still was borne, by this; The Child in human history.  I saw the savage
mother and the savage father caring for the children the best they knew,
with all the torture and distortion, all the cruel initiations, all the
black, blind superstitions of those old times, to the crowning horror of
infant sacrifice when the child went through the fire to Moloch--for his
parents' sins!--the living, loving, helpless child, sacrificed by his
parents.  I saw the bent skull of the Flathead Indian child, the
crippled feet of the Chinese girl child, the age-long, hideous life and
death of the child-wife and the child-widow of Hindoostan.  I saw The
Child in Sparta, and The Child in Rome, The Child in the Dark Ages, The
Child scourged, imprisoned, starved, its mind filled with all manner of
black falsehoods, its body misunderstood, and maltreated; and my heart
ached, and I cried out, "Were there no Mothers for those children?"

And then I saw behind The Child, The Mother visible--the vague,
composite, mighty form of a million mothers made as one--but her heart
was my heart to feel and know.

I said to her--aching for her yet full of awful blame--"Could you not
have saved The Child from this?"

And she wrung her hands.  "I loved my child," she said.

"Loved?  Loved?" I cried.  "Could Love allow all this?  Could Love not
guard and feed, could Love not teach and save?"

"Alas, no!" she said.  "I gave Love: it was all I had.  I had neither
Knowledge nor Freedom, nor Wisdom, nor Power: and I could not guard nor
feed nor teach nor save.  But I could love and I could serve--and I
could suffer."

And the eyes of The Child, steady, clear, deep as all Time, were on me;
and I felt his pain.

Then the moving screen of The Past was swept away and The Present spread
and widened before me 'till I saw the whole wide range of Earth in all
its starlit glory and sunlit joy--and everywhere The Child.  Also
everywhere The Mother--still loving, still serving, still suffering,
still without Knowledge or Wisdom or Freedom or Power, still unable to
guard or feed or teach or save.

Disease seized upon The Child, disease planted in his bones and blood by
his Father while the Mother, blind and helpless, became partner in this
Unnatural Crime.  Disease preyed upon The Child, disease from ignorance
and disease from poverty and disease from pride; and the Doctors strove
with the diseases--and they strove also with the Mothers, but in vain.

Poverty preyed upon The Child: he suffered for lack of life's
necessities, for decency and comfort, for peace and beauty and
cleanliness.  And the Fathers strove with Poverty.  But the Mothers
remained alone--and loved and served and suffered.

Labor preyed upon The Child.  Forced Labor, Premature Labor, hard,
grinding, destructive Labor such as wastes the tissues of strong men;
and The Child went down before it like grass before the scythe, for
Childhood is meant for Growth and not for Waste and Toil.  The Mind of
The Child was dulled, the Body of The Child was stunted and crippled and
broken: accidents fell upon him, with the Special Diseases of Labor and
Premature Death.

And I cried out to The Mother--that mighty figure I saw dimly there
behind The Child--to save The Child.  But there replied only the faint,
piping voices of a million mothers, isolated and alone, each sorrowing
one heart-full for one child--and sorrowing in vain.

"My child is dead!" said one, and wept.

"Mine is a cripple!" said another, and wept.

"Mine is an idiot!" said another, and wept.

"Mine is stunted by the mill work!" said another, and wept.

"Mine is ignorant and grows vicious because of our poverty and the
vileness wherein we must live!" said another, and wept.

And I cried to them again, "But you are millions upon millions--and you
are Mothers!  And you can have today--if you will but take it--Wisdom
and Freedom and Knowledge and Power, and you can feed and teach and
guard and save.  And if you do not, the blood of The Child is on your
hands!  And The Child is The World--the Whole World--a Baby World--and
yours!"

But the great picture faded and fled away.  The Child disappeared and
left first the flickering flight of a million babies like the leaves of
a forest, and then but one, my child, asleep before me.  That vague and
mighty figure of The Mother disappeared, leaving first the sad-eyed
faces of a million mothers--loving, serving and suffering--and then
nothing but myself and my child.

But in my heart remained an emptiness that nothing could fill.  I caught
my baby to my heart--but he was not enough!  I had seen and I had loved
the Child--the Baby World.

"Oh Child of Mine!" I cried, "I will love you and serve you and I will
feed and guard and teach and save--but that is not enough!  You are but
one, oh Child of Mine, and there are millions and millions!  There
were--there are--and there will be!  It is a stream--a torrent.  It is
everlasting.  Babyhood upon earth continuously, always Babyhood, Human
Babyhood--and not yet Motherhood to meet its needs!"

No savage Mother is enough.  No slavish Mother is enough.  No narrow,
selfish Mother is enough.  No pitiful offered sacrifice of one Mother's
life is enough.

The Child does not need sacrifice.  It needs Wisdom and Freedom and
Knowledge and Power.  It needs Social Motherhood--the conscious, united
Mother Love and Mother Care of the Whole World.



THE NEW MOTHERHOOD


I have been reading Ellen Key's "Century of the Child," reviewed in this
number, and am moved to add, in connection with that review, a "brief"
for the New Motherhood.

Agreeing with almost all of that noble book and with the spirit of the
whole of it, I disagree with its persistence in the demand for primitive
motherhood--for the entire devotion of each and every mother to her own
children--and disagree on the ground that this method is not the best
for child service.

Among animals, where one is as good as another, "the mother"--each one
of them--can teach her young all that they need to know.  Her love, care
and instruction are all-sufficient.  In early stages of human life, but
slightly differentiated, each mother was still able to give to her
children all the advantages then known, and to teach them the few arts
and crafts necessary of attainment.  Still later, when apprenticeship
taught trades, the individual mother was still able to give all the
stimulus and instruction needed for early race culture--and did so,
cheerfully.

But we have now reached a stage of social development when this grade of
nurture is no longer sufficient, and no longer found satisfying either
by mother or child.  On the one hand, women are differentiating as human
beings: they are no longer all one thing--females, mothers, and NOTHING
ELSE.  They are still females, and will remain so; still mothers, and
will remain so: but they are also Persons of widely varying sorts, with
interests and capacities which fit them for social service in many
lines.

On the other hand, our dawning knowledge of child culture leads us to
require a standard of ability in this work based on talent, love,
natural inclination, long training and wide experience.  It is no longer
possible for the average woman, differentiated or undifferentiated, to
fulfill the work of right training for babies and little children,
unassisted.  Moreover, the New Motherhood is belying to-day the dogma of
the high cultural value of "the home" as a place of education for young
children--an old world assumption which Miss Key accepts without
question and intensifies.

The standards of the New Motherhood are these:

First: The fullest development of the woman, in all her powers, that she
may be the better qualified for her duties of transmission by
inheritance.

Second: The fullest education of the woman in all plain truths
concerning her great office, and in her absolute duty of right
selection--measuring the man who would marry her by his fitness for
fatherhood; and holding him to the highest standards in his duty
thereto.

Third: Intelligent recognition that child culture is the greatest of
arts, that it requires high specialization and life service, and the
glad entrance upon this service of those women naturally fitted for it.

Such standards as these recognize the individual woman's place as a
human being, her economic independence, her special social service; and
hold her a far more valuable mother for such development, able to give
her children a richer gift by inheritance than the mothers of the
past--all too much in femininity and too little in humanity.

A mother who is something more--who is also a social servant--is a
nobler being for a child to love and follow than a mother who is nothing
more--except a home servant.  She is wiser, stronger, happier, jollier,
a better comrade, a more satisfying and contented wife; the whole
atmosphere around the child at home is improved by a fully human mother.

On the second demand, that of a full conscious knowledge of the primal
conditions of her business, the New Motherhood can cleanse the world of
most of its diseases, and incidentally of many of its sins.  A girl old
enough to marry, is old enough to understand thoroughly what lies before
her and why.

Especially why.  The real cause and purpose of the marriage relation,
parentage, she has but the vaguest ideas about--an ignorance not only
absurd but really criminal in the light of its consequences.  Women
should recognize not only the personal joy of motherhood, which they
share with so many female creatures, but the social duty of motherhood
and its unmeasured powers.  By right motherhood they can build the
world: by wrong motherhood they keep the world as it is--weak, diseased,
wicked.

The average quality of the human stock today is no personal credit to
the Old Motherhood, and will be held a social disgrace by the New.  But
beyond a right motherhood and a right fatherhood comes the whole field
of social parentage, one phase of which we call education.  The effect
of the environment on the child from birth is what demands the attention
of the New Motherhood here: How can we provide right conditions for our
children from babyhood?  That is the education problem.  And here arises
the insistent question: "Is a small, isolated building, consecrated as a
restaurant and dormitory for one family, the best cultural environment
for the babyhood of the race?"

To this question the New Motherhood, slowly and timidly, is beginning to
answer, "No."  It is becoming more and more visible, in this deeper,
higher demand for race improvement, that we might provide better
educational conditions for the young of the human species.  For the
all-engrossing importance of the first years of childhood, it is time
that we prepared a place.  This is as real a need as the need of a
college or school.  We need A PLACE FOR BABIES--and our homes arranged
in relation to such places.

A specially prepared environment, a special service of those best fitted
for the task, the accumulated knowledge which we can never have until
such places and such service are given--these are demanded by the New
Motherhood.

For each child, the healthy body and mind; the warm, deep love and
protecting care of its own personal mother: and for all children, the
best provision possible from the united love and wisdom of our social
parentage.  This is not to love our children less, but more.  It is not
to rob them of the life-long devotion of one well-meaning average woman,
but to give them the immortal, continued devotion of age after age of
growing love and wisdom from the best among us who will give successive
lives to the service of children because they love them better even than
their mothers!



HOW WE WASTE THREE-FOURTHS OF OUR MONEY


The waste of Nature is great, and seems unavoidable: it is Nature's way.
 She is prodigal of time, of material, of life itself; and seems to have
unlimited supplies to draw from.  But the waste in our human processes
is conspicuously absurd.  We submit to it because we are not, in
general, awake to what is going on.

Recent spasms of civic investigation have revealed to us one large
source of waste in the dishonest use of public money.  We are taxed more
than is necessary to meet expenses in no way essential to good
government.  Ten per cent is a moderate allowance for this loss.

We waste more largely and less noticeably in carelessness of our natural
resources, as is now beginning to be realized.  Waste of timber is
followed by waste of water, and that by waste of land.  The earth's
surface of arable soil is being washed into the ocean at a wholly
unnecessary rate, the foundation of all wealth--of our very life on
earth--thus slipping away from us unobserved.  Every barren, naked hill
is a ruined garden; every yellow, muddy river is leaking gold dust from
our pockets; every choked harbor is a loss in money.  Another ten per
cent is scant allowance for this.

The waste of sewage in almost every city so provided, as well as the
loss of the same valuable fertilizing material in smaller places, is
grotesquely foolish.  If we saw a farmer gathering all the material from
his stables and cow sheds and throwing it into the sea, we should think
he was a fool.  We in towns and cities are just as foolish in wholesale
waste of what is worth good money to the farmer.  The sale of this
material by any great city, together with the sale of its garbage, would
be a large and steady source of income.  At present we pay out large
sums for sewage systems to throw away this product, and pay further sums
to persons to take away the garbage and other refuse.  We then, to
accumulate idiocy, pay more large sums to dredge out the harbors we have
ourselves obstructed, and furthermore charge ourselves with a heavy
death rate and a burden of disease from the effects of the defiled water
and poisoned fish--defiled and poisoned by ourselves.  Taken altogether
this makes another ten per cent. of our wealth wasted.  (All these sums
are arbitrary, but well below what they would really amount to.)

We pay very heavily to support our public institutions for the
defective, crippled and criminal population--in terrible numbers and
increasing.  Practically all this is pure waste of money--to say nothing
of the loss and suffering to humanity.  Prisons, hospitals, insane
asylums, poor houses, and the like cost the community a prodigious
amount.

This is very largely unnecessary.  Our criminal population is made--not
born!  The born criminal belongs in the hospital or asylum.  Our
crippled and blind are mainly made so by vicious parents--and all that
contributes to vice can be avoided.  It is a tremendous expense to
produce and maintain such a lot of poor human stock--and it is wholly
unnecessary--the most utter waste.  We will call it another ten per
cent.

Our all too numerous diseases with their premature deaths constitute
another heavy loss.  The waste of human life force in the infant
mortality alone is enormous.  The cost of medicine, of doctors, of
undertakers, of graveyard rents; the loss of services of those
prematurely taken from us--all this is a groaning burden of pain and
loss amounting easily to another ten per cent.

We lose by fire, unnecessarily, other huge sums--and fire loss is
absolute; there is no "come back," no compensating circumstance.  More
human life is lost in fighting fire.  In this, and in the terrible death
roll from accident in mill and mine and railroad, we lose in money more
than another ten per cent.

In the foolishness of throat-cutting competition with all its
multiplication of plant and service, its interruptions and interference
and delay, another ten per cent is gone--and more.  In the general
inadequacy of our people--low grade people where we might have high
grade ones, like poor stock in cows or hens, or poor kinds of corn or
wheat instead of first-class varieties, we waste again good ten per
cent--and more.  Also in the blind, careless assortment of occupation
where people work grudgingly at what they do not like we lose largely.
The vigorous output of happy, well placed workers would be worth ten per
cent. added to our present wealth.

Then comes our method of domestic industry in which we waste forty-three
per cent. of the productive labor of the world--and three-fourths of our
living expenses.

Put these all together--and every one of them is modestly within the
mark--and three-fourths is a small allowance to cover our wastes.  Isn't
it time we had a Social Secretary and a Financial Expert to teach us a
few things?



OUR ANDROCENTRIC CULTURE; OR, THE MAN-MADE WORLD


XIV.

A HUMAN WORLD.


In the change from the dominance of one sex to the equal power of two,
to what may we look forward?  What effect upon civilization is to be
expected from the equality of womanhood in the human race?

To put the most natural question first--what will men lose by it?  Many
men are genuinely concerned about this; fearing some new position of
subservience and disrespect.  Others laugh at the very idea of change in
their position, relying as always on the heavier fist.  So long as
fighting was the determining process, the best fighter must needs win;
but in the rearrangement of processes which marks our age, superior
physical strength does not make the poorer wealthy, nor even the soldier
a general.

The major processes of life to-day are quite within the powers of women;
women are fulfilling their new relations more and more successfully;
gathering new strength, new knowledge, new ideals.  The change is upon
us; what will it do to men?

No harm.

As we are a monogamous race, there will be no such drastic and cruel
selection among competing males as would eliminate the vast majority as
unfit.  Even though some be considered unfit for fatherhood, all human
life remains open to them.  Perhaps the most important feature of this
change comes in right here; along this old line of sex-selection,
replacing that power in the right hands, and using it for the good of
the race.

The woman, free at last, intelligent, recognizing her real place and
responsibility in life as a human being, will be not less, but more,
efficient as a mother.  She will understand that, in the line of
physical evolution, motherhood is the highest process; and that her
work, as a contribution to an improved race, must always involve this
great function.  She will see that right parentage is the purpose of the
whole scheme of sex-relationship, and act accordingly.

In our time, his human faculties being sufficiently developed, civilized
man can look over and around his sex limitations, and begin to see what
are the true purposes and methods of human life.

He is now beginning to learn that his own governing necessity of Desire
is not _the_ governing necessity of parentage, but only a contributory
tendency; and that, in the interests of better parentage, motherhood is
the dominant factor, and must be so considered.

In slow reluctant admission of this fact, man heretofore has recognized
one class of women as mothers; and has granted them a varying amount of
consideration as such; but he has none the less insisted on maintaining
another class of women, forbidden motherhood, and merely subservient to
his desires; a barren, mischievous unnatural relation, wholly aside from
parental purposes, and absolutely injurious to society.  This whole
field of morbid action will be eliminated from human life by the normal
development of women.

It is not a question of interfering with or punishing men; still less of
interfering with or punishing women; but purely a matter of changed
education and opportunity for every child.

Each and all shall be taught the real nature and purpose of motherhood;
the real nature and purpose of manhood; what each is for, and which is
the more important.  A new sense of the power and pride of womanhood
will waken; a womanhood no longer sunk in helpless dependence upon men;
no longer limited to mere unpaid house-service; no longer blinded by the
false morality which subjects even motherhood to man's dominance; but a
womanhood which will recognize its pre-eminent responsibility to the
human race, and live up to it.  Then, with all normal and right
competition among men for the favor of women, those best fitted for
fatherhood will be chosen.  Those who are not chosen will live
single--perforce.

Many, under the old mistaken notion of what used to be called the
"social necessity" of prostitution, will protest at the idea of its
extinction.

"It is necessary to have it," they will say.

"Necessary _to whom?_"

Not to the women hideously sacrificed to it, surely.

Not to society, honey-combed with diseases due to this cause.

Not to the family, weakened and impoverished by it.

To whom then?  To the men who want it?

But it is not good for them, it promotes all manner of disease, of vice,
of crime.  It is absolutely and unquestionably a "social evil."

An intelligent and powerful womanhood will put an end to this indulgence
of one sex at the expense of the other; and to the injury of both.

In this inevitable change will lie what some men will consider a loss.
But only those of the present generation.  For the sons of the women now
entering upon this new era of world life will be differently reared.
They will recognize the true relation of men to the primal process; and
be amazed that for so long the greater values have been lost sight of in
favor of the less.

This one change will do more to promote the physical health and beauty
of the race; to improve the quality of children born, and the general
vigor and purity of social life, than any one measure which could be
proposed.  It rests upon a recognition of motherhood as the real base
and cause of the family; and dismisses to the limbo of all outworn
superstition that false Hebraic and grossly androcentric doctrine that
the woman is to be subject to the man, and that he shall rule over her.
He has tried this arrangement long enough--to the grievous injury of the
world.  A higher standard of happiness will result; equality and mutual
respect between parents; pure love, undefiled by self-interests on
either side; and a new respect for Childhood.

With the Child, seen at last to be the governing purpose of this
relation, with all the best energies of men and women bent on raising
the standard of life for all children, we shall have a new status of
family life which will be clean and noble, and satisfying to all its
members.

The change in all the varied lines of human work is beyond the powers of
any present day prophet to forecast with precision.  A new grade of
womanhood we can clearly foresee; proud, strong, serene, independent;
great mothers of great women and great men.  These will hold high
standards and draw men up to them; by no compulsion save nature's law of
attraction.  A clean and healthful world, enjoying the taste of life as
it never has since racial babyhood, with homes of quiet and
content--this we can foresee.

Art--in the extreme sense will perhaps always belong most to men.  It
would seem as if that ceaseless urge to expression, was, at least
originally, most congenial to the male.  But applied art, in every form,
and art used directly for transmission of ideas, such as literature, or
oratory, appeals to women as much, if not more, than to men.

We can make no safe assumption as to what, if any, distinction there
will be in the free human work of men and women, until we have seen
generation after generation grow up under absolutely equal conditions.
In all our games and sports and minor social customs, such changes will
occur as must needs follow upon the rising dignity alloted to the
woman's temperament, the woman's point of view; not in the least denying
to men the fullest exercise of their special powers and preferences; but
classifying these newly, as not human--merely male.  At present we have
pages or columns in our papers, marked as "The Woman's Page" "Of
Interest to Women," and similar delimiting titles.  Similarly we might
have distinctly masculine matters so marked and specified; not assumed
as now to be of general human interest.

The effect of the change upon Ethics and Religion is deep and wide.
With the entrance of women upon full human life, a new principle comes
into prominence; the principle of loving service.  That this is the
governing principle of Christianity is believed by many; but an
androcentric interpretation has quite overlooked it; and made, as we
have shown, the essential dogma of their faith the desire of an eternal
reward and the combat with an eternal enemy.

The feminine attitude in life is wholly different.  As a female she has
merely to be herself and passively attract; neither to compete nor to
pursue; as a mother her whole process is one of growth; first the
development of the live child within her, and the wonderful nourishment
from her own body; and then all the later cultivation to make the child
grow; all the watching, teaching, guarding, feeding.  In none of this is
there either desire, combat, or self-expression.  The feminine attitude,
as expressed in religion, makes of it a patient practical fulfillment of
law; a process of large sure improvements; a limitless comforting love
and care.

This full assurance of love and of power; this endless cheerful service;
the broad provision for all people; rather than the competitive
selection of a few "victors;" is the natural presentation of religious
truth from the woman's viewpoint.  Her governing principle being growth
and not combat; her main tendency being to give and not to get; she more
easily and naturally lives and teaches these religious principles.  It
is for this reason that the broader gentler teaching of the Unitarian
and Universalist sects have appealed so especially to women, and that so
many women preach in their churches.

This principle of growth, as applied and used in general human life will
work to far other ends than those now so painfully visible.

In education, for instance, with neither reward nor punishment as spur
or bait; with no competition to rouse effort and animosity, but rather
with the feeling of a gardener towards his plants; the teacher will
teach and the children learn, in mutual ease and happiness.  The law of
passive attraction applies here, leading to such ingenuity in
presentation as shall arouse the child's interest; and, in the true
spirit of promoting growth, each child will have his best and fullest
training, without regard to who is "ahead" of him, or her, or who
"behind."

We do not sadly measure the cabbage-stalk by the corn-stalk, and praise
the corn for getting ahead of the cabbage--nor incite the cabbage to
emulate the corn.  We nourish both, to its best growth--and are the
richer.

That every child on earth shall have right conditions to make the best
growth possible to it; that every citizen, from birth to death, shall
have a chance to learn all he or she can assimilate, to develop every
power that is in them--for the common good--this will be the aim of
education, under human management.

In the world of "society" we may look for very radical changes.

With all women full human beings, trained and useful in some form of
work; the class of busy idlers, who run about forever "entertaining" and
being "entertained" will disappear as utterly as will the prostitute.
No woman with real work to do could have the time for such petty
amusements; or enjoy them if she did have time.  No woman with real work
to do, work she loved and was well fitted for, work honored and
well-paid, would take up the Unnatural Trade.  Genuine relaxation and
recreation, all manner of healthful sports and pastimes, beloved of both
sexes to-day, will remain, of course; but the set structure of "social
functions"--so laughably misnamed--will disappear with the "society
women" who make it possible.  Once active members of real Society; no
woman could go back to "society," any more than a roughrider could
return to a hobbyhorse.

New development in dress, wise, comfortable, beautiful, may be
confidently expected, as woman becomes more human.  No fully human
creature could hold up its head under the absurdities our women wear
to-day--and have worn for dreary centuries.

So on through all the aspects of life we may look for changes, rapid and
far-reaching; but natural and all for good.  The improvement is not due
to any inherent moral superiority of women; nor to any moral inferiority
of men; men at present, as more human, are ahead of women in all
distinctly human ways; yet their maleness, as we have shown repeatedly,
warps and disfigures their humanness.  The woman, being by nature the
race-type; and her feminine functions being far more akin to human
functions than are those essential to the male; will bring into human
life a more normal influence.

Under this more normal influence our present perversities of functions
will, of course, tend to disappear.  The directly serviceable tendency
of women, as shown in every step of their public work, will have small
patience with hoary traditions of absurdity.  We need but look at long
recorded facts to see what women do--or try to do, when they have
opportunity.  Even in their crippled, smothered past, they have made
valiant efforts--not always wise--in charity and philanthropy.

In our own time this is shown through all the length and breadth of our
country, by the Woman's Clubs.  Little groups of women, drawing together
in human relation, at first, perhaps, with no better purpose than to
"improve their minds," have grown and spread; combined and federated;
and in their great reports, representing hundreds of thousands of
women--we find a splendid record of human work.  They strive always to
improve something, to take care of something, to help and serve and
benefit.  In "village improvement," in traveling libraries, in lecture
courses and exhibitions, in promoting good legislation; in many a line
of noble effort our Women's Clubs show what women want to do.

Men do not have to do these things through their clubs, which are mainly
for pleasure; they can accomplish what they wish to through regular
channels.  But the character and direction of the influence of women in
human affairs is conclusively established by the things they already do
and try to do.  In those countries, and in our own states, where they
are already full citizens, the legislation introduced and promoted by
them is of the same beneficent character.  The normal woman is a strong
creature, loving and serviceable.  The kind of woman men are afraid to
entrust with political power, selfish, idle, over-sexed, or ignorant and
narrow-minded, is not normal, but is the creature of conditions men have
made.  We need have no fear of her, for she will disappear with the
conditions which created her.

In older days, without knowledge of the natural sciences, we accepted
life as static.  If, being born in China, we grew up with foot-bound
women, we assumed that women were such, and must so remain.  Born in
India, we accepted the child-wife, the pitiful child-widow, the ecstatic
_suttee_, as natural expressions of womanhood.  In each age, each
country, we have assumed life to be necessarily what it was--a moveless
fact.

All this is giving way fast in our new knowledge of the laws of life.
We find that Growth is the eternal law, and that even rocks are slowly
changing.  Human life is seen to be as dynamic as any other form; and
the most certain thing about it is that it will change.  In the light of
this knowledge we need no longer accept the load of what we call "sin;"
the grouped misery of poverty, disease and crime; the cumbrous,
inefficatious, wasteful processes of life today, as needful or
permanent.

We have but to learn the _real_ elements in humanity; its true powers
and natural characteristics; to see wherein we are hampered by the wrong
ideas and inherited habits of earlier generations, and break loose from
them--then we can safely and swiftly introduce a far nobler grade of
living.

Of all crippling hindrances in false ideas, we have none more
universally mischievous than this root error about men and women.  Given
the old androcentric theory, and we have an androcentric culture--the
kind we so far know; this short stretch we call "history;" with its
proud and pitiful record.  We have done wonders of upward growth--for
growth is the main law, and may not be wholly resisted.  But we have
hindered, perverted, temporarily checked that growth, age after age; and
again and again has a given nation, far advanced and promising, sunk to
ruin, and left another to take up its task of social evolution; repeat
its errors--and its failure.

One major cause of the decay of nations is "the social evil"--a thing
wholly due to the androcentric culture.  Another steady endless check is
warfare--due to the same cause.  Largest of all is poverty; that
spreading disease which grows with our social growth and shows most
horribly when and where we are most proud, keeping step, as it were,
with private wealth.  This too, in large measure, is due to the false
ideas on industry and economics, based, like the others mentioned, on a
wholly masculine view of life.

By changing our underlying theory in this matter we change all the
resultant assumptions; and it is this alteration in our basic theory of
life which is being urged.

The scope and purpose of human life is entirely above and beyond the
field of sex relationship.  Women are human beings, as much as men, by
nature; and as women, are even more sympathetic with human processes.
To develop human life in its true powers we need full equal citizenship
for women.

The great woman's movement and labor movement of to-day are parts of the
same pressure, the same world-progress.  An economic democracy must rest
on a free womanhood; and a free womanhood inevitably leads to an
economic democracy.



THE NUN IN THE KITCHEN


When you gaze upon a row of large, beautiful houses; those "residences"
to which the citizen "points with pride;" those "homes" which form our
ideal of life's fulfillment; bear this in mind:

For every one of those proud, spacious mansions must exist somewhere one
or more huts or hovels or crowded city tenements.

Why?  To furnish from the daughters of the poor the servants necessary
to maintain such a domicile.  So long as each woman performed with her
own hands the labors of the home; there were physical limits to the size
and splendor of that building.

The Palace has its slaves, the Castle its serfs, and the capacious
mansions of today owe their splendor--yes, their very existence--to the
nun in the kitchen.

"Why nun?" you will ask.  Because in entering our service she is
required to be poor, chaste and submissive; she gives up home and
family; hers is a consecrated life--consecrated to the physical comfort
of our families.

We expect our servants to be women as a matter of course: are not women
made to serve?  As a matter of fact, they are.  That is, they are made
to serve children, but we make them serve men.  And since a married
woman must serve her own husband exclusively, we must have unmarried
women to serve other women's husbands!  Hence the demand for maid
service; hence the constant--though futile--effort to prevent our maids
from marrying; and hence--this we have hitherto utterly overlooked--the
continuous inadequacy of that service.

Thus an endless procession of incompetent young people--necessarily
incompetent--is forever passing in and out of our back doors; and our
domestic life--its health and happiness--is built upon these shifting
sands!

When slaves were owned we had a secure foundation, such as it was; but
the present servant is not held by a chain or collar, and as she flits
through the kitchen--either slowly or swiftly--the mistress of the
mansion is drawn upon, in varying degree, to be a stop-gap.

The family and the home are far too important to our happiness to be
left at the mercy of such a fleeting crowd of errant damosels.
Affection and obedience they may give--or may not--but competence does
not come to ignorant youth.  We need, to keep the world well fed and
really clean, skilled, specialized, experienced, well-paid workers; and
it is none of our business whether they are married or single.



LETTERS FROM SUBSCRIBERS


Being wholly unable to respond individually to the kind and helpful
letters, I wish here to personally thank each friend for his or her
really important contributions to the establishment of this magazine.

It is the rich response which gives assurance that the work is worth
doing, and that it reaches those for whom it is written.

CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN.



COMMENT AND REVIEW


THE CENTURY OF THE CHILD


This is the well chosen title for one of the most important books of
this Twentieth Century, written by Ellen Key, that great Swedish woman
who so intensely loves "the child," a book which has set all Europe
thinking, has revolutionized the attitude of mind of thousands of young
women, and filled thousands of old ones with vain remorse.

In Germany a very considerable movement among girls of the upper
classes, involving a new attitude towards marriage and maternity, has
resulted from this one work.

I take a special, personal interest in it because my "Woman and
Economics" was held to represent the opposite pole of thought regarding
women from that of this book.

What is Miss Key's position?

She holds that "the child" is the most important of personages, that
life should all be bent to its service, that the woman's one,
all-inclusive purpose is the right bearing and rearing of children.  She
shows how painfully inadequate is our present provision for child
culture, how unprepared is the average mother, how unsuitable the
atmosphere of the average home and also of the average school; and makes
searching comment on our methods of teaching--especially in teaching
religion.

Her chapter on "The Education of the Child" is so important that it has
been taken out and made a book by itself.

There is present throughout the book a deep sincerity, a boundless love
and sympathy, and evidence of the widest and most searching observation.
 It throws a relentless light on our cheap and trivial way of facing the
gravest issues of life, and should stir every woman's heart to new
enthusiasm for the power and glory of motherhood.

The most controversial chapters--to most of us--are the first, in which
marriage is discussed, and the one on religion; but to my mind the most
important question here, as in all deep study of child culture, is this:
Is the mother the best person to supply the entire care for and culture
of the child?

Miss Key holds that she is.  For that reason she deprecates any
education, any profession, any interest or purpose in a woman's life
which at all interferes with this primal claim of motherhood.  She
allows to women the right, as individuals, to forego motherhood and
develop their egos as they will; but of women as a class she demands the
most entire consecration to this function.  Her requirements are
soul-absorbing and exclusive of all others.  It is not alone in the
hours spent with the child that the mother should be at work upon him,
but in every waking hour--in her work and rest times--the child should
be always on her heart, and she should ceaselessly revolve in her mind
the problems of her work as a mother.

The book is a determined protest against the present tendency to
specialization among women: it is thrown up like a rampart against the
rising tide of independence and free human life demanded by the girls of
today--and its strength lies in the deep truth of its attitude towards
the child.

It is true that the child is the most important personage.  In him--in
her--must appear the inherited growth of the world.  Unless our children
are born better, born stronger, born cleaner and more beautiful than we,
the race does not progress.  And unless the first years are rightly
treated, we lose in wrong education much of the fruit of right breeding.

It is true that we need among women a new, strong, clear "class
conscious" motherhood which shall recognize that this deep duty is
superior to that of the wife; that it is woman's worst crime to consent
to bear children of vicious, diseased fathers; that it is woman's first
duty, not merely to reproduce, but to improve the human race.

So far I am in hearty agreement with Ellen Key, and congratulate the
world of to-day upon her book.  She herself is a "human mother," a
"social mother," loving children because they are children not because
they are her own.  Such love, such high intelligence and insight, such
quenchless enthusiasm, are in themselves the proof that wise and
beneficial child-service may be given by extra-maternal hearts, heads
and hands.  Wherein I disagree with this world-helper will be found in a
few remarks on "The New Motherhood," elsewhere in these pages.

*

I was asked by a justly indignant subscriber to review Molly Elliot
Sewell's amazing performance in the September "Atlantic" called "The
Ladies' Battle," and replied at the time that I had not seen the
article.  Since then I have, and am glad to say a few words on a matter
the only importance of which is that The Atlantic Monthly should have
committed itself to such a presentation.

There is but one reasonable way to oppose Woman Suffrage today: that is
to bring definite proof that it has worked for evil in the states and
countries where it has been long in practice.  This means not merely to
show that evil still exists in these communities, or even that some
women take part in it: it must be shown that new or greater evils exist,
and that these are proven due to use of the ballot by women.  We have
yet to wait for such legitimate opposition.

This effort of Miss Sewall's, like all the others, consists almost
wholly of prophesies of horror as to the supositious effects of an
untried process, and where she does bring definite charges of corrupt
behavior in a woman suffrage state, the corruption charged is one common
to man suffrage everywhere, and is in no way attributable to the
presence of voting women.  Her anti-suffrage opinions, quoted from these
states, can be overwhelmingly outnumbered by pro-suffrage ones from
equally good sources.

She repeatedly alludes to woman suffrage as "a stupendous governmental
change," "the overturning of the social order which woman suffrage would
work," and other similar alarmist phrases; yet, as a matter of fact,
women have voted more than a generation, and are now voting, in various
of our states and in foreign countries all over the world without the
slightest "governmental change" or "overturning of social order" other
than a gradual improvement through legitimate legislation.

The notable essence of this paper lies in two statements, advanced with
the utmost solemnity as "basic principles" and "basic reasons," whereas
they might both be dismissed by sweeping legal exclusion as
"incompetent, irrelevant and immaterial."

First, no electorate has ever existed, or ever can exist, which cannot
execute its own laws.

Second, no voter has ever claimed, or ever can claim, maintenance from
another voter.

To dismiss the second with an airy wave of the hand, us its merely
inquire if it is a fact that in our four woman suffrage states married
women have no legal claim to support from their husbands?  As a matter
of fact, they have.  Therefore it is apparent that even now in this
country, as in many others, one voter has claimed, does claim, and
succeeds in getting, maintenance from another voter.  Exit the second
"basic reason."

The first one looks quite formidable.  It calls up in one's mind a
peculiar alignment of the sexes in which all the women voters are
segregated and opposed to all the men voters and that this all-woman
vote is on some matter which concerns all men, and that all men utterly
object to doing what all women want them to do, and that all women could
not make all men do what they wanted them to do--against their wills.
Perhaps they couldn't.  Perhaps they could.  There are more ways of
coercing them than by brute force.  But in any case what has this
preposterous vagary to do with woman suffrage?

Have the women voters of any state or country ever united as a body
against the men voters?  Is there any reason to suppose that they ever
will?  There are some measures, as in dealing with the social evil,
wherein women might conceivably vote "solid" against a considerable
number of men; but even then there would remain a large proportion of
wise and good men on the side of virtue and health--and this proportion
is increasing daily.  Decisions made by all women on questions of this
sort could be efficiently enforced by them.

The absurdity of this first "basic proposition" is in its innocent
assumption of flatly opposing interests between men and women, whereas
most of their interests are identical.  In following out her grisly
fears of valiant man forcibly preventing womankind from voting, our
authoress again forgets existing facts and again surrenders herself to
gloomy prediction.

"A dozen ruffians at a single polling place could prevent a hundred
women from depositing a single ballot," she says.

Yes.  But do they?

A dozen ruffians could do alarming damage to a hundred women almost
anywhere if the women had no guns.  Has Mrs. Seawell ever had the
pleasure of observing the absence of "ruffians" at the polling places in
Woman Suffrage states?  She seems to imagine that women, in acquiring
the ballot, instantly thereby lose, not only all their male relatives,
but the protection of the law, and become a species of "enemy," with
men, terrified and enraged, banded together against them--which is a
childish absurdity.

The errors of fact in this article are gross and unpardonable.  If Mrs.
Seawell had ever examined "The Woman's Bible" she would have noticed
that it was not "Miss Anthony's," but was undertaken by Mrs. Elizabeth
Cady Stanton with collaboration of some others, and that it was not an
attempt to make the Bible a "suffrage document" but to show how it
discriminated against women.

She alleges that the divorce rate is "practically higher" in the four
suffrage states than in any others in the Union whereas Wyoming is the
one state where divorce has decreased rather than increased.  She speaks
of Colorado as having had "more than thirty years of suffrage" whereas
it was only introduced in 1893.

Any person capable of real interest in this question of practical
politics and world improvement are urged to concentrate their study, not
on the most fiercely sentimental presentation of what woman suffrage
will do or will not do, but on the numerous and easily accessible facts
as to what it really does, information concerning which can be readily
obtained at the National Woman Suffrage Headquarters, 505 Fifth avenue,
New York city.

*

In the preliminary announcement of this magazine, twelve short articles
were promised by name.

As the months came round, other matters arose for attention, other
articles were urgent, and this arbitrary set was much in the way.

One, The Nun in the Kitchen, was seized upon by another magazine.  They
wanted the title particularly, so it was given them--and the price
thereof goeth to feed the Forerunner.  But, being a much larger
magazine, they benevolently allowed the same name and a similar article
to appear in these modest pages.

The others, "Our Overworked Instincts" and "How We Waste Three-Fourths
of Our Money" being promised, are now printed, altogether and with most
gratifying brevity, their length never having been specified.  The New
Year is not going to be hampered with any such too previous
announcements.

*

We mean to carry lists of books useful to our readers.  We wish to prove
that it will pay publishers to advertise with us.  If you order any book
reviewed here, please send your order to THE FORERUNNER.

"Pure Sociology," by Lester F. Ward, Macmillan, Pub., $4.00.

"Hygiene and Morality," by Lavina L. Dock, R.N., G. P. Putnam's Sons,
Pub., $1.25.

"Marriage as a Trade," by Cicely Hamilton, Moffat, Yard & Co., Pub.,
$1.25.

"To-day's Problems."  Trade Union Book Concern.  Chicago, Ill.

"The Century of the Child," by Ellen Key; G. P. Putnam's Sons., Pub.,
$1.50.



[Advertisement]


Success Magazine
For December and January


December
Our Prize Fiction Number'

When "MOLLY MAKE-BELIEVE" appeared, our readers gave us no peace until
we promised another story by the same author.  Our Christmas number
opens with "THE PINK SASH," by _Eleanor Hallowell Abbott._

In "THE HAZARD," _Katherine Cecil Thurston_ gives an exciting romance of
the days when feelings ran high in the fight for a maiden's hand.

_Rupert Hughes'_ story, full of snow, Christmas presents, soldiers and a
girl, is entitled "DUMBHEAD."

In the "FIRE_BLUE NECKLACE," by _Samuel Hopkins Adams,_ the well-known
detective hero, "Average Jones," while in search for the adventure of
life, lends Cupid a helping hand.

"THE IRISH SCHOOLMASTER," by _Seumas MacManus,_ is the first of a series
of delightful Irish sketches.  _John Kendrick Bangs_ comes into our
Christmas issue with one of his up-to-date fairy stories; "PUSS IN THE
WALDORF."

Among the many entertaining stories in our January issue there is one by
_Mary Heaton Vorse,_ entitled "THEY MEANT WELL"--a story of too many
chaperons and what happened to the girl; also, in "THE LITTLE MOTHER AND
THEIR MAJESTIES," _Evelyn Van Buren_ accomplishes her usual feat of
making the reader laugh and cry at the same time.

The Boy Scout movement, its purpose and its laws, is treated by _Ernest
Thompson Seton_ in the article "ORGANIZED BOYHOOD.

_Miriam Finn Scott_ in "SHOW GIRLS OF INDUSTRY" relates interestingly
how beauty of form and features figure as a big asset in the Business
World.

"THE STORY OF WENDELL PHILLIPS,"  by _Charles Edward Russell,_ is a
vivid and inspiring character sketch of this great orator and friend of
freedom.


A Few Of Our January Articles

_Franklin Clarkin,_ in a beautifully illustrated article, "CITY BEAUTY
PAYS," proves that it pays big to make a city beautiful--pays in actual
dollars and cents.  In "THE EVERYDAY MIKADO," _Adachi Kinnosuke_ gives a
lot of interesting and hitherto unknown facts about the Emperor of
Japan, his daily life and his responsibility for the modern movement in
the Island Empire.

"A SOFT-PEDAL STATESMAN," by _Robert Wickcliffe Woolley,_ is a slashing
character picture of the rich, influential and reactionary Senator
Murray Crane, of Massachusetts.


SUBSCRIPTION, $1.00.  AT NEWS-STANDS, 15 Cts. PER COPY



[Advertisement]


The Co-Operative Press

15 SPRUCE STREET
NEW YORK

Is fully equipped to take on Contracts, for
Printing in all its Branches

TELEPHONE BEEKMAN 5581 AND REPRESENTATIVE WILL CALL.



[Advertisement]


THE FIFTIETH EDITION OF
WOMAN AND SOCIALISM

The Condition of Woman in the Past, Present and Future

BY AUGUST BEBEL

Will appear in English about January 1st.  A masterpiece of logic in
popular style.  510 Pages.  Artistic Cloth Binding, $1.50

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIALIST LITERATURE CO.
15 SPRUCE STREET
NEW YORK CITY



[Advertisement]


Subscribe for

The Woman's Journal
585 Boylston St., Boston, Mass.

Official Organ of the National American Woman Suffrage Association

A weekly newspaper devoted to winning the ballot for women
Contains all the best news about women and their progress

FOUNDED 1870 BY LUCY STONE AND HENRY B. BLACKWELL

Edited by
Alice Stone Blackwell

The Woman's Journal is published in Boston and controlled by the
National American Woman Suffrage Association whose headquarters are at
505 Fifth Avenue, New York City.  It gives suffrage news from every
state in the Union, and especially from the states where campaigns are
under way; it gives important suffrage news from all the countries where
the women have the full right of suffrage, and from the countries where
the battle is waging; it gives official announcements and rousing news.

Thousands of women read it every week from beginning to end.  Nobody who
has read it one month can ever do without it.  It is the only paper of
its kind in this country.

Send for sample copies for yourself and ask us to send them to your
friends.


Try our four months trial subscription for 25 cents


REGULAR SUBSCRIPTION RATES

DOMESTIC

1 year . . . $1.00
6 months . . . $.50
4 months on trial . . . $.25
Single copies . . . $.05

CANADIAN

1 year . . . $1.50

FOREIGN

1 year . . . $1.50

A full year's subscription costs only . . . $1.00

CAN YOU AFFORD TO BE WITHOUT IT?



[Advertisement]


SOME OF OUR EXCHANGES


The Forecast Magazine

CHARLES HOUSTON GOUDISS, Editor

A MAGAZINE THAT DISPELS FEAR

WHY?  Because it stands for all that's BIG and BROAD, for all that's
PROGRESSIVE--for all that makes LIFE worth while.  It STANDS for the
KEEN MAN in BUSINESS.  It STANDS for the CLEAN MAN in PUBLIC LIFE.

IN OTHER WORDS It STANDS for MEN and MEASURES that spell GROWTH.  GROWTH
is life.  LIFE is never afraid.  Its the sneaks and cowards who fear.

THE FORECAST appeals to all who are interested in DEMOCRACY--in PUBLIC
EDUCATION--in the RIGHTS OF THE CHILD--THE ENFRANCHISEMENT OF WOMEN--In
the personal side of GREAT MEN AND WOMEN.

SUBSCRIBE NOW.
One dollar yearly

FORECAST PUBLISHING COMPANY
423 Lafayette Building, Philadelphia


The Englishwoman
A MONTHLY MAGAZINE FOR WOMEN

$3.50 post free per annum to any part of the United States

"The Englishwoman" is intended to reach the cultured public and bring
before it, in a convincing and moderate form, the case for the
Enfranchisement of Women.  No support will be given to any particular
party in politics.

The magazine will be inspired from the first page to the last by one
continuous policy, which is to further the Enfranchisement of Women.

It will try to do so, first by securing the sympathy and holding the
attention of that public which is interested in letters, art and culture
generally, and by an impartial statement of facts.  Its chief features
will be:

Articles dealing with the Women's Movement in England and other
countries.

Notes on parliamentary bills as affecting women and children.

Articles on Women's Work in Professions and Trades.

Sociological questions and their influence on the status of women.

Stories, poems, scientific articles, and short plays.

Criticisms of music, painting, sculpture, and current literature.

Editorial Offices: 11 Haymarket, London, S.W., England.

Publishers: Messrs. SIDGWICK & JACKSON.
3 Adam Street, Adelphi, London, W.C., England.

Every American woman interested in the suffrage should read

THE ENGLISHWOMAN


The Common Cause

WHAT IS IT?

There are in England something like twenty-five National Societies for
promoting the enfranchisement of women.  The oldest of these is the
National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, which was started in 1861
and whose President is Mrs. Fawcett, LL.D.  The National Union has over
two hundred branches in Great Britain, and a total membership of about
20,000.  It is the only British Woman's Suffrage Society affiliated to
the International Woman Suffrage Alliance.

The Common Cause
Is the Organ of the National Union.

It contains leaders and articles on political, social, legal and
industrial matters affecting women, and is a complete record of the work
done by the National Union for the enfranchisement of women in England.

The Common Cause
Is the Paper of Thinking Women.

Subscriptions should be sent to

64 DEANSCATE ARCADE,
MANCHESTER, ENGLAND

3 months, post free --- 1 shilling 9 pence
6 months, post free --- 3 shillings 3 pence
12 months, post free --- 6 shillings 6 pence

Every Thursday, 1 Penny


The Progressive Woman

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

Edited and Pubilshed by
JOSEPHINE CONGER-KANEKO
at Girard, Kansas, U.S.A.

Price, 50 cents a year.

The Progressive Woman stands for a better race through the political and
economic freedom of womankind.  Its contributors are among the cleverest
of the more advanced thinkers, and its readers endeavor to keep up with
its writers.

This is the great charm about The Progressive Woman--it does not stand
still: it leads.

Send to-day for sample copy.


Woman's Era

The New Magazine of Inspiration for the American Woman.

A World-wide Review
With Original Articles on

ECONOMICS,
ETHICS,
CIVICS,
ARTS AND CRAFTS,
MUSIC,
LITERATURE,
CLUB WORK,
Etc.

SPECIAL ARTS AND CRAFTS NUMBER FOR SEPTEMBER.

Sample copy . . . 10 cents
6 months . . . 75 cents
12 months . . . $1.50

(Worth a good deal more)

Address,

WOMAN'S ERA
New Orleans, La.


Up the Divide

A MONTHLY PERIODICAL

Asking:
Why not see Social and Religious Things from Higher Altitudes?

EDITED BY

DUREN J. H. WARD, A.M. (Harvard), Ph.D. (Leipsig) and WM. THURSTON
BROWN, A.B. (Yale).

IT IS A KIND BY ITSELF
UNIQUE IN EVERY WAY
A BRAND NEW THING IN MAGAZINES

SECOND YEAR

IS CALLED:

"Breezy, vigorous."
"Brusher away of cobwebs."
"Full of burning words."
"Blazes the trail."
"Crisp and bold thoughts."
"An eye-opener."
"The new spirit and new conscience shine on each page."
"Place not filled by any other."
"Speaks not as the Scribes and Pharisees."
"Charged with the gunpowder of progress."

$1.00 a year.  10 cents a copy.
With _The Forerunner,_ $1.80.

2442 Glenarm Pl., Denver, Colorado.


The Star

San Francisco, California.

JAMES H. BARRY, Editor.

A WIDE-AWAKE, UP-TO-DATE PAPER
FEARLESS, FRANK AND FREE

The First in the Land to Advocate Direct Legislation.  Stands for Human
Rights, including Votes for Women.  Considers all Questions of Public
Moment, such as Public Ownership, the Single Tax, the Tariff, etc.
Contains good Miscellaneous Matter.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY

Per year . . . $1.50
Six months . . . 75 cents

in advance

THE STAR

1122-1124 Mission Street, San Francisco, Cal.



From Letters of Forerunner Subscribers


"You certainly have struck your happiest medium." * * * "Given a real
live wire like The Forerunner all that is needed are points of contact.
_Experience_ has harrowed the receptive minds far and wide, and they are
more or less ready for the planting.  I would like to see 'Read The
Forerunner' at every station platform."

*

"I am tempted when I read your good stuff to just get out and do but one
thing--make the people of this country take your paper and read it.  It
is GOOD.  And more than that it is full of science--and of _Heart_.
There are too many good things in it (them) for me to be willing to
mention any in particular.  I wish I was up against it as is
Rockefeller--and did not know how to do good with a lot of stuff called
money--I think I might be tempted to send The Forerunner to every home
in the land: that would be to be rich."



[Advertisement]


Books by Charlotte Perkins Gilman


Sent postpaid by

THE CHARLTON COMPANY
67 WALL STREET, NEW YORK


"Women and Economics"  $1.50

Since John Stuart Mill's essay there has been no book dealing with the
whole position of women to approach it in originality of conception and
brilliancy of exposition.--_London Chronicle._

A remarkable book.  A work on economics that has not a dull page--the
work of a woman about women that has not a flippant word.--_Boston
Transcript._

Will be widely read and discussed as the cleverest, fairest, most
forcible presentation of the view of the rapidly increasing group who
look with favor on the extension of industrial employment to
women.--_Political Science Quarterly._


"Concerning Children"  $1.25

WANTED:--A philanthropist, to give a copy to every English-speaking
parent.--_The Times,_ New York.

Should be read by every mother in the land.--_The Press,_ New York.

Wholesomely disturbing book that deserves to be read for its own
sake.--_Chicago Dial._


"In This Our World" (Poems)  $1.25

There is a joyous superabundance of life, of strength, of health, in
Mrs. Gilman's verse, which seems born of the glorious sunshine and rich
gardens of California.--_Washington Times._

The poet of women and for women, a new and prophetic voice in the world.
 Montaigne would have rejoiced in her.--_Mexican Herald._


"The Yellow Wall Paper"  $0.50

Worthy of a place beside some of the weird masterpieces of Hawthorne and
Poe.--_Literature._

As a short story it stands among the most powerful produced in
America.--_Chicago News._


"The Home"  $1.00

Indeed, Mrs. Gilman has not intended her book so much as a treatise for
scholars as a surgical operation on the popular mind.--_The Critic,_ New
York.

It is safe to say that no more stimulating arraignment has ever before
taken shape and that the argument of the book is noble, and, on the
whole, convincing.--_Congregationalist,_ Boston.


"Human Work"  $1.00

Charlotte Perkins Stetson Gilman has been writing a new book, entitled
"Human Work."  It is the best thing that Mrs. Gilman has done, and it is
meant to focus all of her previous work, so to speak.--_Tribune,_
Chicago.

In her latest volume, "Human Work," Charlotte Perkins Gilman places
herself among the foremost students and elucidators of the problem of
social economics.--"San Francisco Star._

It is impossible to overestimate the value of the insistence on the
social aspect of human affairs as Mrs. Gilman has outlined it.--_Public
Opinion._


IN PREPARATION:


"What Diantha Did" (A Novel)  $1.00

"The Man Made World": or, "Our Androcentric Culture"  $1.00


Orders taken for Bound Vols. THE FORERUNNER, $1.25



[Advertisement]


THE FORERUNNER

A Monthly Magazine

WRITTEN, EDITED, OWNED AND PUBLISHED
By Charlotte Perkins Gilman


"THE CRUX"


Mrs. Gilman's new novel, will appear in
THE FORERUNNER, of 1911.

This touches upon one of the most vivid and vital of our age problems;
and has more than one kind of love story in it.  Also, published
serially, her next book,


"Moving the Mountain"


Those who believe this world is a good place, easily made better, and
who wish to know how to help it, will enjoy reading this book.  Those
who do not so believe and wish may not enjoy it so much, but it will do
them good.

The Forerunner carries Mrs. Gilman's best and newest work; her social
philosophy, her verse, satire, fiction, ethical teaching, humor, and
comment.  It stands for Humanness in Women, and in Men; for better
methods in Child-culture; for the Home that is no Workshop; for the New
Ethics, the New Economics, the New World we are to make--are making.


THE FORERUNNER
CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN'S MAGAZINE
CHARLTON CO., 67 WALL ST., NEW YORK

_____ 19__

Please find enclosed $_____ as subscription to "The Forerunner" from
_____ 19___ to _____ 19___

__________

 __________

  __________

$1.00 a year
$0.10 a copy


End of the Project Gutenberg etext of The Forerunner, Vol. 1
