The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898, Volume
XXXVI, 1649-1666, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898, Volume XXXVI, 1649-1666
       Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the
       islands and their peoples, their history and records of
       the catholic missions, as related in contemporaneous books
       and manuscripts, showing the political, economic, commercial
       and religious conditions of those islands from their
       earliest relations with European nations to the close of
       the nineteenth century

Author: Various

Contributor: Edward Gaylord Bourne

Editor: Emma Helen Blair
        James Alexander Robertson

Release Date: October 28, 2009 [EBook #30350]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/









                   The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898

   Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the islands and
   their peoples, their history and records of the catholic missions,
    as related in contemporaneous books and manuscripts, showing the
   political, economic, commercial and religious conditions of those
   islands from their earliest relations with European nations to the
                    close of the nineteenth century,

                        Volume XXXVI, 1649-1666



 Edited and annotated by Emma Helen Blair and James Alexander Robertson
  with historical introduction and additional notes by Edward Gaylord
                                Bourne.






CONTENTS OF VOLUME XXXVI


    Preface                                                           9

    Documents of 1649-1658

        Royal funeral rites at Manila.  [Unsigned;] Manila, 1649.    23
        Royal aid for Jesuits asked by Manila cabildo. Matheo de
        Arceo, and others; Manila, June 20, 1652.                    44
        Condition of the Philippines in 1652. Magino Sola, S. J.;
        September 16, 1652.                                          49
        Jesuit missions in 1655. Miguel Solana, S. J.; San Pedro,
        June 30, 1655.                                               53
        Letter from the archbishop of Manila to Felipe IV. Miguel
        de Poblete; Manila, July 30, 1656.                           63
        Two Jesuit memorials, regarding religious in the Moluccas,
        and the Inquisition. Francisco Vello, S. J.; [Madrid, 1658]. 68
        Jesuit protest against the Dominican university. Miguel
        Solana, S. J.; [1658?].                                      74
        Description of the Philipinas Islands. [Ygnacio de Paz;
        Mexico, ca. 1658].                                           87

    Documents of 1660-1666

        Recollect missions, 1646-60. Luis de Jesus and Diego de
        Santa Theresa, O.S.A., (Recollect); [compiled from their
        works].                                                     109
        Description of Filipinas Islands. Bartholome de Letona,
        O.S.F.; La Puebla, Mexico, 1662.                            189
        Events in Manila, 1662-63. [Unsigned; July, 1663?].         218
        Letter to Francisco Yzquierdo. Diego de Salcedo; Manila,
        July 16, 1664.                                              261
        Why the friars are not subjected to episcopal visitation.
        [Unsigned and undated; 1666?].                              264

    Appendix: Judicial conditions in the Philippines in 1842        279

    Bibliographical Data                                            307






ILLUSTRATIONS


    Map of Philippine and Ladrone Islands; photographic
    facsimile of map by Sanson d'Abbeville ([Paris?],
    1652); from copy in Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris.     facing p. 50

    Map of Cavite, with proposed fortifications, by the engineer
    Juan de Somovilla Tejada; photographic facsimile from original
    MS. (dated 1663) in Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla.          93

    Chart of the island of Luzon, with some of the smaller
    islands, drawn by a Dutch artist, ca. 1650; photographic
    facsimile of original MS. map in the British Museum.            191

    Birds-eye view of bay of Cavite, showing towns, fortifications,
    etc., by the engineer Richard Carr (in employ of the Dutch),
    captured in Madrid; photographic facsimile from original
    MS. (dated 1663), in Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla.        215






PREFACE


The present volume, covering the years 1649-66, is mainly
ecclesiastical in scope. An appendix, showing the judicial state
of the islands in 1842, is added. A number of the documents are
from Jesuit sources, or treat of the affairs of that order. Among
these are an account of the Jesuit missions in the islands, and their
protest against the erection of the Dominican college at Manila into a
university. The archdiocese of Manila strives to gain more authority,
both in the outlying islands of the Eastern Archipelago and over the
administration of parishes by the regular orders; and effort is made to
strengthen the power of the tribunal of the Inquisition at Manila. The
question of episcopal visitation of the regular curas is already vital,
and the later conflicts over this question are plainly foreshadowed,
and even begun. The history of the Recollect missions for the above
period shows their prosperous condition until the time when so many
of their laborers die that the work is partially crippled. As for
secular affairs, the most important is the Chinese revolt, of 1662;
this and other disturbances greatly hinder and injure the prosperity
of the islands.

Reverting to the separate documents: a curious pamphlet (Manila, 1649)
describes the funeral ceremonies recently solemnized in that city in
honor of the deceased crown prince of Spain, Baltasar Carlos. Solemn
and magnificent rites are celebrated, both civil and religious; and
a funeral pyre, or chapelle ardente, is erected in the royal military
chapel, the splendors of which are minutely described.

The Manila cabildo send a letter (June 20, 1652) to the king, praising
the work of the Jesuits in the Philippines, and urging the king to
send thither more men of that order. Their services as confessors,
preachers, missionaries, and peacemakers are recounted, and their
poverty is urged; they are sending an envoy to Spain, to ask for
royal aid, a request supported by the cabildo.

The Jesuit Magino Sola represents, in a memorial (September 15, 1652)
to Governor Manrique de Lara, the needs of the Philippine Islands. The
greatest of these is men and arms; and with these must be provided
money to pay the soldiers. Sola enumerates the many misfortunes which
have reduced the islands to poverty, and urges that the aid sent from
Mexico be greatly increased.

An account of the Jesuit missions in the islands in 1655 is furnished
by Miguel Solana, by command of Governor Manrique de Lara. He
enumerates the villages administered by Jesuits, with the names of
the priests in charge. To this we append a similar report, made the
year before, enumerating the missions in Mindanao and the population
of each.

The archbishop of Manila, Miguel Poblete, writes to the king (July
30, 1656), making some suggestions regarding diocesan affairs: that
the bishopric of Camarines be discontinued, and its prelate assigned
to the Moro and heathen peoples farther south; and that ministers
be sent from Manila to outlying islands for their spiritual aid,
as thus far these have been dependent on Goa. Poblete asks whether
he shall ordain Portuguese priests who come to him for this office;
on this point the royal Council ask for further information.

Two memorials presented (1658) by the Jesuits to the king ask that
a tribunal of the Inquisition be established at Manila, and that
the religious jurisdiction of Ternate be vested in the archbishop
of Manila.

A memorial to the king is presented (1658?) by Miguel Solana,
procurator-general at Madrid for the Jesuits of Filipinas,
protesting against the erection of Santo Tomas college at Manila
into a university, claiming that this will interfere with the rights
already granted to the Jesuit college of San Ignacio there. Solana
accuses the Dominicans of trickery and bribery in having obtained
privileges for Santo Tomas; and maintains that the rights of his
order have been legally granted and authenticated, while the claims
of the Dominicans are mere assertions. Nevertheless, the latter are
scheming to secure new letters and bulls granting their pretensions;
Solana adduces various arguments to show that they should not be
allowed the privileges of a university in Santo Tomas, and that
such a foundation should rather be made in San Ignacio, which "will
be subject in all things to the behest and commands of your Majesty
and your Council." The king is asked to examine certain documents in
the case, which show that the students of Santo Tomas are obliged
to swear allegiance to the doctrines taught by Aquinas, and are
not allowed to teach other branches than philosophy and theology;
moreover, that college has "no teachers who are acquainted with the
first principles" of medicine and law; and the curious statement is
made that there is no graduate physician in the Philippine Islands,
since one could not obtain a living, and the sick are treated by
Chinese. There is no need and no room there for a regular university,
and the burden of its support should not be imposed on the treasury;
but, if one be founded, it should be in San Ignacio.

From a document of 1658 relating to the Inquisition we extract a
description of the Philippines, written in Mexico from data furnished
by the Jesuit Magino Sola. It outlines very briefly the government of
Manila, civil and ecclesiastical; mentions the convents, hospitals,
and other public institutions there; and enumerates the villages of
that archbishopric, with mention of the missions conducted therein
by the several orders. Similar information is given about the towns
and villages of the suffragan bishoprics; and the location, extent,
government, and missions of the principal islands in the archipelago,
including the Moluccas. At the end is a statement regarding the number
of commissaries of the Inquisition who are needed in the islands.

The Recollect historian Luis de Jesus relates in his Historia
(Madrid, 1681) the holy life and death (1646) of Isabel, a native
beata of Mindanao; and the foundation in 1647, in the City of Mexico,
of a hospice for the shelter and accommodation of the Recollects who
pass through that city on their way to Filipinas. The history of the
discalced Augustinians for the decade 1651-60 is found in the Historia
of Fray Diego de Santa Theresa (Barcelona, 1743), a continuation of
the work begun by Andres de San Nicolas and Luis de Jesus; such part as
relates to the Philippines is here presented (partly in synopsis). It
begins with the troubles of 1647 in the Recollect mission at Tandag, in
Mindanao, when its convent was destroyed by the military authorities,
as dangerous to the fort at that place in case the convent were
occupied by an invading enemy. Accusations against the Recollect
missionary there are sent to the king, who warns the provincial of that
order to see that his religious aid the civil government in keeping
the natives pacified. Santa Theresa here prints letters from the civil
and ecclesiastical authorities at Manila, praising in high terms the
Recollect missionaries in the islands and their great services in
all directions, and asking royal aid for them in their great poverty.
The life of Fray Pedro de San Joseph is sketched. In the village of
Linao, Mindanao, a revolt occurs (1651) among the natives, which is
related in detail; it arises from an order issued by Governor Faxardo
requisitioning from each of the islands a number of native carpenters
for the government service at Manila. A Manobo chief, named Dabao,
fans the flame of discontent among the converted natives of Linao,
and by a stratagem brings conspirators into the fort, who kill nearly
all the Spaniards. Troops are sent to that region who punish severely
even the natives who surrender; and the people, although overawed,
are filled with resentment. The Recollect missionaries do much to
aid the natives, overlooking the fact that the latter had killed one
of those fathers; and one of them, "Padre Capitan," secures an order
from the Audiencia liberating all the Indians who had been enslaved
in consequence of the above revolt. This is followed by a sketch
of Fray Santa Maria's life; he was slain by the insurgents in that
same year. The writer recounts the difficulties met by the Recollect
province of Filipinas, and the coming to Manila (1652) of a body of
Recollect missionaries. The lives of many of these are sketched.

Considerable space is devoted to the subjection of religious to the
episcopal visitation, when they act as parish priests. Santa Theresa
describes the plan on which the missions have always been administered
in the Philippines by the various orders, and their relations to the
diocesan authorities. His account is a brief for the orders in their
controversy with the bishops over this question of visitation, and
presents the main points in its history; he writes it for the purpose
of refuting the slanders that have been current in Europe regarding the
attitude of the orders toward the diocesans, and discusses at length
the arguments against the episcopal visitation of the regulars in
parishes. These are advanced in behalf of all the orders in general,
and then the writer adduces special reasons, which concern the
Recollects in this matter. He enumerates the villages administered
by that order in different islands, and the spiritual conquests
made by his brethren; in their missions the number of Christians
has been steadily increasing, and the hostile heathen element much
reduced. Santa Theresa relates the dangers and sufferings experienced
by the Recollects in their missions, which lie on the very frontier
toward the Moro pirates; many of these devoted missionaries have even
lost their lives in the Moro raids. Have not these religious, then,
deserved the exemption from episcopal supervision that was granted
to the religious in Nueva Espana? Moreover, the missions need more
laborers than can be supported by their incomes (the royal grant from
the tributes), and the order itself must maintain these additional
men. It will become necessary for the order to abandon the missions if
these are to be placed under diocesan control; nor, in such case, can
it do more than sustain its leading convents in the islands. Finally,
the writer presents sketches of some illustrious Recollects who have
labored in the Philippines.

In a rare pamphlet by the Franciscan Bartholome de Letona--bound
in with his Perfecta religiosa (La Puebla, Mexico, 1662)--occurs an
enthusiastic description of the Philippines, which we here present
(in translation and synopsis). He describes the voyage thither,
the location and distribution of the islands; the various provinces
of Luzon; the climate, people, and products; the city of Manila,
which Letona describes as the most cosmopolitan in the world; and the
Chinese Parian. Letona relates the downfall of Venegas (the favorite
of Fajardo), and the achievements of Manrique de Lara; enumerates and
describes the various churches, colleges and seminaries, convents
and hospitals of Manila; and gives a sketch of each of the various
religious orders there, with special attention, of course, to his own,
the Franciscan.

One of the Jesuit documents preserved in the Academia Real de la
Historia, at Madrid, relates in detail the embassy sent to Manila by
the noted Chinese leader Kue-sing (1662) to demand that the Spaniards
submit to his power and pay him tribute. This demand being angrily
refused by the Spaniards, the Chinese in Manila, fearing evil to
themselves, and hearing of their intended expulsion from the islands,
undertake to flee from the Parian and other neighboring settlements,
blindly endeavoring to save their lives. The Jesuit missionary at
Santa Cruz hastens to the governor, to secure pardon for these poor
fugitives; and other priests second his efforts. Meanwhile, the
other Sangleys in the Parian are so terrified that many are drowned
in trying to swim across the river, others commit suicide, and most
of those who remain flee to the hills. The Spaniards in Manila,
in fear of an attack by the Chinese, are ready to slay them all;
and a repetition of the horrors of the Chinese insurrection in 1639
is averted only by the prudence and good sense of Governor Manrique
de Lara, who, with mingled sternness and humanity, calms the fear
of the Chinese and the anger of the Spaniards. Granting protection
to all who return to Manila by a certain day, he allows a specified
number to remain there for the aid and service of the Spaniards, and
obliges the rest to return at once to China. The fugitives who do not
come back to Manila are hunted down and slain by the Spanish troops,
aided by the natives. The two chief leaders of the Sangleys in their
flight are executed in public, and those who remain in Manila are kept
in the Parian under heavy guards of Indian troops; afterward these
Chinese are set at forced labor on the fortifications of Manila and
Cavite, thus taking a great part of that burden from the shoulders of
the natives. The same ambassador sent by Kue-sing returns to Manila
in April, 1663, this time with news of that corsair's death, and a
request from his successor for an amicable arrangement between them
and the maintenance of their trade. Our writer gives an interesting
sketch of Kue-sing's career, especially of his conquest of Formosa
(1660-61), the first occasion when Chinese had defeated a European
nation in war. The death of this formidable enemy relieves the fears
of the Manila colony; and the authorities decide to allow a moderate
number of Chinese to reside in the islands, since their services are
so necessary to the Spaniards.

Governor Salcedo sends to a friend (July 16, 1664) some account of
the affairs of the colony at his arrival in the islands--the treasury
almost empty, the soldiers unpaid, commerce paralyzed, and the natives
"irritated by cruel punishments." He takes vigorous measures, at once,
to improve the condition of the colony.

An unsigned document (1666?) gives the reasons why the civil
authorities have not executed the royal decrees subjecting
the Philippine friars in charge of parishes to the episcopal
visitation. Apparently written by a friar, it gives the reasons why
the missions must be administered by the religious orders rather
than by secular priests, and why the friars ask that they be not
placed under the episcopal authority. They allege that there are
still many heathen and Mahometans to be converted, throughout the
islands; that the missions are full of hardship; that the courage
and strict observance of the religious would grow lax under diocesan
supervision; and that the most able of them would not consent to such
subjection. Difficulties, also, must necessarily arise in the attempt
of a religious to obey his superiors when these are both religious and
ecclesiastical, and from interference by the civil authorities. All
sorts of scandals and irregularities are liable to spring from these
causes, affecting not only the missionaries but the natives, as well
as the many heathen peoples who surround Manila.

The present volume is terminated by a short appendix taken from
Sinibaldo de Mas, showing the condition of the judiciary of
the Philippines in 1842. Justice is administered by the royal
Audiencia, by the alcaldes, and by the gobernadorcillos, the last
being Filipinos. The action of the alcalde-mayor is very limited and
dependent on the Audiencia. Mas draws a vivid picture of some of the
alcaldes which shows that the system is honeycombed with graft. The
great evil arises from the fact that alcaldes are allowed to trade, and
hence business absorbs all their energies for the six years of their
office, for during that time they must become rich. As one does not
need to be a lawyer to become an alcalde, those posts generally being
assigned to military officers, the incumbent of such post needs an
adviser. This results in great delay, and often justice is completely
subverted. By advancing money at usurious rates the alcalde bleeds
those who borrow from him, and in fact such unfortunate people can
almost never get square with the world again. The gobernadorcillos
in turn lash the alcaldes, for they are necessary to the latter,
and good terms must be maintained with them. For the general legal
business the alcalde depends on his clerk, a native, who runs things
to suit himself, and in his turn makes his office an occasion for
graft. The parish priests who formerly had so great influence in the
villages have now been ordered by the governors to cease meddling
with secular matters, and some of them even are in collusion with
the alcalde, whom they endeavor to aid in order that they may gain
their own ends. Notwithstanding the alcaldes are few who are not
often fined during their term. The government is most to blame for
this state of affairs for its course implies that the alcaldes
are expected to be rogues. Crime has increased greatly of late
years. Punishments are too light, and many criminals even get off
scotfree. This produces only bad results. The officials are slow to
arrest because the criminal will soon be released as a general rule,
and will always take vengeance if possible. Although he argues that
the death sentence ought to be abolished as an unnecessary cruelty,
Mas urges that the lash be not spared, for a good beating will correct
more faults than anything else. The jail only acts as an allurement
for the majority of Filipinos, for it is generally better than their
own houses. The laws in force in the islands are a confused mass,
consisting of the Leyes de Indias, royal decrees and orders, the
decrees and edicts of the governors, a portion of the laws of the
Siete Partidas, parts of Roman law, etc. Mas advocates strenuously
the prohibition of trade granted to alcaldes and an extension of their
term of office. One common native language, could such be established,
would be very useful. There should be a commission after the manner
of that in British India, to advise revision in the existing laws.


The Editors

March, 1906.






DOCUMENTS OF 1649-1658


    Royal funeral rites at Manila. [Unsigned;] 1649.
    Royal aid for Jesuits asked by Manila cabildo. Matheo de Arceo,
    and others; June 20, 1652.
    Condition of the Philippines in 1652. Magino Sola, S.J.;
    September 15, 1652.
    Jesuit missions in 1655. Miguel Solana, S.J.; June 30, 1655.
    Letter from the archbishop of Manila. Miguel de Poblete;
    July 30, 1656.
    Two Jesuit memorials. Francisco Vello, S.J.; [1658].
    Jesuit protest against the Dominican university. Miguel Solana,
    S.J.; [1658?].
    Description of the Philipinas Islands. [Ygnacio de Paz;
    ca. 1658]



Sources: The first of these documents is taken from Retana's Archivo,
ii, pp. 105-158; the second and sixth, from Pastells's edition
of Colin's Labor evangelica, iii, pp. 786, 787, and 804, 805; the
third and fourth, from the Ventura del Arco MSS. (Ayer library),
ii, pp. 385-389. The following are obtained from original MSS. in
archives as follows: the fifth, in the Archivo general de Indias,
Sevilla; the seventh, in the Academia Real de la Historia, Madrid;
the eighth, in the Archivo general, Simancas.


Translations: The fifth document is translated by Robert W. Haight;
the seventh, by Rev. T. C. Middleton, O.S.A.; the remainder, by James
A. Robertson.






ROYAL FUNERAL RITES AT MANILA


Funeral ceremonies and the royal pyre of honor erected by piety and
consecrated by the grief of the very distinguished and ever loyal
city of Manila, in memory of the most serene prince of Espana, Don
Balthassar Carlos (may he dwell in glory). By license of the ordinary
and of the government. [Printed] at Manila, by Simon Pinpin, in the
year 1649.


[This document is presented in translation and synopsis, because of the
light it throws on the religio-social life of Manila in the middle of
the seventeenth century. It is preceded by the license to print given
(June 5, 1649), for the archbishop by Doctor Don Juan Fernandez de
Ledo, precentor of Manila cathedral, judge-provisor, official and
vicar-general of the archbishopric; by that of the government, given
(May 27, 1649), on recommendation of Joseph de la Anunciacion, prior
of the Recollect convent in Manila; and by a letter (dated Manila,
December 15, 1648, and signed by Lucas de Porras, Gabriel Gomez del
Castillo, and Diego Morales) addressed to the governor Diego Faxardo
y Chacon, which amounts to a dedicatory epistle. The relation begins
with the grief that comes to the city of Manila with the announcement
of the sudden death (at the age of seventeen) of the prince Balthasar
Carlos, heir to the throne and son of Felipe IV and Isabel of Bourbon,
who had died but a short time before. The document continues:]

The first rumors of this so sad event reached this city in the
middle of December, 1647, by means of the Dutch, who were harassing
these islands at that time with a large fleet of twelve galleons,
which sailed from Nueva Batavia with the intention of capturing this
stronghold. But they, after having experienced the valor and boldness
of our Spaniards in the severe and obstinate combat in the port of
Cabite, of which a full relation has been written in former years, [1]
attempted to terrify the hearts and take away the courage of those whom
they had not been able to resist by hostilities, by sending a letter to
Don Diego Faxardo, knight of the Order of Santiago, member of the War
Council, and president, governor, and captain-general of these islands;
and with it part of a gazette printed in the Flemish characters
and language, which contained a copy of a letter from his Majesty
to the Marques de Leganes, in which was mentioned the heavy grief
of his royal heart because of the sudden death of his son and heir,
Don Balthassar Carlos. The minds of so loyal vassals were alarmed,
and their hearts chilled, on hearing so sad news; and those who had
not given way before the violent attack of cannon-balls yielded to
the tenderness of grief, and to the sighs of sorrow; and they bore in
their faces the effects of their dismay and the marks of their pain,
as if the prince were seen dead in each one.... There was no doubt
of the truth of that news, for its arrival with the superscription of
misfortune gave it the credit of truth. But neither the condition in
which we found ourselves, with arms in our hands, nor prudence allowed
us to proceed with public demonstrations and funeral ceremonies until
we received a letter from his Majesty, and with the letter the order,
direction, and prudent management which so serious a matter demanded.

[The royal announcement arrived in July, 1648; and by his decree
the king ordered the demonstrations of sorrow to be made on the same
scale as if intended for his own person.]

In conformity with that decree, and in order that they might obey it,
the auditors called a meeting, and resolved to publish the mourning,
and to prepare the things necessary for the splendid celebration of
the funeral ceremonies. At the same time they elected as the manager
of that solemn function the fiscal auditor, Don Sebastian Cavallero
de Medina, who was as vigilant and punctual in the affairs of his
office as attentive to the service of both Majesties--guaranteeing
by the completeness of his arrangements the entire success which so
serious a matter demanded. As his assistants in carrying out that
commission were named the treasurer, Lucas de Porras Ontiberos,
alcalde-in-ordinary, and Captains Gabriel Gomez del Castillo and Don
Diego Morales, regidors. At a suitable time, the mourning rites were
heralded, in fulfilment of the above resolution; and all the provinces
were notified to make the same demonstrations, so that the external
conduct of so faithful vassals should correspond to the sorrow which
palpitated in their hearts and saddened their breasts. Scarcely was
the word given before the obedient people changed the precious and
fine appearance of their attire with somber mourning garments; and
this whole community became a theater of grief--each one showing the
loyalty which was as much evinced by his grief as it was wondered at
by the barbarous nations who trade in these islands, when they saw
in so remote a part of the world so extreme piety, so intense love,
and so faithful allegiance to their king, that distance does not make
it lukewarm, or absence weaken the affection that these deserving
vassals have ever had for their Catholic kings.

The day set for their expressions of condolence arrived, Monday,
November 9, 648; for the direction of the ceremonies, Admiral Don
Andres de Azcueta and Captain Don Pedro Diaz de Mendoza were appointed
managers. The halls of the Audiencia and royal assembly were made ready
with the funereal adornments and other preparations significant of so
melancholy an occasion. At two in the afternoon the bells of all the
churches began to ring, in so sad and doleful tones that they filled
the air with sorrow, and the hearts of those who heard their plaints
with bitterness and grief, learning from the very bronze to grieve for
so considerable a loss. At that same time all the religious communities
assembled, with their crosses, priests, deacons, and subdeacons, clad
in their vestments, in the royal chapel of the garrison. That temple,
although small in size, has all the characteristics of a great one
in its beauty, elegance, and arrangement. There, architecture was
employed to the best effect, and genius was alert in erecting a royal
tomb and mausoleum proportionate to the grandeur and sovereign rank
of the person; and one not at all inferior to the one erected during
the funeral rites and pageant of our lady the queen, [2] by the
direction and advice of Doctor Don Diego Afan de Ribera, auditor of
this royal Audiencia, and auditor elect of that of the new kingdom
of Granada. The royal assembly entrusted the arrangements of that
solemnity to him. Each community in succession chanted its responsary,
with different choirs of musicians, so well trained that they could
vie with those of Europa. While that pious action was going on, the
ecclesiastical and secular cabildos were assembling, as well as the
tribunal of the royal official judges, the superiors of the orders,
the rectors of the two colleges--San Joseph, which is in charge
of the fathers of the Society of Jesus; and San Thomas, which is
ruled by the fathers of St. Dominic--and the members of the bureau
of the Santa Misericordia (as was determined and arranged two days
previously, the place of each being assigned) in the hall of the royal
Audiencia. There the managers assigned them their position, observing
toward each one the order of his seniority and precedence. They left
that place in the same order, to express their condolences to Don
Diego Faxardo, governor and captain-general of these islands, who
stood in the hall of the royal assembly. He was covered with mourning,
which well manifested his grief and represented very vividly in his
majestic appearance the royal person--in whose name he received the
condolences for the death of the royal son and heir, Don Balthassar
Carlos, the prince of Espana. First entered the royal Audiencia, in
company with their official, as grave in the pomp of their mourning as
adequate in the demonstrations of their grief. Don Antonio de Castro,
senior auditor and auditor-elect of Mexico, spoke in the name of all,
expressing in brief and impressive sentences the universal grief of
all the community and the special grief of that royal Audiencia. His
Lordship listened to him attentively, and answered him gravely and
concisely, with words suitable to the subject, thanking him in the
name of his Majesty for the demonstrations of grief which servants
so loyal were making on an occasion so consecrated to sorrow. Having
finished their oration, the royal Audiencia gave place successively
to the ecclesiastical cabildo, the secular cabildo, the tribunal of
the royal official judges, the superiors of the orders, the colleges,
and the bureau of the Santa Misericordia--each one taking its proper
place as regards precedence. All of them observed the courtesies
and punctilious forms due to the decorum and seriousness of that
function. After these had signified by the gravity of their words,
and by the seriousness and sadness of their countenances, the heavy
weight of the sorrow which oppressed their hearts for a loss so worthy
of immortal lament, and after his Lordship had answered with equally
apposite speech what good judgment dictated and sorrow forced out,
that act of mourning came to an end. It was no less dignified than
refined; and no accompaniment or ceremony was lacking in the decorum
of that action--the daughter of the affection with which so faithful
vassals serve their king and sovereign.

That parade was followed by another of no less gravity, namely the
accompaniment of the royal crown to the chapel of the royal camp for
the solemnity of vespers and the funeral oration which was prepared
[for this occasion]. For that purpose, after the condolences the
members of the royal Audiencia returned to the hall of the royal
assembly, where the august crown reposed with all authority and
propriety, signifying, in the somber mourning with which it was
covered, a sorrowing majesty and a monarchy grief-stricken at
beholding itself without the head from whose glorious temples it
had fallen--Cecidit corona capitis nostri. [3] His Lordship handed
the crown to General Don Pedro Mendiola y Carmona, entrusting to his
hands the honor of so great a Majesty, and thus crowning the great
services which the latter had rendered to his king in the lofty posts
that he has occupied in these islands. This was the opening act of the
parade, which commenced at the palace, encircled the entire plaza of
arms under the galleries, and ended at the royal chapel--the theater,
as we have already remarked, destined for the magnificence of that
funeral celebration. That act was arranged by the care and foresight
of the royal assembly, and carried out by means of the managers with
so great brilliancy, gravity, and propriety that it corresponded in
all things with the majesty of the [dead] person. The orphan boys
of the college of San Juan de Letran--who number more than one
hundred and fifty, and are reared at the expense of his Majesty,
in charge of the fathers of St. Dominic--marched first of all, two
by two (the universal order that was observed in that act by all the
tribunals and communities) holding their candles of pure white wax,
which were distributed, that day and the following, with magnificence
and liberality by this illustrious city. The alguacils followed, and
then the ministers of justice, the attorneys, the judges' secretaries,
the notaries, public and royal, with their gowns and cloaks trailing
behind. Next to them came the confraternities with their pennants and
banners, and after these the parishes from the suburbs of this city,
with their crosses, and their curas clad in black cloaks. Next in the
line was the college of Santo Thomas, and following it that of San
Joseph, with their badges [becas] turned back at the collar as a sign
and token of grief. Then followed the bureau of the Santa Misericordia
(which is composed of the most noble persons of this city) all clad
in their black surtouts and hats, with heads covered, bearing their
small bells, and the standard with their insignia in front. The holy
families also marched: the brethren of St. John of God, the Recollects
of St. Augustine, the Society of Jesus, the hermits of St. Augustine,
the seraphic family of St. Francis, and that of the Preachers. These
were not so splendid by reason of the candles which they carried in
their hands as by the gravity and modesty of their manner, showing in
the seriousness and composure of their faces the religious sorrow and
pious grief that oppressed their hearts. The ecclesiastical cabildo
followed with their black choir-cloaks, with the skirts extended
and their heads covered; and altogether with so grave and majestic
a demeanor that they commanded the eyes and also the applause of all
the people. The city [cabildo] followed, together with the tribunal of
the royal official judges, bearing their maces and insignia. They were
accompanied by the nobility of the city with flowing black mourning
cloaks, and with heads covered; but very apparent was the grief and
manifest the sadness which their love and good-will towards their
unfortunate prince brought to their faces. The royal standard of the
city was carried by Captain Gabriel Gomez del Castillo, assisted by the
two alcaldes-in-ordinary, who carried it between them, as authorizing
the action. The royal Audiencia with their president, the governor
of these islands, crowned all that grave and religious concourse with
all the splendors of authority. They were followed by the government
and court secretaries, and by the gentlemen and pages of the palace,
clad in all display of grandeur in funeral garb, thus manifesting
in somber grays the sharpness and depth of the wound which they had
received by the sudden death of the most serene and very august prince,
Don Balthassar Carlos, the clear and resplendent light of the Spanish
monarchy, at whose taking away all the world was darkened. Between the
city cabildo and the royal Audiencia was carried the Caesarean crown,
with two kings-at-arms, on a cushion of rich cloth, with the gravity
and decorum which is due to the head [that it adorns], to which all
the people who were present that day rendered humble veneration. So
sad a spectacle was made by all that splendid parade, that never was
more bitter grief represented, never was Majesty seen more afflicted,
never was sorrow seen more at its height. All the Plaza de Armas
was occupied, while that brilliant procession was going round it,
by the royal regiment of the Spanish troops, the governor of which is
Sargento-mayor Manuel Estacio Venegas. It consisted of four hundred
and eighty-six infantrymen formed in a body with four fronts, each
of which was commanded by two captains and one alferez. The regiment
marched to take position in five lines, with fifty artillerymen in the
rear with their campaign linstocks. They all maintained so great order
and discipline that the military art was seen in practice in all its
splendor--a glorious proof of the diligence of their commandant and
the loyalty and devotion of so valiant soldiers; for notwithstanding
the excessive heat of the sun they remained immovable on that and
the following day, their zeal and love for their king, which burn
most brightly in their hearts, being preponderant in them. The
parade having passed, all the soldiers fell in behind, captained
by the sargento-mayor himself, the commandant of the regiment. They
entered by one door of the royal chapel and went out by the other,
with drums muffled and banners trailing, and the soldiers carrying
their arquebuses under the arm with the butt-ends reversed, with an
order so regular and so in keeping with military rules that that action
deserved the acclamation and even the admiration of all. The father
chaplain-in-chief of the regiment, namely, the presentado father Fray
Joseph Fayol, of the Order of Nuestra Senora de la Merced, was present,
as were also all the royal chaplains, at the door of the royal chapel,
with cross and wax tapers [ciriales] held aloft while the procession
was entering. After they had entered, the royal crown was placed on
its royal catafalque--or rather a funeral pyre of fire, crowned with
candles as is the firmament with stars, where the brilliant and the
majestic glowed in competition. I leave the description of that for
the crown of this historical compilation. Those in the procession took
possession of and even filled all the seats which were provided for
the tribunals and the communities, distributing themselves therein
according to the same order of their seniority. With this began the
vespers for the dead, which was in charge of the chaplain-in-chief,
assisted by the royal chaplains, with all the requisites of solemnity
and pomp, accompanied by the piety, devotion, and silence of so grave
an assembly who were present, at the verge of tears. They paid with
fervent suffrages the debt of their love and the obligations of their
loyalty to the prince, their deceased sovereign, whose obsequies they
were performing; and they refreshed their memories with his heroic
virtues, and his brilliant deeds in the tender and flowery years of
his age--gifts that assured us that he was glorious and triumphant in
the court of Heaven. The complement of the solemn splendor of that day
was the reverend father, Fray Vicente Argenta, of the seraphic order,
and past provincial of this province of San Gregorio. He, occupying the
pulpit, took up the space of an hour with a funeral panegyric, where
his eloquence had an opportunity to exercise itself in all its colors,
and in a beautiful variety of erudition, both divine and human. He
roamed through the spacious and extensive field of the virtues of
our most serene prince, with so impressive discourse adjusted to the
gravity and meaning of the subject, that he softened the hearts of the
people and even drew tears from their eyes, the faithful witnesses
of their grief. That solemn function ended with a responsary; and
then the procession was again formed, in the same manner and method,
until they left his Lordship at the palace. After having performed
the due courtesies, the gentlemen of the royal Audiencia, and of
the cabildos, tribunals, and religious communities bade one another
farewell, and returned to their houses, for the night had set in.

The following day, Tuesday, November 10, before sunrise, the care and
anxiety of the sacred families were awake, and all went to the royal
chapel with different choirs of musicians. There, at the various altars
assigned to them, they sang first each their mass, and afterward the
responsary in front of the royal catafalque. The mingling of so many
voices with the dead silence and serene quiet of the night made an
indistinct harmony and a confusion of echoes pleasant and agreeable
to the listeners, awakening at the same time in their hearts tender
affection and loving grief, which they consecrated to the glorious
memory of the prince whose obsequies were being celebrated. After
having performed this pious action they went to the palace, where they
waited until all who had taken part in the parade of the preceding
day had assembled. The parade was arranged and directed at the
appointed hour, with the same order and brilliant display as on the
preceding day, and took the same course until they entered the chapel
of the royal camp. There having filled the seats, and the order and
arrangements of the day before having been observed, the office for the
dead was commenced, and then the mass was sung. Doctor Juan de Ucles,
the venerable dean of the holy church, officiated, accompanied with
all solemnity and pomp, at an altar which was erected near the center
of the catafalque in front of the urn. He was clad in his vestments,
with precious ornaments; and on that day the music was better than
ever before, the musicians outdoing themselves in heightening its
beauties, and with the consonance and harmony of their voices rendering
it suitable to the majesty and high dignity of him who filled their
thoughts at that moment. The reverend father Francisco Colin, outgoing
provincial and present rector of the college of the Society of Jesus,
and qualifier of the Holy Office, sealed the glory of that day. He
mounted the pulpit, where he preached a sermon so well suited to the
subject in its eloquence, the depth of its arguments, the gravity
and maturity of its discourse, the profundity and erudition of its
fundamental proofs, and the solidity and thoroughness of its learning,
that he arrested the attention and even the admiration of those
present. Not less learnedly did he instruct them than he melted them
to affection and sorrow, quickening in them all, with his intellectual
vigor and his well-known pulpit eloquence, grief at having lost a life
so filled with virtues and so crowned with merits. Some responsaries
followed the sermon, and with that ended the funeral ceremonies for
our prince, whose memory will live immortal in our hearts. During
those two days was shown the devotion and loyalty of vassals ever
attentive to the service of their Catholic monarch, in recognition of
the rewards that they receive from his august hand. The same parade
was formed once more; and, leaving his Lordship at the palace, they
bade one another farewell, and returned to their houses.

The sumptuous and royal mausoleum, which was erected by the piety
of this noble community, occupies the last place in this brief
relation. In the description of it, one finds his eloquence fail
and he is dismayed, and he can find no excellence in his art that is
proportionate to the measure of its grandeur and majesty. The said
alcaldes-in-ordinary and two regidors assisted the fiscal auditor as
managers in the construction of that catafalque. They urged forward the
work, and attended to what was done by the best workmen and those who
were most skilled in the matter. Beyond doubt they saw fulfilled the
object of their vigilance, in the applause and admiration of all. It
was a work that seemed born of nature rather than a contrived invention
of art. In it gravity was surpassed, richness gleamed forth, majesty
was displayed, and method excelled; and its brilliancy was dazzling,
with so beautiful an arrangement and display of lights, without proving
an obstacle by their number or the lights paling, that grandeur was
never seen to greater advantage or majesty more resplendent.

Its ground space and arch occupied all the space of the principal
chapel, until it met the very ceiling of the temple; and had the
capacity of the place allowed more, the execution of so extensive a
contrivance would not have been confined to so narrow limits. The
height of the socle was six feet, and it was thirty-nine feet
wide. In the center of it arose the catafalque, which was octagonal in
form. It was composed of two structures made after the best ideas of
architecture. The first structure was composed of sixteen columns,
with foundations on a like number of bases and pedestals crowned
with beautiful and curiously wrought capitals. On top of them arose
the entablatures with their friezes, architraves, fluted mouldings,
and pediment of the arch crowned with balusters--all regulated to the
requirements of art without detracting one jot from the idea [that
they expressed]. That structure ended in a cupola, [4] which well
supplied the place of the sky, when it was seen reflecting the lights,
and bathed in splendor. The cornices, mouldings, representations
of fruit, mouldings above, and brackets, were of a bronze color,
so cunningly done that they appeared rather the work of nature than
the imitation of art. The pedestals and capitals, touched with beaten
gold, heightened the fiction of the bronze which the brush and hand
of the artist feigned and imitated. The shafts of the columns, with
their pedestals, friezes and architraves were so vivid an imitation
of jasper that one would believe them to have been cut from that
mineral; or that they had stolen the confused variety of its colors,
so that one's sight was mistaken in it. Their beauty was heightened by
the brilliancy of silver work or broken crystals with which they were
wreathed. In the center of that structure shone forth majestically the
urn, which was placed under a canopy of solid silver covered with a
rich violet cloth of gold, with two cushions of the same material, and
and her of white cloth of gold, on which reposed the royal crown. On
its pedestal was seen a stanza of ten verses, as follows:


    "Esta fatal urna encierra           This fatal urn encloses a
    fallida vna Magestad: ayer          dead majesty, but yestreen
    temida Deidad, oy breve             a reverenced deity, now a mere
    monton de tierra.                   heap of earth. Little gains
                                        he, and much he errs, who,
    Poco alcanca, y mucho hierra        cautious, does not note the
    quien prevenido, no advierte        mutability of his lot; for
    lo inconstante de su suerte;        Fate does not exempt the
    pues no reserva la Parca al         successor of a monarch from
    Sucessor de un Monarca del          the tribute of death." [5]
    tributo de la muerte."


At the four corners of the urn, outside the circumference of the
catafalque, were seen four kings-at-arms, of beautiful appearance
with their headpieces pulled down and gold maces on their shoulders,
with which one hand was occupied, while with the other they held up
the escutcheon of the royal arms embroidered with gold. The royal arms
were also stamped upon their breasts on their black corselets, girdled
with a beautiful variety of bands and edgings of gold. In the niches of
the first columns, which formed the front and faced the urn, upon their
fretted pedestals and spattered with gold rose the figures of Grammar
and Rhetoric with their emblems--so excellent in their workmanship
and lifelike in attitude that, although mute, the excellence of their
sculpture and make-up instructed [the beholder]. I do not describe the
grace of their shapes, the beauty of their features, the easy flow of
the hair, the undulations of the drapery, spangled with bits of glass,
and the other accompaniments of beautiful ornaments and fantasies of
art, in order not to weary [my readers] with prolixities. They were
significant of the excellent progress which the prince made in both
of those branches of study, and an illustrious trophy of his early
genius and marvelous intellect. Grammar had the following attached
to the placard of her pedestal:


    "La primera, que dicto al           "The first to dictate to Prince
    Principe Balthassar Preceptos       Balthassar the rules of
    de declinar, y de construir,        declension and construction was
    fuy yo.                             I. At death he declined in his
                                        last lesson; for it is a sure
    A la muerte declino en su           conclusion that in the art of
    postera licion, porque es           dying the construction of
    cierta conclusion; que en           living ends in declension."
    el arte del morir, la
    construccion del vivir acaba
    en declinacion."


Not less pithily and elegantly did Rhetoric explain her thought in
another stanza, of ten verses, as follows:


    "Yo ensene lo figurado, y lo        "I taught the figures and
    terso del estilo al Principe,       polish of style to the
    aquiem el hilo corto de la          Prince, whose thread of life
    vida, el Hado                       Fate cut short. But now
                                        already lies he disfigured
    Mas ya esta desfigurado en          in that dark tomb. Look at
    aquesta tumba oscura: mirale        him, robbed of his beauty;
    sin hermosura; y desde tus          and, from thy tender years,
    tiernos anos, Rhetoricos            learn in that figure
    desenganos aprende en esta          rhetorical errors."
    Figura."


The second structure was built upon the first, and it was no less
grave and majestic. There symmetry and proportion vied with beauty and
variety of colors, which the brush usurped from nature. It was composed
of twelve columns, made in imitation of jasper, with their pedestals,
architraves, and flying cornices; and these were closed above with
a cupola, adorned with spirals and volutes, which happily completed
the work. In the space between the columns of the facade or front,
and occupying their own pedestals, were set majestic and pleasing
figures of Arithmetic and Geometry, with their emblems. These statues
faced each other, and corresponded to Grammar and Rhetoric who were
in the first structure--in both their location and altitude, and in
the proportions and excellence of their sculpture. It was a glorious
blazon for our prince, who, although of so tender years, was able,
having cast aside sloth and childish amusements, to give himself up
to the exercise of branches of learning so useful, thus preparing for
success in the monarchical government of his kingdoms. Arithmetic had
an inscription on the placard of her pedestal, which read as follows:


    "A guarismo reducida la cuenta      "Reduced to a cipher is
    de Balthassar, no vino mas que      the account of Balthassar,
    a sumar diez y siete anos de        who at last added up but
    vida.                               seventeen years of life.
                                        The entry was concluded, and
    Concluyose la partida, y la         the account having been
    cuenta rematada se hallo la         ended, death was found to
    muerte pagada: porque se            be paid. For he so balanced
    ajusto de suerte, en la vida        his accounts with death in
    con la muerte, que no quedo         life that he did not remain
    a dever nada."                      at all indebted."


Geometry had a corresponding placard on her base, which read as
follows:


    "Balthassar con mi medida el        "Balthassar estimated the
    orbe entero midio: y no             whole world with my measure,
    contento passo a medir la           and, not content, he passed
    eterno vida.                        to measure eternal life. It
                                        is better to be able to
    La indistancia conocida,            measure the unknown distance
    que ay del vivir al morir;          between life and death
    es mejor saber medir lo             (which must endure eternally)
    que eterno a de durar con           with the rule of good works
    regla del bien obrar, con           and the compass of good
    compas del bien vivir."             living."


The space between the columns of this structure was occupied by
the prince (or rather, our sovereign)--the glorious shoot from the
Austrian trunk, and the beautiful flower which was the most brilliant
ornament of the august lily of Francia--who, because he had no room
in the entire sphere of his extensive monarchy, mounted gloriously,
by means of the wings of his brilliant and heroic virtues, to rule in
the heavens. His statue was so well conceived, and so commensurate with
the beauty of the architecture, that one would think it had a soul,
for it gave soul to the entire work. Not only did it take possession
of the eyes but also of the hearts [of the people] who rendered humble
adoration to the image of their prince. The prince was armed, with
breastplate and shoulder-piece embroidered with beautiful edgings of
gold, and his clothing was elegant and showy. In his right hand he
held an imperial and Caesarean crown. In his left hand was another
and royal crown, indicating him as sworn prince of the kingdoms of
Espana and of the empire of the Indias. On the base of the image was
an inscription which read as follows:


    "Iurado Principe fui; y Rey,        "I was the sworn prince, and
    y Emperador fuera: mas ay           would have been king and
    que la Parca fiera, embidia         emperor, had it not been that
    tuvo de mi! Hiriome cruel, y        savage Fate was envious of me.
    perdi el ser Rey, y                 Cruelly did she wound me, and
    Emperador: mas orto Imperio         I lost the kingship and the
    mejor por el perdido he             empire. But I have gained
    ganado: porque crece el             another and better empire
    embidiado, quanto la embidia        instead of the one that I lost;
    es mayor."                          for greater does the envied one
                                        become when the envy is greater."


By way of a finial, there was displayed on the ball at the center of
the cupola a proud and spirited figure of Monarchy--armed gracefully
but heavily with breastplate, shoulder-plate, greaves, cuisses,
gorgets, and bracelets; and wearing skirts of bronze color edged with
gold. Her head was encased in a morion surmounted by waving plumes
and beautiful crests. Over her breast was a rich sash that hung
loosely with airy grace and splendor. She was clad in a military
cloak, flowing in beautiful lines, and ornamented here and there
with embroidery in silver. In her right hand she gracefully held
a general's baton subduing with it by the jaw a rampant lion of
wonderful fierceness. With the left hand she clasped an escutcheon
of the royal arms, bound about with many spirals of gold edging and
beautiful ornaments. Massed about her feet were various military
instruments, and at her side were the standards and devices of
her glorious triumphs. All that variety composed a collection
of beauties which was the crown of the entire work. Two finely
carved pyramids arose gloriously at the two extremes of the socle,
which they confronted. They were as high as the catafalque, and
were painted in various colors, and spangled with bits of crystal,
and on them were many rows of candle-sockets. There were, besides,
other triumphal obelisks which were erected upon the cupola, and
garlanded the upper structure, which accompanied Monarchy as glorious
monuments. Many escutcheons of the royal arms and of the city were
seen hanging at regular intervals--some of them embroidered and
others in bas-relief, and all with much ornamentation of ribbons
and resplendent in colors. The brilliant display of candles,
(more than one thousand two hundred in number), enhanced all this
splendor. Most of the lights were candles of two, three, four, five,
or six libras, and were placed in their silver candlesticks, sockets,
and holders. Besides, there were a great number of codales, [6] which
were made for that purpose and filled the entire space of the plinth.

The funeral poems and eulogies with which all the royal chapel was
crowned were a glorious acquittance of the Muses, in the happy death
of their illustrious pupil. Some of these will be given in conclusion,
and with them will end [the account of] what was done at the funeral
ceremonies which this noble and loyal city of Manila performed for
its august prince. The public demonstrations corresponded, not to the
devotion with which so loyal vassals serve their Catholic sovereigns,
but to the condition in which this community finds itself at present,
worn out with so many calamities, oppressed by so many misfortunes, and
even bloodless and exhausted by the so continual invasions of enemies;
had not the divine hand been so favorable on its side, it would not
now have any shoulders to support so heavy a burden. May our Catholic
and invincible monarch accept these slight indications of the desire,
and the proofs of the affection, which all this community offers as
the obligation of its loyalty and in token of its grief, consecrated
to the happy memories of their prince, in this public manifestation;
if not suited to the grandeur of his person, it is to the generosity
of his royal breast and august blood. May Heaven extend his life for
the glory and increase of this monarchy, as we his humble and obedient
vassals desire. [7]

[Then follow the poems and eulogies above mentioned, which are written
partly in Latin and partly in Spanish.]






ROYAL AID FOR JESUITS ASKED BY MANILA CABILDO


Sire:

This city of Manila has informed your Majesty on other occasions how
the Order of the Society of Jesus, which came to these islands many
years ago with an ardent and apostolic zeal for the greater service
of our Lord and that of your Majesty, has been employed in the
conversion of souls; and that it has made and makes use of various
means extraordinarily and especially efficacious to allure souls
to the true knowledge of the matters of our holy Catholic faith,
as experience has proved and proves daily. Their modest prudence
and their admirable example of life and morals have verily aided in
that--qualities which, resplendent in them, as is right, our Lord has
permitted to shine out with great profit in the missions that they
have in charge in these remote islands, besides the great edification
that they cause in this city by their holy and excellent instruction.

We say the same in this letter, and, in particular, that the
said order, recognizing its extremely great need of religious, has
determined to send at the present time Father Diego Patino [8] as their
procurator-general--a religious of excellent abilities and learning,
and of long experience in everything relating to these islands, as
he has served your Majesty here for thirty years--in order that he
might petition your Majesty to be pleased to grant him permission to
bring as many religious as he can; for the said need is today greater
than what it was when Father Diego de Bobadilla came with the forty
men that he brought. For, since that time, sixty-one religious have
died here, and some of them of but moderate age, as the land and its
means of livelihood in general are so poor. The said order uses them as
sparingly as is demanded by the poverty that the land suffers at this
time. They are also placed under great restrictions by the continual
hardships and dangers of their missions, as they are so separated
in various islands--some of Moros and others of infidels--and by the
stormy seas and awful currents. In that said number of sixty-one who
have died, are nine priests who have gloriously given and sacrificed
their lives to our Lord at the hands of the infidels. Attested official
reports regarding three of these have been given before the ordinary
of the city of Santisimo Nombre de Jesus, while those of the remaining
six are being considered. For that reason the posts of the province
are suffering the said need of the workers who are necessary; for the
college of this city has one-half of the number of priests that it had
formerly, in order that they might attend to the so numerous duties
that they exercise--the school for children; chairs of grammar,
arts, and theology; and as preachers and confessors, because of
the great frequency with which people of all nations go to their
college for the administration of the holy sacraments of confession
and communion throughout the year, and especially during Lent. This
is something which does not receive due consideration; and with the
few religious that they have, they are necessarily very hard-worked,
for they have to go out day and night to confess the sick; to minister
in the hospitals, prisons, and girls' schools; and to the ordinary
preaching in the guardhouses--from which abundant fruit has been seen.

The colleges of the city of Santisimo Nombre de Jesus and of the port
of Yloylo, which formerly had five or six priests, do not now have
two apiece, so that it is impossible to attend to the many duties
that there present themselves.

Many of their Indian missions which formerly rendered two religious
indispensable, have now but one. In the great island of Mindanao,
nearly one-half of the civilized villages are without a minister, and
consequently many people die without the sacraments. It is necessary
for one minister to attend to one, two, three, or four villages which
are very distant from one another, when each village needs its own
priests. They do not hesitate, for all that, to go in the fleets
when opportunity offers, in the capacity of chaplains, and in the
shipyards where galleons are built. In those duties they have performed
well-known and special services to our Lord and to your Majesty.

By the industry of the said religious, and by the toil and hardships
which can be understood, they have aided the arms of your Majesty;
and the kings of Jolo and Mindanao, who were the ones who had rebelled
and were destroying the islands with their plunderings, were reduced
to peace, and today are increasing their friendship. The greatest
foundation for that friendship is the example furnished by the said
religious in their lands, and in the region where they have their
missions, such as the mild and fitting treatment that they employ,
according to their custom, having hopes [thereby] to gain the natives
for God; for they listen without any reluctance to the matters of
our holy Catholic faith from the mouths of the fathers, and learn
from them very willingly.

The poverty of the houses of the said Society is as great as that which
the inhabitants suffer, who are the fount whence originates all the
support of this order and all the others. For since they are so poor,
they cannot aid with the generosity that they might wish this and the
other orders, the colleges, hospitals, prisoners, and brotherhoods. For
that reason it was necessary to beg alms from door to door for more
than five years, in order that they might maintain the college of
this city and the few fathers in it; and the reason why they have
ceased to beg is not because the need is not the same and greater,
but because it is recognized that the citizens cannot continue their
aid. For that reason the said father procurator-general of the said
order is going [to Espana], as others have gone, as he can expect no
more aid here. Consequently, it will be necessary to make heavy loans
there, if your Majesty do not please to order that he be assisted
in that royal court, and in Sevilla and Mexico, with your usual
liberality. This city humbly petitions your Majesty to be mindful
of the said great need of ministers and the great fruit that they
obtain for our Lord and your Majesty, whose royal Catholic person may
the divine Majesty preserve, as is necessary to Christendom. Manila,
June twenty, one thousand six hundred and fifty-two. [9]


Matheo de Arceo
Jeronimo de Fuentes Cortes
Nicolas Fernandez Paredes
Cristobal Velazquez
Gabriel Gomez del Castillo
Pedro de Morales
Pedro de Almonte
Juan de Somonte
A. de Verastegui
Francisco Lopez Montenegro
Albaro de Castillo






CONDITION OF THE PHILIPPINES IN 1652


Summary of the memorial of the Jesuit Magino Sola [10] to Don Sabiniano
Manrique de Lara, governor of the Filipinas Islands, explaining the
needs of the islands.


In this memorial Magino Sola shows that the conquest cannot
be sustained, or extended to the points that are indispensable,
without arms and soldiers. That the conquest may be carried on, it is
necessary that the pay of the soldiers be met, as well as the other
obligations of the islands, which have been quite disregarded for
several years. Especial attention should be given to the evangelical
ministers, who ought to be helped by the military.

The scarcity and misery has been the cause of serious disturbances. The
father says: "The reason why the Chinese in Filipinas rose in revolt
was only because of the lack of the ordinary supplies for the soldiers,
so that the soldiers violently seized their food and clothing from
the houses and Parian of the Chinese. The merchants could not pay
the Chinese for the goods that they had bought from them for the
want of the same succor. [11] The reason why the natives in some
provinces have risen in insurrection and killed their ministers and
the Spaniards was only because, the ordinary supplies being lacking,
the Spaniards could not satisfy the natives for the food and goods
that they had given on credit, nor pay them for their work.

"The reason why the governor of those islands found himself obliged
to seize the money of their citizens and that of this city [i.e.,
Mexico], with so great loss to trade, was only for the reenforcement
of the presidios, and to avoid troubles which follow from not paying
the soldiers. Let one consider in how many years either the relief
for those islands has been lacking altogether, or has been sent in so
small quantity that it neither supplies the need, nor gives any hope of
paying the amount owed. That is the origin and beginning, if I do not
deceive myself, of all the many troubles and misfortunes that were and
are suffered by the inhabitants of those islands, since the year 1637,
when the trade began to dwindle because of the harshness at Acapulco
in the visitation of Licentiate Don Pedro de Quiroga y Moya--troubles
predicted, without doubt, by the ashes that rained down throughout
those islands in the year 1633, which was followed by a general
famine. In the year 1636, no ships came from those islands. In the year
38, the 'Concepcion' was wrecked in the Ladrones. In the year 39, the
two ships which were being sent back from this kingdom were lost on the
coast of Cagayan, and the Sangleys rose in revolt. In the year 1640,
the volcanoes burst open and some villages were entirely engulfed;
and many other damages resulted. It would appear that Heaven itself
was announcing new troubles and was sounding to arms against those
islands. For throughout that archipelago one could hear distinctly
aerial combats with artillery, and skirmishes with musketry.

"In the year 1644, occurred the so terrible earthquake which destroyed
and overthrew two-thirds of the temples and buildings of Manila, and
buried many persons among their ruins. In the year 46, the ship which
was returning from this kingdom to those islands was wrecked. In that
year and in that of 47 no ships could come here, for the Dutch held
those seas, and they were committing great depredations and robberies
in those islands. In the year 49, the ship 'Encarnacion' ran aground
while returning, and was lost with all the cargo aboard it, while some
of the people lost their lives. There was no ship in the year 1650,
for that which was coming had to put back into port. 'Nuestra Senora
de Guia' was almost wrecked among the islands when returning, with
great loss and damage on the goods carried. No help was sent to those
islands in the year 51-52. Let so many misfortunes be considered, and
whether so many losses demand extraordinary reenforcements. Let one
consider what must be the present gloomy conditions in those islands
since the reenforcements have failed there for so many years. Let one
consider whether an extraordinary and all-surpassing reenforcement
is now rightly due and demanded, and according to the command of his
Majesty. For, as appears by his decrees, he ordered in past years, on
hearing of some of the above-mentioned troubles, that those islands
be reenforced, even though the usual money and treasure should not
be sent to Espana for that purpose."

The father continues to speak of the sacrifices made by the citizens
of Manila because of the wars with the Dutch, not only giving money to
the royal treasury, but also military service in the Plaza de Armas
and manning the galleys with their slaves. In the time of Corcuera,
money was taken from the charitable fund of the Misericordia for
the maintenance of the infantry; and the gratings and balconies,
and even the bells, served for the making of nails and artillery.

Therefore, the father states the necessity to the islands of a governor
who should have as his chief aim the relief of the soldiers, and of
the other classes who received assistance from the state.

This relation is dated September 15, 1652.






JESUIT MISSIONS IN 1655


Father Fray Miguel Solana [12] of the Society of Jesus, provincial
of this province of Filipinas, in fulfilment of the royal decree,
of which he was notified by order of your Excellency, commanding him
to give accurate information of the religious whom the Society has
engaged in work in the missions of the Indians and of the villages
which are in their charge, declares that all the villages and missions
that they administer are located in the archbishopric of Manila and
the bishopric of the city of Dulce Nombre de Jesus, where there are
sixty-seven priests, distributed as follows:

There are seventeen in the archbishopric of the city of Manila.

There are four priests in the city of Manila, who are interpreters,
and are at the expense of his Majesty, so that they may attend to the
ministry to the Indians who go thither from all parts, as that place
is the capital of the islands. They also minister to the mulattoes
and those of other races. At present those priests are Fathers Antonio
Juan Sana, Jose Pimentel, Juan Bautista Suredo, Francisco Manuel.

In the village of San Miguel, which is inhabited by Tagalog Indians,
is Father Magino Sola.

In the village of Santa Cruz, which, is inhabited by Christian
Chinese, mestizos, free negroes, and Tagalogs, are two priests,
namely, Fathers Francisco Ferrer and Ambrosio de la Cruz.

The village of San Pedro, where Indians, Chinese, and mestizos who
work in the surrounding country congregate, has Father Francisco Colin.

In the residence of Antipolo, where there are other villages--namely,
Antipolo, Taytay, and Baras, with four visitas in the mountains--there
have always been three priests. At present there are two, namely,
Fathers Luis Espinelli and Ygnacio Zapata.

In the residence of Silang reside three priests, namely, Fathers
Ygnacio del Monte, Diego de Sanabria, and Juan de Esquerra. They
have charge of three villages, namely, Silang, Yndan, and Maragondon,
and their visitas.

In Cavite, the port of Manila, and in Cavite el Viejo, Fathers Andres
de Ledesma and Juan Lopez attend to all the people of every class.

There are two fathers in four settlements of the island of Marinduque,
namely, Fathers Luis Pimentel and Juan de Espinosa.




BISHOPRIC OF CEBU, OR OF SANTISIMO NOMBRE DE JESUS

In various islands of the bishopric of Cebu there are fifty priests
of the Society of Jesus, in the following residences and villages.

In the city of Cebu itself are two fathers, who attend to the village
of Mandaui and to the many Indians in the said city [of Cebu]. They
are Fathers Domingo Esquerra and Francisco Combes.

There are four fathers in the island of Bohol--namely, Luis Aguayo,
Pedro de Aunon, Bartolome Sanchez, and Francisco de la Pena--who attend
to all the villages of the said island, five in number, called Loboc,
Baclayon, Panglao, Ynabangan, and Malabohoc, and their visitas.




Island of Leyte

The Society has two residences in this island. The first is that of
Carigara, where there are six priests, namely, Juan de Avila, Juan de
la Rea, Pedro Carlos Cristobal de Lara, Andres Vallejo, and Antonio de
Abarca. They instruct twelve villages, namely, Carigara, Leyte, Jaro,
Barugo, Alangalan, Ocmug, Baybay, Cabalian, Sogor, Ynonangan, Panaon,
and Luca. Those villages are scattered through a space of sixty leguas.

The second residence in the same island is that of Dagami. Its villages
number ten, namely, Dagami, Malaguicay, Tainbuco, Dulag, Bito,
Abuyo, Palo, Basey, Guinan, and Balanguigan. They are in charge of
six fathers, namely, Carlos de Lemos, Diego de las Cuevas, Francisco
Luzon, Laudencio Horta, Juan de la Calle, and Jose de Leon.




Island of Samar and Ybabao

The Society has two residences in this island, which is a very large
one. One is located on the coast on the side toward Espana, and the
other on the opposite coast. The former is called the residence of
Samar, and the alcalde-mayor of this jurisdiction lives there. It
is composed of six villages, namely, Catbalogan, Calbigan, Paranas,
Bangahun, Ybatan, and Capul; and other smaller villages have been
reduced to these. The ministry of that residence is in charge of four
priests, namely, Fathers Melchor de los Reyes, Baltasar de Porticela,
Ygnacio de Alcina, and Matias de Montemayor.

The second residence is that of Palapag. The villages in its mission
number ten, namely, Palapag, Catubig, Burabur, Catalman, Bonbon,
Biri, Bacor, Tubig, Sulat, and Borongan. They are visited--with great
difficulty, because of the roughness of the seas--by six priests,
namely, Fathers Bartolome Besco, Simon Baptista, Diego Flores, Cosme
Pilares, Pedro de Espinar, and Jose Luque.




Oton

One father looks after the fort of Spanish infantry owned by his
Majesty. Another priest attends to the village of Yloilo, which is
composed of Indians and Sangleys. Those priests are Fathers Pedro de
Montes and Juan de Contreras. However, his Majesty gives a stipend
to only one.




Island of Negros

In four villages, namely, Ylog, the capital of the corregidor of the
island of Negros, Canancalan, Suay, and Ygsiu, with two other visitas
in the mountains, there are two fathers, namely, Esteban Jaime and
Francisco Deza.




Mindanao

His Majesty possesses two forts in this great island, that of
Yligan and that of Samboangan, to which two priests of the Society
attend. Father Ygnacio Navarro attends to that of Yligan, and Father
Nicolas Cani to that of Samboangan. There are also two residences in
the said island. The one lying toward the north is that of Dapitan. The
villages in its district are inhabited by Subanos. There are fourteen
churches, besides the one of the natives in the village of Yligan. They
are Cayaguan, Delanun, Bayug, Dapitan, Lairaya, Dipolo, Dicayo,
Duhinug, Piao, Licay, Manucal, Ponot, Silingan, Quipit, besides
some others of less renown. They are in charge of four priests,
namely, Fathers Jose Sanchez, Carlos de Valencia, Francisco Angel,
and Bernardino de Alison.

The second residence is that of Samboangan. It extends from the border
of Dapitan to Sibuguy, the boundary of King Corralat, which is a
distance of about fifty leguas. There are seventeen villages along
that coast, which are as follows: Siocon, Siraney, Cauit, Sibuco,
Bocot, Malandi, La Caldera, Baluajan, Masluc, Manicaan, Ducunney,
Coroan, Bitali, Tungauan, Sanguito, Boloan, and Bacalan. Besides
the above there are three [sic] villages of Lutaos near the fort
of Samboanga, namely, Bagumbaya, Buayabuaya. In addition to these,
that residence includes the island of Basilan, and also the island
of Jolo and the island of Pangotaran, and other islands where many
Christians live. Five priests are divided among all those places, and
sail in the fleet of Samboangan, and they are paid at his Majesty's
expense. Those priests are Father Pedro Tellez, Father Francisco
Lado, Father Francisco de Victoria, Father Juan Andres Palavicino,
and Father Juan Montiel.




Terrenate and Siao

Three priests are busied in these missions, by order of the
government. They are Father Vicente Choua, Father Francisco Miedes,
and Father Diego de Esquivel, and they are paid at his Majesty's
expense. Another one is needed to go and come thence, in order that
the said priests may be sustained.

The above sixty-seven priests are actual instructors and
missionaries. Besides them, there are eleven students in the college
of the Society, who are studying the language and becoming suitable
ministers to supply the place of those who shall die. There are also
five masters, who teach not only the members of the Society, but also
laymen. To their teaching are indebted the majority of the beneficed
clergy, secular priests, in the islands, besides many others who have
entered the orders. They also have charge of missions. Other priests
in the said province who are occupied in the care of the Spaniards
are not named in this paper, because they are not maintained at his
Majesty's expense. These are also used to fill the vacant places of
those who are lacking in the said missions either from sickness or
death; for no priest is permitted to work therein who does not know
one of the languages of the Indians who are in our care, so that all
may be instructors. In order that this may be given credit, I have
affixed my signature in this village of San Pedro, June 30, 1655.




The Mindanao Missions

The island of Mindanao [13] is the largest of these Filipinas
Islands, next to that of Manila. A great portion of it is yet to be
subdued. In that part which is conquered, the Society has charge of
the jurisdictions of Iligan and Zamboanga. The latter is the chief
presidio of the Spaniards, where a college is in the first years of
foundation, which has a rector and five priests who work in it. The
villages that it instructs are as follows: The village of the natives
and Lutaos [14] of the same Zamboanga, who number 800 families. In
place of paying tribute, they serve as rowers in our fleets, which
are quite usually cruising about in defense of our coasts and to
harass the enemy. The island of Basilan opposite the presidio of
Zamboanga and two leguas distant, has about 1,000 families--who,
attracted by the industry, affection, and care of the mission fathers
are most ready to show themselves for the Christian instruction,
but few appear at the time of collecting the tribute. The Christian
kindness of the Spaniards, which attends rather to the welfare of
the souls than to personal interest, is tolerant with those people,
as they are not yet entirely tamed and subdued, and because of the
danger of losing everything if they are hard pressed. That happens
not only in the island of Basilan, but also in all the other places
of that jurisdiction of Zamboanga, in the land of Mindanao. Those
places are: La Caldera, a port so named, two leguas from Zamboanga
toward the east, with about 200 families; Bocot, 250 families; Piacan
and Siraney, 100 families; Siocon, 300 families; Maslo, 100 families;
Namican, 30 families; Data, 25 families; Coroan, 20 families; Bitales,
40 families; Fingan, 100 families; Tupila, 100 families; Sanguinto,
100 families. All those places are at the southern part of Zamboanga,
and contain in all 3,251 families. The islands of Pangotaran and Ubian
are also included in that jurisdiction, which are two days' journey
from Zamboanga; and their inhabitants, now almost all christianized,
pay some kind of tribute when the fleets pass there. The islands of
Tapul and Balonaquis, whose natives are yet heathen. There are many
islets about Basilan which serve as a shelter for Indian fugitives,
many of whom are Christians, who on occasions come to the fathers for
the sacraments, and come at the persuasion of the fathers to serve in
the fleets. The island of Jolo also belongs to the same jurisdiction
of Zamboanga. It has many Christians, who remained there when the
Spanish presidio was withdrawn. The father ministers go at times to
visit them, and endeavor to attract them in order to administer the
holy sacraments to them. All of the people in these various places
reduced to families will be a little more or less than as follows:
in Pangotaran and Ubian, 200; in Tapul and Balonaquis, 150; in the
islets of Basilan, 200; in Jolo, with its islets, 500--all together
amounting to 1,000.




The jurisdiction of Iligan, with its residence of Dapitan

This jurisdiction runs along the eastern coast of the island, and
its territory extends for a distance of about sixty leguas. That
district includes the people of the Subanos, who are one of the
most numerous in the island, and one of the most ready to receive
the evangelical doctrine, as they are heathen and not Mahometans,
as are the Mindanaos. The village of Iligan, which is the capital of
the jurisdiction, where the alcalde-mayor and the infantry captain
of the presidio live, has about 100 tributes along the coast. The
district further inland, in another village called Baloy, has
about 200 families, although only 30 make their appearance for
the tribute. Another village called Lavayan, which is located on
the other side of Iligan and the bay of Panguil, has 50 tributes,
although there are [actually] twice as many more. Then comes Dapitan,
which is our center for residence and instruction, as it is one of
the most ancient Christian villages in these islands. Its inhabitants
went of their own accord to meet the first Spaniards who went out
for the conquest, and guided and served them in that conquest; and
they have always remained faithful in their friendship, for which
reason they have been exempted from paying tribute. There are about
200 families there, while another village in the interior at the head
of the same river has about 250. The villages located along the coast
toward Zamboanga are Dipoloc, with 300 families Duino, 600; Manucan,
100; Tubao, 100; Sindangan 500; Mucas, 200; Quipit, 300--in all 2,750
families This is the number estimated to be in this residence. Five
priests generally aid in their instruction. [15]






LETTER FROM THE ARCHBISHOP OF MANILA TO FELIPE IV


Sire:

When we became established in these islands, and they were divided
up into bishoprics, the division was not made with due regard
to convenience, and as the distance between the several parts
required. This was due either to a lack of information, or to the fact
that the conversion [of the heathen] had not yet been accomplished, nor
had various islands, inhabited by numerous souls, yet been discovered;
but these are now for the most part brought to our holy Catholic faith,
or are shortly to be so, as we hope. To this must be added the lack
of gospel laborers in regions which are distant more than a hundred
leguas in the sea; as are the Litaos of Zamboanga, the Mindanaos,
the Xoloans, the Borneans, and other nations, to which no bishopric
extends or can extend, nor is there any prelate to care for those
souls. Such a condition demands a remedy, and it appears to me best to
present the matter to your Majesty, beseeching you to be pleased to
apply the remedy which is fitting, by providing a prelate and bishop
to govern the church for so many souls. The most effective measure, it
appears to me, is to discontinue the bishopric of Camarines, and have
the bishop put over the said nations--considering that the former is
the smallest bishopric, and borders on this archbishopric of Manila;
and that the administration of the sacraments of confirmation, and
the visitations, could be attended to by land journeys [from here]. In
this way these souls will be provided with their needed nourishment,
and many will receive [spiritual] aid who today are neglected, or
who have hardly any ministers. It has seemed best to me to present
this matter to your Majesty, that you may command what shall seem
best. [In the margin: "Let the decision on the printed memorial,
number 47, 48, and 53, be executed."]

In the year 654 I gave an account to your Majesty of all the kingdoms
and islands in the neighborhood of these. In some of them your Majesty
has garrisons and government, as in that of Terrenate; others are
governed by their own native kings; and in all there are an infinite
number of Christians. But all of them are lacking in ecclesiastical
jurisdiction and spiritual administration, because priests have to come
to them from Goa; and on account of the want that they have suffered,
they find themselves in need of ministers. Considering the fact that
I am the nearest metropolitan in these islands, it seemed best to me
to make known these facts to your Majesty, so that, if it be your
pleasure, you may provide assistance from this archbishopric--as
is provided for the countries of Camboxa, Tunquin, Macazar, Sian,
which are all governed by their native kings and are inhabited by an
infinite number of baptized persons, who are afforded salvation in
the same manner and way as was done in the year 654 in the islands
of Terrenate, where the power of your Majesty is established. Your
governor, Don Sabiniano Manrrique de Lara, withdrew the curacy which
was established at Malaca, as it seemed expedient for the service
of your Majesty; and at that time he sent ministers to maintain that
Christian community until your Majesty should determine otherwise, or
his Holiness should make provision [through me], as the metropolitan
nearest at hand, for the saving of these souls. [In the margin:
"The same as in the preceding clause."]

I also relate to your Majesty how, through the lack of bishops which
prevails in the kingdoms near these islands (whose ecclesiastical
government has been administered by the archbishopric of Goa), several
Portuguese candidates, both secular priests and religious, have come
to this city from Macam and other regions, to be ordained. As a vassal
of your Majesty, I decided not to ordain them without special advice
from your Majesty; I, therefore, informed your governor of this,
and have ordained none of them. That I may execute in this and in
everything else the will of your Majesty, I beg you to be pleased to
command me what I must do. May God protect your Catholic and royal
person, granting greater kingdoms and seigniories. Manila, July 30,
1656. [In the margin: "This question was found in another letter
from the archbishop. Have the fiscal examine it at once, and have it
brought with everything to the Council." "The fiscal, having examined
this clause of the letter, says that the Council might be pleased to
command that the archbishop give information as to the manner in which
those mentioned in this clause came to be ordained--whether with or
without dismissory letters, and from whom they bring them--so that with
this he may make such request as is suitable. Madrid, March 2, 660."]

Miguel, archbishop of Manila.

[Endorsed: "Manila, July 30, 656. To his Majesty. The archbishop
informs us concerning various subjects, which are noted on the margin,
namely: the great number of Christians who are in those islands,
and the few laborers; much besides bishops and ministers is needed
for their government and instruction; and he proposes other matters
which should be decided." "June 6, 659. Memorial, number 47, 48,
and 53." "Session of the Council of March 4, 1660. Let his Majesty be
advised that the Council have considered what the archbishop of Manila
writes in the last clause of this letter of July 30, 1656, in regard
to his refusing to ordain the religious and secular priests who come
to his archbishopric from the Portuguese who are in the territory of
the archbishopric of Goa, on account of the state in which Portugal
is; and, besides, what the fiscal answered on this point, after he
had seen the letter--namely, that the archbishop should be asked to
give information in regard to the manner in which these men came to be
ordained, whether with or without dismissory letters, and from whom
they bring them, so that the proper request may be made. Although
orders to this effect have been issued, it has seemed best to the
Council to render account to your Majesty of what this information
contains, on account of the bearing which it has generally upon
the affairs of Portugal; so that, in so far as this knowledge is
important to him, such consultation may be held as shall appear most
expedient." "Let the Council take immediate action on this, so that
their decision may go with the fleet."


Don Juan Gonzales
Don Pedro de Galbez
Don Miguel de Luna


Dated on the same day.]






TWO JESUIT MEMORIALS, REGARDING RELIGIOUS IN THE MOLUCCAS, AND THE
INQUISITION


Sire:

I, Francisco Vello of the Society of Jesus, procurator-general of
the province of Filipinas, who am at present in this court, deem
it advisable for the service of your Majesty to make the following
statements:

The governor of Filipinas, for certain reasons and motives that he
had, withdrew from the Terrenate forts the rector of a house of the
Society of Jesus which the province of Cochin in Eastern India had
there from the beginning of those conquests, and placed there instead
religious belonging to my province of Filipinas. The said rector acted
as commissary of the Inquisition for the tribunal of Goa, as long as he
was there; but when he was withdrawn those forts were left without any
commissary. I gave testimony regarding that to the inquisitor-general,
so that he on his part might procure from your Majesty the appointment
for those forts of a minister--a matter so important for the purity
of our holy faith--since your Majesty strives, as your chief glory,
to preserve it in all the kingdoms and provinces of your monarchy;
and it is most necessary in them, as they are in the midst of many
sectaries, and, as those people are very warlike, they are more ready
to receive errors.

Everything relating to the Inquisition of the Filipinas is carried to
the tribunal of Mexico, with great hardships to the persons, expense
to the treasury, and the risk of losing everything--sometimes years
being spent in questions and answers, and the enemy capturing (as
happened at various times) not only the records but the criminals
as well. And when affairs are settled, whether the criminals are
punished or freed, they are left about two thousand five hundred
leguas from their home and abode, and sometimes it is impossible
for them to return. One would think that, since it was considered an
inconvenience for the vassals of the Canarias (who are distant only
two hundred odd leguas from Hespana) to go to Sevilla, and a tribunal
was established there for their alleviation, there is not less but
much [more] reason in the Filipinas for your Majesty to be pleased
to order that a tribunal be erected in the city of Manila, as was
done in the Canarias. Moreover, supposing that Goa return later to
the allegiance of your Majesty, it is as difficult to take criminals
and records from the forts of Terrenate to that place as to Mexico;
and, in proportion to the dangers of the sea, much greater.

At present, even if the road from Terrenate to Goa were short and easy,
it is not right to take the faithful vassals of your Majesty to be
punished by rebels, and by secret decrees, in districts so distant
from one another. And if they are not taken--as they have not been
taken for many years, during which acts have been fulminated--evildoers
remain without punishment, and the one evil is as bad as the other. All
that will be avoided by establishing a new tribunal in Manila. By that
erection no new expense will be added to the royal treasury other than
that of the inquisitor, and the amount given him will be proportioned
to the income of the country, and can be obtained by assigning a
certain number of Indian tributes to the royal treasury for that
purpose; and he can afterward be advanced to bishop and archbishop,
with greater experience than those have who go from other regions. The
other officials do not receive a salary. I trust in God, and the
piety of your Majesty, that provision will be made for this in the
manner most to our Lord's glory and the welfare of your vassals, etc.

Francisco Vello [16]


Sire:

I, Francisco Vello, procurator-general of the Society of Jesus for
the province of Filipinas, declare that, on account of the information
that I have had from those islands and from all parts of the Orient,
I have deemed it necessary to represent to your Majesty that, when the
forts of Terrenate were restored from the possession of the Dutch in
the year six hundred and four, the temporal government of those forts
(which was before under Eastern Yndia), was administered by Filipinas,
while the ecclesiastical and spiritual was left to the said Yndia,
as it belonged to the bishopric of Malaca, and the Inquisition to the
tribunal of Goa, and a house of my order to the province of Cochin or
Malabar (which is one and the same thing)--your Majesty paying both
the expenses of the military and the salaries of the ecclesiastical
persons from your royal treasury of Manila.

Because of the troubles that Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera
recognized while governor, after the insurrection of Portugal and their
conquests, he had the religious withdrawn--leaving only the vicar,
because of the jurisdiction--which could not be administered by secular
officials, but by those to whom it belongs. After Don Diego Faxardo
assumed that government, he again introduced Portuguese religious
there, and withdrew those of my province. [That plan was pursued]
until Don Saviniano Manrrique de Lara assumed the same government,
who, on account of information from the warden of those forts, again
withdrew the religious from Yndia, and likewise the vicar--entrusting
to my provincial that administration and house, at the advice of the
archbishop of Manila. That charge was immediately accepted, in order
to serve your Majesty; and it has been thus far fulfilled.

Although those presidios and the king of Tidore (who is a Christian)
and the people of those districts have persons to administer the holy
sacraments to them, their ministers have no jurisdiction, as it has
to emanate from the ordinary of Malaca. In the same way there is no
commissary of the Inquisition, as the tribunal of Goa thus far has
jurisdiction there. Malaca, to which the said forts belonged, has
been occupied by the Dutch since the year six hundred and forty-one;
and our holy Roman faith is no longer exercised there, nor has there
been left any city or village of that bishopric which could obtain
that see. Also is there no hope of the restoration of what has been
lost, according to the trend of the times. Because of that loss the
jurisdiction of Terrenate had to be transferred either to the bishopric
of Cochin--which is the nearest one, being distant thence six hundred
leguas--or to the metropolitan of Goa, which is seven hundred leguas
from Malaca, while the first one is one thousand three hundred leguas
and the second one thousand four hundred from Terrenate. Consequently,
on account of the long navigation, they cannot be furnished with
supplies from there, as their proper administration requires. For
that same reason they were not visited for more than twenty years
by any ordinary or ecclesiastical superior, as is commanded by the
councils. Besides the above difficulty there is another one, namely,
that no people sail from Yndia to the Moluccas except the Dutch, as the
latter have gained possession of those islands and of their drug trade,
which they defend from all, most especially the Portuguese of Yndia.

Consequently, it seems to be necessary that the spiritual affairs of
those forts be placed in charge of the archbishop of Manila (although
they are nearer to the bishopric of Zebu), because of the ships which
continue to carry reenforcements, with a voyage of three hundred leguas
or a little more or less. No other object is intended in this than the
welfare of those Christians; and your Majesty will obtain no other
advantage than that of maintaining our Roman faith in its purity in
that most remote district of the world, among so warlike nations as
are the Japanese, Chinese and Tartars, Tunquinese, Cochin-chinese,
Cambojans, Siamese, Joloans, and others who almost surround it. For
that alone so great a sum of money is spent as is known, not only in
those forts but in all those islands. It has been proved to be very
agreeable to God because of the extent to which the holy gospel has
spread among them, for they are the best fields of Christian effort of
all the conquests of the monarchy. It is well seen that He favors it
in the continual victories that your Majesty's arms have had in those
regions on sea and land, although it is so distant a member of the body
of this monarchy. May God prosper this monarchy well with fortunate
victories for the welfare and increase of our holy religion. [17]

Francisco Vello






JESUIT PROTEST AGAINST THE DOMINICAN UNIVERSITY

Memorial of Miguel Solana, Jesuit, petitioning the king not to
allow the Dominican friars to carry out their purpose of founding a
university in Manila.


Sire:

Miguel Solana of the Society of Jesus, and procurator-general of the
province of the Philippine Islands, makes the following declaration,
namely: That he has been shown a memorial presented by the father
master Fray Mateo Vermudez, [18] procurator-general of the college
of Santo Tomas in the city of Manila, wherein for reasons therein set
forth he asks that the ambassador at Rome be authorized in writing to
petition his Holiness to erect a university of general studies, and to
incorporate and establish it in his college as above--so that, should
there hereafter be founded separate schools and general [studies],
the said university is to be transferred to them, in which may be
taught three other branches of learning--namely, canon law, civil
law, and medicine, as more fully set forth in the said memorial,
the meaning whereof to be taken for granted. Your Majesty will be
pleased to order that the same be stricken from the judicial acts,
and furthermore, that no other petition of similar import be admitted,
with the declaration to the opposing party that, inasmuch as the matter
has already been decided [cosa juzgada] in favor of the college of San
Ignacio, which the Society conducts in the said city, they are barred
from further relief. All which I petition for, for reasons to be more
fully described hereafter, whereon I found the necessary petitions
and prayers, which, as is evident and appears, will be acknowledged
throughout the whole line of reasoning and the acts of the suit that
has been entered by the said college, as well as from the allegations
and claims deduced therein. The claim of the college of Santo Tomas,
in brief, is the establishment of a university in order to nullify
the right and privileges of the Society and of the said college of
San Ignacio, whereon the Audiencia of Manila has acted and delivered
judgment--which acts, on being brought before the Council on appeal,
were ended definitively in the trial and review of the said suit. The
case, therefore, is finished and closed, and for no reason can or
should it be reopened, either in whole or part. Wherefore it results
that the claim now introduced is faulty with no other purpose than to
burden the said Society with new suits and expenses; as the case, as
stated, has been decided and closed, and the reopening of it barred,
as being a matter already determined. The said memorial therefore
should not be admitted, nor a hearing granted to the claim advanced
therein, which should be refused further consideration. And to the
end that his plea be drawn up according to the requirements of law,
and for the better confutation of the reasons advanced in the said
memorial, he [i.e., Solana] maintains that what was petitioned for and
obtained by the opponents in the warrant (which was secured through
the aid of money) was the establishment of a university like those
at Avila and Pamplona. But in order to avoid raising the question
of temporal privileges with the necessary expenses therefor, as well
as because the paper to be sent to Rome had to be of similar tenor,
it was trickily drawn up, and the petition for a university made to
read as for one like Lima and Mexico, whereof the reasons advanced
in the said suit were set forth in full form, whence it follows that
it is not entitled to any further consideration; especially so, since
the concession made by his Holiness was according to the tenor of the
clear and truthful petition that had been presented to him, without
taking into consideration the ulterior meaning that through deceit
and malice had been introduced into the report and the subsequent
decree thereon. Nor should so important a defect be glozed over with
the assertion that the said paper bore the signatures of the president
and the members of your Council (whereof there is no evidence) while
the very contrary is evident in the acts. [Let it be noted] that
considerable time has passed, while, moreover, the proceedings have
taken for granted the certainty that those acts should have in similar
matters--besides the facts that, in the endeavor to secure a bull, the
accompanying statement was vague in that no mention was made therein
of the authority possessed by the Society of conferring degrees by
perpetual and lawful right; and that in the Council acknowledgment was
made (with full cognizance of the case and of whatever was proposed in
the said memorial and papers), that they were in favor of the college
of San Ignacio and its degrees and students, and not of those of Santo
Tomas. Moreover, the bulls and apostolic privileges that have been
enjoyed by the Society are in legal and recognized form, and have
been admitted and certified to in all the audiencias and tribunals
of the Indias, as is notorious; they were passed by the Council, and
were presented in the suit, and acknowledged as being of value; while
what was advanced by the said father procurator whereon were issued
the decisions and writs of the Audiencia of Manila and the Council,
was held as gratuitously asserted and without foundation. As early as
the year 26, the said bulls were presented to the president, governor,
and captain-general, at that time Don Juan Nino de Tabora--from which
the subreption latent in the bull which they obtained is inferrible,
for in the form wherein it was granted, they would not have secured
it if his Holiness had had the evidence of the right and [fact of]
possession on the part of the said Society. Nevertheless, the said
father procurator-general seeks and claims to have all the defects
therein corrected through the issuance of new letters and bulls,
in order that the said Society may thereby be deprived and despoiled
of its said just privileges and legal titles. In virtue of these it
is toiling to the great benefit and advantage, both spiritual and
temporal, of the vassals of your Majesty who are resident in those
regions and provinces, and who again and again have sought to have
the Society upheld in its said right, the same having been duly
acknowledged and certified, of which there cannot be the slightest
doubt. In order to make plain the baselessness of the arguments that
are raised against the said bulls, it suffices to say that they have
been presented in legal, authentic, and unchallengeable shape, whereof
the evidence is wholly undeniable; and have been recognized as such
by the Council, by which they have been accepted with all needed
circumstances and requirements--so that, had any further scrutiny
been needed therein, the same would not have been neglected, nor,
[in such case], would the audiencias of the Indias have allowed them
to be cited. Moreover in the suit now pending in the Council, between
the college of the Society and that of Santo Tomas in sequence of
the one conducted before the royal Audiencia resident in that city
[of Manila], the fiscal of Santa Fe [in Mexico?] required that those
bulls should be recognized and fulfilled; and although opposition
thereto was offered on the part of the college of Sante Tomas,
the acts of the trial and the review show that a writ of execution
was issued empowering the Society to make full and complete use of
the same by conferring degrees, as it had been doing, the college
of Santo Tomas being enjoined therefrom. In consideration of this
it is not right to grant the father procurator a hearing. Besides,
in that suit many other arguments and reasons were brought forward
in favor of the Society. Wherefore, if this had not already been
decided, finished, and closed, as is the case, a petition would
be presented to have all the acts relative to the same brought
together, or that a report should be drawn up of the proceedings
in the trial. With this concurs the fact, as said, that they were
passed by the Council, of which a cedula to that effect has been
presented. Moreover in the said suit before the Audiencia of Manila,
the cedula of November 25 of [the year 16] 45 having been offered in
opposition thereto, full recognition was had of this article; and in
the trial and review of the case the claim was refused consideration,
since the truthfulness and promptness wherewith the Society was and
is proceeding was in evidence--as also was its right use of the said
bulls and its conferral of degrees, of which recognition and discussion
was made before all parties in this said suit. Besides, to assert
that the powers to confer degrees were revoked by Pius V and Sixtus
V is contrary to established fact, inasmuch as, so far as relates,
appertains, and belongs to its privileges and bulls, these not only
were not withdrawn from the Society, but rather were confirmed most
amply, with the grant besides of new favors and graces. Wherefore,
as regards this plea all question is ended, while the revocation
to which he refers concerns other parties, and other intents and
purposes, which do not belong to or affect this suit relative to the
firm and unalterable right of the Society of Jesus. The said father
procurator-general, then, should know what is so notorious that even
in Rome, where the Society has its principal university, it has been
conferring degrees on its students without any opposition whatever,
which would not be the case were the bulls in any way detective. But
this [claim] is wholly gratuitous and censurable, as the said decrees
of execution were issued by the audiencias and councils; nor should it
be offered in opposition on the part of the college of Santo Tomas;
nor should an attempt be made to reopen what has been resolved and
decided legally with such full knowledge of the case. And the report
which he files is also opposed to established fact, in his statement
that the city [of Manila] petitioned for the foundation of a university
in the said college; for no such paper was written, nor has one been
discovered, to the best of our knowledge. Nay, the evidence on the
contrary goes to show that a special petition was drawn up in both
the general and the particular interest of that community wherein the
said Society is established and the use and exercise of its said bulls
maintained. For this reason, when the Audiencia ordered the trial to
be held, the citizens displayed so much regret for this disturbance of
the Society, that the cabildo and magistracy felt obliged to repair to
the governor and most urgently petition him to interpose his authority
to have the suit remanded to the Council. They asked that no change
[in regard to the college] be made, and that he would petition your
Majesty on their behalf not to sanction the finding of the said act;
or, in event of this being done, to extend the same grace also to the
Society of Jesus, in opposition to whose growth it was not right or
within reason (with due respect) to have the question decided through
the expenditure of money, and that the petty amount of two thousand
pesos. Because of the harm to the public welfare and the service
of your Majesty, besides other cogent reasons, any similar proposal
should be regarded with disfavor and refused a hearing. Moreover, it
[i.e., the Jesuit college] was sought for and granted on the fiat of
the Conde de Castrillo, through whose agency this grant was secured,
and confirmed by the Council. This they secured and obtained fully and
sufficiently, and their warrants have been put into effect; whence it
results that (even though the intent [of these] had not prevailed and
been put into execution, as it has been; even though the res judicata
bars further action, as it does) no recourse is open to them [i.e.,
the Dominicans], nor means that can be of use for introducing the said
claim, nor ground for complaint--especially since in virtue of the bull
they enjoy many and valuable prerogatives which were not contained in
the temporal privileges which they exercised in former times. Then
the archbishop gave them their degrees, which were recognized only
in the Indias, while now these are recognized everywhere, being
conferred by the rector of the college, which has other officials,
insignia, and preeminences of special import. Nor do they [i.e.,
the Dominicans] refrain from nor content themselves with disparaging
in every way the degrees and students of the Society of Jesus, whom
they deprive and despoil of their just titles and rights. Such is
the reason wherefore your Majesty should not give them a hearing were
the subject one entitled to a hearing; such the reason wherefore the
Council, although wrongly the contrary is maintained, has not declared
the college of Santo Tomas to be a university--since what it did do,
as is evident in the acts, was to order and declare that both colleges
use their bulls. Thus the opposing party is deprived of nothing; nay,
especially since, as is stated in the petition and prayer drawn up for
that purpose, it was in order to obtain such powers as are held by the
universities of Avila and Pamplona. They should not now seek, because
of the illegal act of the secretary, to have those powers extended
and enlarged to those [possessed by the colleges] of Lima and Mexico,
even though his Holiness had not reduced them to the form, limits,
and branches of knowledge, referred to in the said bull--to whose
tenor and decision one must submit without therefore giving undue
significance to the word academia used therein. For, without now
raising any question as to the effects thereof, the burden of this
treatise simply states that whether a college be a university or not
depends on the will of him who is empowered to grant it after inquiry
into the fundamental grounds of the matter. In the said lawsuit,
the truth was established; accordingly it is neither expedient nor
fitting to discuss new points, as whether the term academia, or that
of university, or something else be used. Besides, as already stated,
the city of Manila did not petition for a university as alleged
by the opposite party. The petitioner to that effect in the paper
referred to was the said college itself, which secured the grant with
limitations as in the decree. Wherefore, even if the said bull had not
been secured, there would have been no cause for complaint, inasmuch
as they paid the said two thousand pesos with your Majesty's consent;
nor could a new petition at any time be presented, one already having
been granted, even though they had not obtained the bull.

But without calling in question the matter which is already
settled, or his other representations which he insists on and firmly
maintains--without appearance, however, of abandoning his claim in
case of its rejection--the point that now may be discussed relative
to a regular university and general studies is as follows: Has the
college of Santo Tomas the needed requisites therefor? or are there
new conditions by which their claim can be supported, and which would
deprive your Majesty of all ground [for refusing it], although you do
not support it? In case a new foundation should be deemed advisable,
this more suitably should be established in the said college of San
Ignacio, for the reasons to be gathered from the acts of the said
trial, from the reports that have been made in favor of the Society,
and from the excellent progress which, as is proved by experience, has
resulted from their learning and teaching in those islands, with the
general applause and approval of their inhabitants and citizens. All
this [the writer] again brings forward in the interest of this plea;
and he represents that the college of San Ignacio is one founded by
your Majesty, and the earliest, and is older than that of Santo Tomas;
he also asserts its precedence and other prerogatives adjudged to it
in the said trial. Its teaching staff has been, as it will continue
to be, adorned with the needed endowments and learning; and that the
Society will, as is usual in such cases, carefully teach and train
youth follows from its statutes; and the results of its labors in this
direction are well known. For its teachers it has never demanded any
fees, nor have they any other reward than the luster which is derived
from the learning and uprightness of the scholars. They need no royal
endowment for their support and maintenance, nor will they ever apply
for one. From the revenues enjoyed by the college and the favor shown
by your Majesty from the beginning of their earliest establishments
they will maintain themselves and be gladly occupied in the fulfilment
of this duty. Your Majesty will be their only patron and will give them
such statutes as he shall please for their better government. Moreover,
without having the royal exchequer put to the slightest expense,
application will be made to his Holiness for bulls whereby this
institution may win greater renown; while it will be subject in all
things to the behest and commands of your Majesty and your Council,
as ever has been the notable course of the Society of Jesus in those
regions, in order that you may clearly see and understand its mode of
procedure and how consistent are its actions. As a favor from your
Majesty, it prays with the utmost earnestness and respect that you
will be pleased to command that the papers and reports bearing on
this matter in the secretary's office be examined and compared--not
only those from the present governor, but those from his predecessor;
and especially what the latter wrote in the year 49, on the occasion
of his referring [to the Council] this lawsuit. Therein will appear
the arguments in opposition to the college of Santo Tomas, and
the decisions thereon--among others, the fact that its graduates
and students have to take oath that they will uphold the teachings
of Saint Thomas [of Aquino]. As a matter of fact, in the renowned
universities of the world an oath is taken to defend whatever the
consensus of Christian piety has decreed--as during these days was
sworn to amid public demonstrations and applause, in the presence
of your Majesty--relative to the mystery of the conception of the
most holy Virgin our Lady. [19] Besides this, by express enactments
of law they are forbidden under censures to read and teach other
faculties and sciences than those of philosophy and theology. It is
therefore unbecoming and in conflict with the said enactments, as well
as incompatible with their institute and profession, which forbid them
to conduct public universities in the form now claimed. It, moreover,
is in manifest prejudice to the right conferred by bulls and privileges
on the Society of Jesus, as well as to what has been decreed in its
favor with so much toil and expense. And, besides, it may be remarked
that the establishment of a university, with courses of medicine,
and canon and civil law, in the convent of Santo Domingo would be
an improper and absurd proceeding, as they have no teachers who are
acquainted with the first principles of these sciences, in default of
which there could be but poor instruction, whereas the law requires
that the teachers thereof be very learned, besides being endowed
with singular talents and qualifications. As the matter is well and
generally known, it may be observed that in the Philippines and the
city of Manila, where the only persons who treat the sick are Chinese,
there is no graduate physician; for no one wishes to go thither from
Mexico, as he would be unable to get a living. As regards canon and
civil law, graduates therein might go thither every year, if only they
could obtain a living and find scholars to whom they might lecture
and give instruction. But the city of Manila is so small and confined
that--as is evident from the paper here presented with the necessary
formalities from Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corquera--it numbers no more
than two hundred and seventy citizens. Behold then, your Majesty, under
what conditions and in what sort of a place it is sought to establish
a regular university of sciences and arts, with chancellor, rector,
secretary, beadle, and other officials and teachers who make up its
stall--for whose support would be needed twelve thousand ducados of
income, no matter how moderate the salaries; whereas, if a portion
of this were applied in increasing the number of settlers, with
a consequent saving of burdens on the royal exchequer, this would
redound to the greater benefit and service of your Majesty. With
consideration of the same and whatever besides in fact or law may be
of moment, the writer prays and beseeches your Majesty to order the
said memorial to be rejected, and allow no other of similar import
to be received--with the addition of the declaration, if needed, that
the case has already been settled, and the claim is not entitled to a
hearing. In conclusion, without prejudice, however, to his plea nor
with abandonment of the same, he [i.e., Solana] prays that, should
a university be established, it be founded in the college of San
Ignacio of the said Society; and on each and every matter relating
thereto he files all the petitions needed therefor, wherein he will
receive favor with justice, etc. [20]






DESCRIPTION OF THE PHILIPINAS ISLANDS [21]


Although it appears by the information above that in regard to the
Philipinas Islands (which belong to the district of the Inquisition of
Mexico) it has not been possible to arrange the itinerary, because of
the great distance thither from this kingdom; and that the inquisitor
visitor, Doctor Don Pedro de Medina Rico, charged its execution by
letter to the father-definitor, Fray Diego de Jesus Maria, discalced
religious of St. Augustine, and calificador of the Holy Office, as
he had labored more than twenty years in the said islands--the said
letter being sent in duplicate in the two ships that left this kingdom
in this present year of one thousand six hundred and fifty-eight--yet,
because the said visitor has heard of the great knowledge of those
regions that is possessed by Father Maxino Sola, a religious of
the Society of Jesus (who is at present in the City of Mexico, and
about to go to the kingdoms of Castilla as procurator-general of the
province of Philipinas), in order that the said itinerary might be
arranged with greater despatch, and so that in the interim until the
coming of the person who shall settle things in those islands, there
may be such relation as we are able to have in this book (which must
be sent at the first opportunity to the most illustrious and most
reverend inquisitor-general and the members of the Council of the
general Holy Inquisition), his Lordship ordered me, Ygnacio de Paz,
that, continuing the work, I should set down the information given
by the said Father Maxino Sola. And, in obedience to that order,
that relation which I have been able to procure with the exercise of
all care and minuteness, is as follows.




Archbishopric of Manila

The city of Manila, from which the said archbishopric (as well as all
the island) takes its name, occupies the same site as did the largest
settlement of the natives of this island when they were heathen,
who called it by the same name. It was conquered and happily united
to the Spanish crown on May nineteen, one thousand five hundred and
seventy-one (the same year of the establishment of the tribunal of
the Holy Office of the Inquisition in Mexico) by the valiant Miguel
Lopez de Legazpi, native [of Guipuzcoa: blank space in MS.], and a
former citizen of the said City of Mexico, whom his Majesty honored
with the title of adelantado of the said islands. The city lies
in fourteen degrees of north latitude. The governor lives there,
who is the captain-general and president of the royal Audiencia
which resides in that city, and consists of four auditors who are
also alcaldes of the court, a fiscal, and the chief constable of the
court. Their archbishop and the ecclesiastical cabildo live there,
the latter consisting of the accustomed dignitaries--three canons
(for one of the four canonries there was suppressed by his Majesty),
two racioneros, two medio-racioneros, one secular cura, who has
charge of the Spaniards, and another who has charge of the natives
and mulattoes. They are building at the cost of his Majesty a temple
for a cathedral, as that which they had before fell in the ruin caused
throughout those islands by the earthquakes in the year one thousand
six hundred and forty-four [sic; sc. five]. There is a royal chapel in
the Plaza de Armas for the funerals and ministry of the soldiers, and
it has a chief chaplain and six secular chaplains, all at his Majesty's
expense. There is a commissary of the tribunal of the Holy Office,
counselors, calificadors, a chief constable, and other employes. The
said commissary is necessary in the said city, and he will suffice for
all the jurisdiction of the archbishopric of Manila, with the exception
of the port of Cavitte. Because of the vessels that anchor at the said
city from foreign kingdoms, and because it is not easy to cross the
bay during certain months of the year, it is advisable for that city
to have its own commissary, as will be related later in the proper
place. There is also need of the chief constable, four familiars,
and two notaries. [There is] a house of the Misericordia with its
temple and two seculars as chaplains, where marriages are provided
[for girls]. There is another house, called Santta Pottenciana, with
its chapel and secular chaplain, where the wives of those who travel
and leave the islands in his Majesty's service are sheltered. There
is a royal hospital for the treatment of Spaniards, with its chapel
and secular chaplain. The convents of religious in the said city of
Manila, in regard to the seniority of their establishment there, are
as follows: the calced religious of St. Augustine; the discalced of
St. Francisco, of the advocacy of St. James; those of the Society of
Jesus; those of St. Dominic; and the discalced of St. Augustine--all
with convents and churches of excellent architecture. In addition,
the fathers of the Society of Jesus have a seminary with some twenty
fellowships under the advocacy of St. Joseph, with a university from
which students are graduated in all the faculties. The religious of
St. Dominic have another seminary, with not so many fellowships, under
the advocacy of St. Thomas, where they also graduate students in all
the faculties. In both, lectures are given in grammar, philosophy,
and theology. There is a convent with religious women of St. Clare,
who are in charge of the religious of St. Francis; a hospital of
the Misericordia for poor people and slaves of the Spaniards, the
administration of which is in charge of the religious of St. John
of God, whose convent is located at the port of Cavite. There is
a cabildo and magistracy, with two alcaldes-in-ordinary, a chief
constable, regidors, and a clerk of cabildo; and an accountancy of
results, with its accountant and officials. There are also three
royal officials, with their employes. There are about sixty Spanish
citizens, not counting those who occupy military posts. The latter
amount usually to about four hundred men. There are many servants,
of various nations, amounting to more than four thousand men and women.




Hamlets falling in the circumference of the city of Manila

Outside and near the walls of the city lies the parish of Santiago
where one beneficed secular has charge of all the Spaniards who live
outside the said walls. The village of San Antonio is also near the
walls, and is in charge of a beneficed secular.

The village of Quiapo, which lies on the other side of the river,
is administered by the said beneficed secular.

The village called La Hermita, in whose temple is the venerated image
of Nuestra Senora de Guia, is two musket-shots away from the walls
of Manila, and is administered by a beneficed secular.

The village called Parian, the alcaiceria where the Chinese merchants
and workmen live--most of that people being infidels, and few of them
Christian--are in charge of religious of St. Dominic. This place is
close to the walls.

There is a small village next the walls called San Juan, which is in
charge of the discalced religious of St. Augustine.

Another village, somewhat farther from the walls than the said San
Juan, and called Malatte, is in charge of the calced Augustinian
fathers.

Another very near village, called Dilao, is where some Japanese
Christians live, separated from the natives; and their administration,
as well as that of the natives, is in charge of religious of
St. Francis.

There is another small village contiguous to that of Dilao, called San
Miguel, which has a house of retreat for the Japanese women who are
exiled from their country because they follow our holy faith. They,
as well as the natives of the said village, are in charge of religious
of the Society of Jesus.

All of the said villages, so far as the secular affairs are concerned,
belong to the jurisdiction of the alcalde-mayor of Tondo, who lives
in the village of that name on the other side of the river. That
village is densely populated with natives and Chinese mestizos who
are in charge of calced religious of St. Augustine.

Still nearer the river is the village of Milongo [sic; sc. Binondo]
which is almost wholly composed of Chinese mestizos. It is in charge
of religious of St. Dominic.

The religious of St. Dominic administer and care for a Chinese hospital
which is located on the bank of the said river.

On the same shore of the river is a village named Santa Cruz, composed
of married Christian Chinese, who are in charge of religious of the
Society of Jesus.

Up-stream toward the lake are various villages. One is called San
Sebastian, and is in charge of discalced Augustinians.

Another is called Santa Ana and is administered by religious of
St. Francis.

Another, called San Pedro, is in charge of religious of the Society
of Jesus.

Another, called Guadalupe, is in charge of calced Augustinians.

Another, called Pasic, is in charge of calced Augustinian religious.

The village of San Matheo is in charge of religious of the Society
of Jesus.

The village of Taitai is in charge of the said religious of the
Society.

The village of Antipolo is in charge of the same religious of the
Society of Jesus.

The village of San Palo [i.e., Sampaloc] is in charge of religious
of St. Francis.

Coasting along from the city of Manila to the port of Cavite, where
the ships that sail from this kingdom anchor, and across the said
river, is the village of Paranaca, which is in charge of the calced
Augustinian religious.




Port of Cabitte

The port of Cabitte is six or seven leguas distant from Manila by land,
and three by sea, and the seamen live there with a Spanish garrison;
they have their castellan, who is also the chief justice. There is
a secular cura who ministers with the help of his assistant and
sacristan. There is a college of the Society of Jesus; a convent
of St. Francis, another of St. Dominic, and another of discalced
Augustinians, as well as a hospital in charge of the religious of
St. John of God. The cura of that port also has charge of the natives
living about the walls, who are almost all workmen who work at the
building of galleons. The same cura also has charge of the small
villages which are located on the other side of the port. Another
called Cabitte el Viexo [i.e., Old Cavite] is in charge of fathers of
the Society of Jesus. At a distance of four or five leguas about this
port are located some cattle-ranches and some farmlands belonging to
the citizens of Manila, which are in charge of a secular cura.

In the jurisdiction of the alcalde-mayor of Tondo, which is the place
nearest to the city of Manila besides the aforesaid villages (which all
belong to him, except the port of Cabitte), is the village of Tegui,
close to the lake. It is in charge of calced Augustinian religious.

In the interior are located the villages of Silan and Ymdan which
are in charge of fathers of the Society of Jesus.

Up-stream and next to the jurisdiction of Tondo begins the jurisdiction
of the lake of Bari [sic; sc. Bay] which lies east of Manila; this
jurisdiction lies along the shore of the said lake. The chief village
is called Barii (whence the name of the said lake) and it is in charge
of calced Augustinian religious.

The village of San Pablo, distant six leguas inland, is in charge of
the same calced Augustinian religious.

There is a hospital located on the bank of the said lake, which is
in charge of religious of St. Francis. These religious have charge
of most of the villages of that jurisdiction with the exception of
that of Binan and its subordinate villages.

Coasting along Manila Bay, one comes first to the island of Maribeles,
a small jurisdiction in charge of a Spaniard, who is corregidor and
serves also as sentinel. Its villages are in charge of discalced
Augustinian religious, with the exception of that of Maragondon and
its subordinate villages, which are in charge of religious of the
Society of Jesus.

Leaving the bay, and pursuing the same voyage made by the ships that
go to Nueva Espana, on the left and some fourteen leguas from Cavitte
is the jurisdiction of Balayan or Bombon, located on a small lake
which bears that name. It has an alcalde-mayor; most of its villages
are in charge of seculars, and the others, of calced religious of
St. Augustine.

Opposite the said jurisdiction and to the right, lie the islands of
Mindoro and Luban, which are in charge of secular priests. They have
an alcalde-mayor, to whom belongs also the island of Marinduque,
which is in charge of fathers of the Society of Jesus.

Traveling along the other side of the land of Manila, [22] one
encounters the jurisdiction of Bulacan, which is but small, and is
administered by religious of the calced Augustinians--as also is the
jurisdiction of Panpanga, which is large and fertile, and contains
many large villages.

Fourteen or fifteen leguas past the island of Mindoro to the southwest,
are the islands called Calamianes, which number about seventeen. They
are small and most of them now subdued; and they lie between the
island of Mindoro and that called Paragua, which is the third of the
said Philipinas Islands in size. [23] A small portion of the latter
island is subject to the Spaniards; it is one hundred and fifty leguas
in circumference, and its greatest latitude is nineteen degrees.

In the islands called Calamianes is located an alcalde-mayor with
a small presidio, as it lies opposite the Camucones enemy. The
administration of all those islands, and of that called Cuio, is in
charge of discalced Augustinian religious.




Bishopric of Cagayan or Nueva Segovia

The city where the seat of the bishopric is located is called Nueva
Segovia. It has a Spanish presidio and its fort, whose castellan
is the alcalde-mayor of that jurisdiction. It is in charge of one
secular cura. The religious of St. Dominic have a convent in the said
city. The jurisdiction is about eighty leguas long and forty wide. All
the province of Cagayan is in charge of religious of St. Dominic except
the village and port of Viga, which is in charge of a secular cura.

Next to that province on the side toward the archbishopric of Manila,
lies the province called Ylocos. It is very fertile and abounds in
gold and cotton, and is densely populated. It has an alcalde-mayor, and
all its administration is in charge of calced Augustinian religious.

The province called Pangasinan is next to the said province of
Ylocos. It is densely populated, fertile, and abounds in gold. The
religious of St. Dominic have charge of it, with the exception of
some small villages on the seacoast, which are in charge of discalced
Augustinian religious. All those three provinces together with the
islands called Babullanes belong to the said bishopric of Cagaian. They
lie north of Manila. There are many people yet to be converted, some
of them being rebels who have taken to the mountains, while there
are others who pay their tributes although they are not Christians.




Bishopric of Camarines or Nueva Cazeres

In the part opposite the bishopric of Cagayan lies the bishopric
called Camarines or Nueva Cazeres. Its city, called [Nueva] Cazeres,
is the seat of the bishopric and has a secular cura and a convent of
religious of St. Francis which has a hospital. All that province of
Camarines, and another one called Paracale is in charge of religious
of St. Francis; and they are in the jurisdiction of one alcalde-mayor.

The province called Calilaya or Taiabas, which has another
alcalde-mayor, is also in the charge of religious of St. Francis,
except the villages called Bondo which are in charge of seculars. The
said jurisdiction has another province called Canttanduanes, which has
its own corregidor; and some small islands a short distance from the
mainland. Those islands, which are called Burias, Masbate, and Tican,
are in charge of seculars.

The islands of Romblon and Bantton, which belong to that jurisdiction
of Canttanduanes, are in charge of religious of the discalced
Augustinians. Those two bishoprics of Nueva Segovia and Nueva Cazeres
are located in the island of Manila. That island is about two hundred
leguas or so long and runs from the east to the north, from about
thirteen and one-half degrees [of latitude] to about nineteen or a
trifle less. In the east it has a width of about one day's journey
from one sea to the other, or a trifle more; and in the north is
thirty or forty leguas wide. The total circumference of the island
is about four hundred leguas.




Bishopric of Sebu or Nombre de Jesus

The see of that bishopric is located in the city called Sebu, as it
took that name from that of the whole island; the Spaniards gave
it the name of Nombre de Jesus. It was so called from the image
of the child Jesus which was found by the adelantado Miguel Lopez
de Legazpe in the Indian settlement in the year one thousand five
hundred and sixty-five. It appears that that image was left in that
island in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-one, when
Hernando de Magallanes (who died there) arrived at that place. Only
one secular cura lives there, for although dignitaries, consisting
of a dean and the others, have been assigned to Sebu, they are so
only in name; and those dignities are enjoyed by the seculars who
have charge of the places nearest to the said city of Sebu. In
that city is located a convent of calced Augustinian religious,
which was the first convent to be founded in the said Philipinas
Islands. There is a college of the Society of Jesus, and a convent
of discalced Augustinian religious. As far as the secular power is
concerned, there is an excellent stone fort with a Spanish presidio,
which is governed by an alcalde-mayor who generally bears the title
of "lieutenant of the captain-general." There is a cabildo and
magistracy, with alcaldes-in-ordinary and regidors. That island is
somewhat prolonged for fifteen or twenty leguas, and is eight leguas
wide. It has a circumference of eighty or ninety leguas, and extends
northeast and southwest in ten degrees of latitude. [24] The city has
a Parian or alcaiceria of Chinese who are in charge of a beneficed
secular. About it are some natives who are in charge of calced and
discalced Augustinian religious.

The nearest island to the above island is that called Bohol, which
runs north and south for some fifteen leguas, with a width of eight
or ten leguas and a circumference of forty. It is all in charge of
religious of the Society of Jesus. As regards secular affairs, it
belongs to the jurisdiction of Sebu.

Next the said island of Bohol lies that called Leite. It also extends
north and south, and has a length of some thirty leguas, and a width
in some parts of only three leguas, while its circumference is about
ninety or one hundred leguas. It is also in charge of fathers of the
Society of Jesus.

Next the said island of Leite lies that called Samar or Ybabao,
the last of the Philipinas. Its coast is bathed by the Mexican Sea,
and it makes a strait with the land of Manila which is called San
Bernardino. By that strait enter and leave the ships of the Nueva
Espana line. It lies between thirteen and one-half degrees and eleven
degrees south latitude, in which latitude it extends for the space
of two and one-half degrees. It is also in charge of fathers of the
Society of Jesus. That island and that of Leite have one alcalde-mayor.

North of the island of Sebu lies the island of Negros, which extends
between nine and ten and one-half degrees, and has some hundred leguas
of circumference. It is almost all in charge of religious of the
Society of Jesus, except one mission which the discalced Augustinian
religious have there.

Northeast of the same island of Sebu lies the island called Bantallan
with four other islets, all of which are in charge of one secular.

Lower down and near Manila is the island called Panai, which is
very fertile and densely populated. It is some hundred leguas in
circumference, and runs east and west, and north and south in ten
degrees of latitude. The city of Arebalo or Oton is located in that
island, and an alcalde-mayor lives there--who is also the purveyor for
the fleets of those islands, and of Mindanao and its presidios. The
cura of the town is a secular; but the Spaniards of the presidio are
in charge of religious of the Society of Jesus; they have a college
in the said city, and also have charge of the district called Hilo
Hilo. The balance of the said island of Panai has an alcalde-mayor,
and is in charge of calced Augustinian religious.

There are two other districts in the said jurisdiction which are in
charge of seculars. All the above islands belong to the bishopric of
Sebu, as do also the great island of Mindanao, with Jolo, and their
adjacent islands.

The island of Mindanao is the largest of all the Philipinas Islands,
next to that of Manila. In its largest part that island extends from
five and one-half degrees northeastward to nine degrees--a distance of
some seventy leguas. Its two headlands, which are called San Augustin
and that of La Caldera, bound a coast which runs east and west for some
hundred and ten leguas. That island has at the port located about its
middle, called Sanbuangan, an excellent Spanish presidio with a stone
fort which is well equipped with artillery. That fort has its governor
and castellan, who is also governor and castellan of the islands of
Jolo, Bacilan, and some other smaller islands. The administration of
all the islands called Mindanao, Jolo, and the others, both Spaniards
and natives, is in charge of religious of the Society of Jesus.

From the cape of San Augustin northeastward in that island
is the jurisdiction called Caraga and Buttuan, which has its
own alcalde-mayor. Its administration is in charge of discalced
Augustinian fathers.

Along the coast toward the vendaval [i.e., southwest], on that same
island is the jurisdiction of Yligan, the principal part of which
lies on a lake of the same name. It is in charge of fathers of the
Society of Jesus.

The district called Dappitan in that same island is in charge of
fathers of the Society of Jesus.




Terrenate

The islands called Terrenate or the Clove Islands are located for
the most part under the equinoctial line toward the east; and are
three hundred leguas distant from Malaca in India, and slightly less
from Manila, toward the southeast. The islands are five in number,
extend north and south, and are quite near one another. The largest,
from which the others take their name, is that of Terrenate. [25] Two
leguas from it is that of Tidore, and then comes Mutiel. The fourth
is called Maquien and the fifth Bachan. All of them lie opposite
the land called Battachina. Those islands of Terrenate have various
Spanish presidios, the principal one of which is in the same island
of Terrenate where the governor lives; he is the governor of all the
other presidios. The Dutch have a settlement in that island with a good
fort, all for the sake of the profit [that they obtain from the] cloves
and nutmeg. The number of Christians there is small, although there
were many in the time of the glorious apostle of Yndia, St. Francis
Xavier. It has always been administered by religious of the Society
of Jesus, as well as the natives of the island of Siau, who are the
most affectioned to our holy faith. The Spaniards of Terrenate are in
charge of a secular cura belonging to the jurisdiction of the bishopric
of Cochin in Oriental Yndia; for the administration of those islands
has always been in charge of that bishopric and province of Cochin,
although the ministers of the Society of Jesus have been appointed
since the time of the revolt of Portugal by the superior of the said
Society in the province of Philipinas. The stipends of the cura and
of the other evangelical workers are paid from the royal treasury of
Manila, as are also the salaries of the governor and the presidios. In
the island of Terrenate is a house of the Society of Jesus, whence
they go out to administer the other islands and presidios. It has
also a royal hospital which is in charge of the discalced religious
of St. Francis. The cura of that island and presidio was withdrawn to
Manila when Portugal rebelled, and the archbishop chose a cura from his
archbishopric; but it was a question whether he had any jurisdiction
for it, so that the appointment of cura passed again in due course to
the proprietary cura of the jurisdiction and bishopric of Cochin, which
is in actual charge of the said presidio [and will remain thus] until
the determination and commands of the king our sovereign are known.


The commissaries that seem necessary in the said islands, and in the
places where such office will be desirable, are the following.

1. In the city of Manila, with the jurisdiction of all the
archbishopric except the port of Cavitte. On account of the vessels
that anchor in the latter place from foreign kingdoms, and because
during some months in the year it is not easy to cross the bay,
it is advisable for that port to have its own commissary.

2. In the said city of Manila, the said employes who are mentioned
in its description.

3. In the fort of Sanboangan in the island of Mindanao, and the
islands subordinate to it.

4. In the city of Sebu, whose commissary can serve for all the islands
called Pinttados.

5. In the town of Arebalo or Oton; the same person may be commissary
of its jurisdiction and of that of Panai and the island of Negros.

6. In the presidio of Yligan and Caraga.

7. There could also be one in the islands of Calamianes and the
islands subordinate to them.

8. Another commissary in the jurisdiction of Cagaian, Ylocos,
and Pangasinan.

9. Another in the forts of Terrenate. This is most necessary, as the
Spaniards of the said forts are among Dutch and Moros, and so far
from the city of Manila.






DOCUMENTS OF 1660-1666


    Recollect missions, 1646-60. Luis de Jesus and Diego de Santa
    Theresa, O.S.A. (Recollect); [compiled from their works].
    Description of Filipinas Islands. Bartholome de Letona,
    O.S.F.; 1662.
    Events in Manila, 1662-63. [Unsigned; July, 1663?].
    Letter to Francisco Yzquierdo. Diego de Salcedo; July 16, 1664.
    Why the friars are not subjected to episcopal
    visitation. [Unsigned and undated; 1666?].


Sources: The first of these documents is taken from the Historia
general de los religiosos descalzos ... de San Agustin: part II, by
Luis de Jesus (Madrid, 1681), from a copy in the library of Edward
E. Ayer, Chicago; and part III, by Diego de Santa Theresa (Barcelona,
1743), from a copy in the Library of Congress. The second is from a
pamphlet bound in with a copy (in the possession of Antonio Graino
y Martinez, Madrid) of Letona's Perfecta religiosa (Puebla, Mexico,
1662), a rare work. The remainder are from the Ventura del Arco
MSS. (Ayer library), ii, pp. 401-483.


Translations: The first and fifth of these are translated by James
A. Robertson; the remainder, by Emma Helen Blair.






RECOLLECT MISSIONS, 1646-60 [26]


CHAPTER SIXTH

The venerable sister Isabel, a beata, dies holily in the faith in
the province of Butuan

Only section: (Year 1646)


One of our Beatas, named Isabel, passed to the better life this year
in the village of Butuan of Filipinas. We know nothing else about her
except that she was converted to the faith by the preaching of Ours
when they entered that province. The Lord illumined her so that she
should leave the darkness of their idolatries, and she was baptized and
given the name of Isabel. She produced great fruit in a short time, for
the hand of God is not restricted to time limit. Seeing her so useful
in the mysteries of the Catholic religion, our religious sent her to
become a coadjutor and the spiritual mother of many souls, whom she
reduced to the faith and catechized thus gaining them for the Church.

She was sent to the villages where the devil was waging his fiercest
war and deceiving by his tricks, so that she might oppose herself to
him by her exemplary life and the gentleness of her instruction. She
established her school in a house in the village to which the
young girls resorted. With wonderful eloquence she made them
understand that the path of their vain superstitions would lead
them astray, and explained the rudiments and principles of the
Christian doctrine. At her set hours she went to the church daily,
and the people gathering, she instructed the stupid ones, confirmed
the converted, and enlightened the ignorant--and that with so much
grace and gentleness of words that she seized the hearts of her
hearers. To this she joined a modesty and bearing sweetly grave,
by which she made great gain among those barbarians.

Since so copious results were experienced through the agency of Isabel,
both in the reformation of morals and in the many who were converted
from their blind paganism, the fathers sent her to preach in the
streets and open places where the people gathered to hear her--some
through curiosity, and others carried away by her wonderful grace in
speaking. By that means many souls were captured and entreated baptism,
for she was a zealous worker and an apostolic coadjutor in that flock
of the Lord. She also entered the houses of the obstinate ones who
did not go to hear her in the streets. There, with mild discourses
and full of charity, she softened their hearts and inclined them to
receive the faith.

After some years of employment in that kind of apostolic life her
husband died. Upon being freed from the conjugal yoke she desired
to subject her neck to that of religion. Father Fray Jacinto de San
Fulgencio, at that time vicar-provincial of that province, gave her
our habit of mantelata or beata. She recognized, as she was very
intelligent and experienced in the road to perfection, that her
obligations to make herself useful were stricter, that she must live
a better life and employ the talent which she had received from God
for the benefit of her neighbor, and she did so. One cannot easily
imagine the diligence with which she sought souls; the means that
she contrived to draw them from the darkness of heathendom. What
paths did she not take! What hardships did she not suffer! She went
from one part to another discussing with the spirit and strength,
not of a weak woman, but of a strong man. The Lord whose cause she
was advancing aided her; for the solicitation of souls for God is a
service much to His satisfaction.

She finally saw all that province of Butuan converted to the faith
of Jesus Christ, for which she very joyfully gave thanks. She retired
then to give herself to divine contemplation, for she thought that she
ought to get ready to leave the world as she had devoted so much time
to the welfare of her neighbor. She sought instruction from Sister
Clara Caliman (whose life we have written above), and imitated her
in her penitences, her fastings, and her mode of life, so that she
became an example of virtues.

For long hours did Isabel pray devoutly; she visited the sick; she
served them; she exhorted them to repentance for their sins and to bear
their sorrows with patience. She devoted herself so entirely to those
works of charity that it seemed best to our fathers (who governed that
district) not to allow her respite from them, and that she could [not]
live wholly for herself. They built a hospital for the poor and sent
her to care for them. She sought the needy, whom she often carried on
her shoulders, so great was her charity. She cared for their souls,
causing the sacraments to be administered to them; and for their
bodies, applying to them the needful medicines. She solicited presents
and alms, and she had set hours for going out to beg for the sick
poor. She did all that with a cheerful and calm countenance, which
indicated the love of God which burned in her breast. Her hour came
during those occupations and she fell grievously ill. She knew that
God was summoning her and begged for the sacraments of the Catholic
Church; and, having received them with joy, she surrendered her soul
to her Lord--leaving, with sorrow for her loss, sure pledges that
she has eternal rest.




CHAPTER SEVENTH

A hospice is established in the City of Mexico for the accommodation
of the religious who go to the Filipinas.

Only section: (Year 1647)


As the province of San Nicolas de Tolentino had been founded in the
Filipinas Islands by our religious, and since they had many missions
in various districts to which to attend--not only converting infidels,
but comforting and sustaining those converted--they thought that it
would be necessary for them to send repeated missions of religious
and to conduct them from Espana to those districts. The usual route is
by way of Mexico, a most famous city; and since our Recollects had no
house there where the religious could await in comfort the opportunity
to embark for the said islands, they determined to take a house or
hospice in which they could live and where those who fell sick from the
long and troublesome journey could be treated. The Order petitioned
it from the king our sovereign, Felipe Fourth, who, exercising his
wonted charity, issued his royal decree in this year of 1647 for the
founding of the said hospice; and it was actually founded. It does
not belong to this history to relate the conditions that were then
accepted; we have only thought it best to give this notice of it here.

[The remainder of this book does not concern Philippine affairs].



[The following is translated and condensed from Diego de Santa
Theresa's Historia general de los religiosos descalzos, being vol. iii
in the general history of the Recollect order.] [27]






DECADE SEVENTH--BOOK FIRST


CHAPTER I

Treats of the fifth intermediary chapter; and of some events in the
province of Philipinas.

[The first section treats of the fifth intermediary chapter of the
order, which was held at Madrid, May 27, 1651].




Sec. II

The convent of Tandag, in the province of Caragha of the Philipinas
Islands, is demolished

232. Tandag is located in the island of Mindanao, and is the capital of
the district of the jurisdiction of Caragha, where the alcalde-mayor
resides. In regard to ecclesiastical affairs, it belongs to the
bishopric of Zibu. Our convent which is found in that settlement has
charge of three thousand souls, scattered in the said capital and in
five annexed villages called visitas. How much glory that convent has
gained for God may be inferred from the repeated triumphs which its
most zealous ministers obtained, thanks to His grace; and the words
of our most reverend and illustrious Don Fray Pedro de San-Tiago,
bishop of Solsona and Lerida, in the relation of the voyage made by
our discalced religious to the Indias are sufficient. "There was,"
he says, "a powerful Indian, called Inuc, the lord of Marieta, who,
waging war on the Spaniards and peaceable Indians, killed many of them
in various engagements while he captured more than two thousand. The
very reverend father Fray Juan de la Madre de Dios left Tandag,
without other army or arms than his virtues. He went to meet Inuc
and, by the force of the divine word, he alone conquered Inuc, who
was accompanied by squadrons; the religious conquered the soldier,
the lamb the lion, and forced him to lay aside his arms and reduce
himself to the obedience of the king our sovereign, and to be baptized
with all his family." Thus did he give in that one action, peace to
the country, a multitude of souls to heaven, and an exceeding great
number of vassals to the Spanish monarch.

233. The seasons continued to pass interwoven with various incidents,
now prosperous, now adverse; although as the world is a vale of tears,
it gave its pleasures with a close hand and its sorrows with prodigal
liberality--especially in the years 46 and 47 when the Dutch, having
become the ruler of the seas, forced or compelled all vessels to take
refuge in the ports. The commerce of the Sangleys or Chinese fell off
almost entirely; and according to the common opinion, the Dutch were so
victorious that their invasions, painted with those rhetorical colors
that fear is wont to give, filled all the islands with terror. Don
Diego Faxardo, knight of the Habit of San-Tiago, was then governor
and captain-general of Philipinas, and also president of that royal
Audiencia. He was most vigilant in defending those wretched villages
from the powerful invasions of the enemy, who, by the specious pretext
that they were going to set them free, induced the chiefs to [join]
a general conspiracy. Don Diego tried to ascertain the forces of the
enemy with accuracy; he ordered the ports to be reconnoitered and the
presidios to be fortified. He solicited truthful reports in order to
obtain advice upon the best way to decide.

234. There was at that time an alcalde-mayor in the fortress of
Tandag whose name is omitted for a special reason. The venerable
father Fray Pedro de San Joseph Roxas, a religious of eminent
qualities and excellent virtues, was prior of that convent. He,
having concluded that the minister ought, as a teacher, to attend
to the Indians in regard to instruction, and as a father, to watch
over their protection, on seeing his parishioners persecuted with
unjust vexations thought himself obliged to oppose the illegal acts
of the alcalde. Father Fray Pedro saw the people of Tandag and its
visitas oppressed with insupportable burdens. He saw them suffering
so great sadness that their weeping did not dare to mount from the
heart to the eyes, nor could the bosom trust its respiration to the
lips. The father noted that, in proportion as they were sacrificed to
the greed of another, just so much did they grow lukewarm in living
according to the Catholic maxims.  Since there was no one to speak
for the Indians if that zealous minister became dumb, he resolved
to defeat them efficaciously in order to make so great wrong cease,
even if it were at his own risk. He asked humbly, exhorted fervently,
and insisted in and out of season in proportion to the cause; but
seeing his petitions unheeded in Tandag, he placed them in a Tribunal
where they would receive attention.

235.  The alcalde-mayor, resenting the father's demands, took occasion
to send his reports to Don Diego Faxardo; accordingly he said that
that fortress of Caragha was in a state of vigorous defense, although
it had a dangerous neighbor in the convent, for that was a very strong
work and dominated the fortress. Consequently, he thought that it was
a necessary precaution to destroy it. Thereupon the governor called
a meeting of auditors, judges, and officials of the royal treasury;
and on the nineteenth of December, 1647, they despatched a general
order to all the alcaldes-mayor commanding that the stone churches
and convents built along the sea shore be demolished. The reason given
was that if the Dutch succeeded in capturing them in their invasions,
they would find in them forts enabling them to continue their raids
with greater persistency. Already the said captain had been withdrawn
from Tandag and Don Juan Garcia appointed in his place when that
order from the royal Audiencia was received. He called a meeting of
Captains Juan de Sabata and Don Marcos de Resines, also summoning
Sargento-mayor Don Andres Curto and the same alcalde-mayor who had
been at Tandag--of whom he did not yet even know that he had given the
said report. They recognized that the church could be burned and pulled
down in less than six hours, in case the Dutch came; for its walls were
built of the weakest kind of stone and the roof of nipa, which is as
combustible as straw. On the other hand, they saw the Indian natives
somewhat sad and feared that they would take to the mountains in flight
in order not to be forced to work at a new building. Therefore they
resolved, by common consent, to suspend the execution [of the order]
until those reasons could be represented in the royal Audiencia, and
the most advisable measures taken for the service of both Majesties.

236. Don Diego Faxardo and the royal assembly saw that those reports
were contrary; for the first said that it was very important to
demolish the convent and church, as it was a very strong work; and
that, since it was within musket-shot and dominated the redoubt, the
Dutch could demolish it in twenty-four hours with only two ten-libra
cannon: while the second report set forth the fear of the revolt and
flight of the Indians, alleging that the convent and church, although
built of stone, would serve as no obstacle. But, notwithstanding that
contradiction, a new decree was despatched ordering the demolition of
the church and convent of Tandag. That was done immediately amid great
sorrow, although with great conformity of the religious and Indians
to so peremptory decrees. Since malice thus triumphed, vengeance
was satisfied, and a religious order so worthy was slighted; and
although its members had more than enough reasons for anger, they never
permitted it to pass their lips, and only employed their rhetoric in
restraining the natives so that they would not take to the mountains.




Sec. III

Philipo Fourth is informed that Fray Pedro de San Joseph resisted the
demolition of the convent strongly, and that he was the cause of the
insurrection of the Indians in the village.

237. Nothing else was thought of in the Philipinas Islands than their
defense from the fear occasioned by the Dutch with their fleets. That
holy province was engaged in the reparation of the ruins of their
demolished church, and the zeal of those evangelical ministers was
working with the same ardor, for they were wont not to become lukewarm
[even] with the repeated strokes of the most heavy troubles. In May,
1651, it was learned at the court in Madrid, that the royal mind of
his Catholic Majesty had been informed of what will be explained
in more vivid colors in the following letter, which the venerable
father-provincial of Philipinas received in the year 53. "Venerable
and devout father-provincial of the Augustinian Recollects of the
Philipinas Islands: It has been learned in my royal Council of the
Indias from letters of the royal Audiencia resident in the city of
Manila that, in virtue of a resolution taken by the council of war
and treasury of those islands, certain strong churches in the islands
were ordered to be demolished, such as those of Abucay, Marinduque,
and Caragha, so that they might not be seized by the enemy, as those
edifices were a notorious menace and peril to the islands after the
Dutch attacked Cavite. It was learned that, although the church of
Caragha was demolished, it was done after the greatest opposition from
the religious of your order who are settled in those missions. He who
instructed the Indians there threatened that the Indians would revolt,
as happened later. For the village rose in revolt, and the Indians
took to the mountains--thereby occasioning the many and serious
troubles that demand consideration. The matter having been examined
in my royal Council of the Indias, it has been deemed best to warn
you how severely those proceedings by the religious of that order
have been censured--so that, being warned thereof, you may correct
them and try to improve them, in order that the religious may restrain
themselves in the future and not give occasion to the natives to become
restless. For they are under so great obligation to do the contrary,
and they ought to have taken active part in calming the Indians and
restraining them if they believed that they were attempting to make
any movement; since the care and watchfulness of the officials cannot
suffice if the religious of the missions fail to aid them with the
natives. I trust that you will be attentive to correct this matter
from now on; for besides the fact that it is so in harmony with your
obligation and with the example that the religious ought to give to
others in respect to their rules, I shall consider myself as well
served by you. Madrid, May 27, 1651.


    I THE KING"


238. It cannot be denied that the terms of that royal letter could
serve the most austere man for no small exercise [in mortification];
and more on that occasion when that holy province was laboring in
the service of his Catholic Majesty, so much to the satisfaction
of his ministers that many praises of our discalced religious were
published.... We confess that the king alleges that he received
that notice through letters from the royal Audiencia, a tribunal of
so great circumspection that it would not undertake to inform its
monarch without sure knowledge. But we declare that the secretary of
the king our sovereign might have been mistaken in the midst of so
great a rush of business, in representing as a report of that most
upright assembly that which proceeds from private subjects only. In
order that the good opinion in which our Augustinian Recollects were
held by the cabildo, city, and royal Audiencia may be thoroughly
evident, I shall insert here their letters of April 29 and 30, 1648,
those dates being somewhat later than the notice which was received
in Manila of this entire affair.

239. The letter of the royal Audiencia runs as follows--"Sire: Your
Majesty was pleased, at the instance of the discalced religious
of St. Augustine, to order this royal Audiencia to report on the
justification for the continuation which they ask of the alms of
250 pesos and 250 fanegas of rice for the support of four religious
who administer to the Indians in this convent of Manila. We know the
excellent manner in which they attend to their ministry, and their
poverty--which obliges them to beg weekly alms, for the incomes of
some of the chaplaincies were lost in the earthquake. They are very
strictly observed in their ministries and hasten to serve his Majesty
on occasions when we encounter enemies, by sea and land, where some
have been killed or captured. Consequently they are today very short
of laborers. These are causes which demand that your Majesty, with
your accustomed liberality, should be pleased to continue the said
alms and allow the Recollects to bring religious hither.  May God
preserve, etc. April 30, 1648."

240. I find the letter of the most illustrious cabildo to be couched
in these terms--"Sire: As this see is vacant, it is incumbent
upon us in obedience to your royal decree to assure your Majesty
that the Augustinian Recollect religious attend to their ministry
punctually. The poverty that they suffer is great, for they are obliged
to beg alms from door to door as they lost the incomes of some of their
chaplaincies in the earthquake and their convent was ruined. They
are very observant in their rules, and in their administrations to
the natives in the missions in their charge. As those missions are
among the most unconquerable and fierce people in these districts,
many of the religious have been killed and captured. Consequently,
they suffer from a great lack of laborers; but they have not for
that failed in the service of your Majesty on the occasions that have
arisen by sea and land--all, motives that should impel your Majesty
with your royal liberality to be pleased to continue the said alms,
and to concede them a goodly number of religious for these islands. May
God preserve, etc. Manila, April 29, 1648."

241. That of the city of Manila speaks of the Recollects in the
following manner--"Sire: This city of Manila has informed your Majesty
on various occasions of the great importance in these islands of the
order of discalced Recollects of St. Augustine; of the apostolic
men in that order; of the great results that they obtain by the
preaching of the holy gospel; of the singular example that they have
always furnished, and do now, with their strict and religious life
and their so exact mode of observing their rules; and of the so
considerable effects that have through their agency been attained
in the service of our Lord and that of your Majesty, with the aid
of your royal arms, in the great number of infidels whom they have
converted to our holy Catholic faith, and how they have been brought
to render to your Majesty the due vassalage and tribute, which they
have generally paid, and are paying, annually. [We have also told
your Majesty] that they have engaged in all this with the spiritual
affection that belongs to their profession, with singular care--both
in the conservation of what they have attained and in their continual
desire, notwithstanding the many discomforts that they suffer, to carry
on their work, steadily converting new souls to the service of our
Lord and to the obedience of your Majesty. [We have also reported]
the great peace and quiet which they preserve among themselves so
that they have always been and are, one of the most acceptable and
well-received orders in these islands--although they are the poorest,
as all their missions are in districts very distant from this city,
and among the most warlike people that are in all the provinces of
these islands, as they are recently conquered; and the danger in
which, for that reason, the lives of those fathers are. Indeed, some
have already risked life, at times, when those people who appeared
to be peaceful have rebelled; and others have gloriously [met death]
at the hands of those who were not pacified, when the holy gospel was
preached to them--besides many others who have suffered martyrdom
in the kingdom of Japon, enriching with noble acts the church of
God and the crown of your Majesty. [We have reported] that no fleet
has gone out in which those fathers do not sail for the consolation
of the infantry, and that, in the emergencies that have arisen,
they have fought like valiant soldiers; and that they accommodate
themselves to everything with the angelic spirit that is theirs,
when it is to the service of our Lord and that of your Majesty. At
the present we inform you of the extreme poverty that the convent of
San Nicolas of this city is suffering; for with the earthquake which
happened on November 30 of the former year 1645, their entire church
fell, so that today they are living in great discomfort in cells of
straw which have been built in the garden. The sick are the ones who
suffer the greatest inconveniences; and they generally have sick
people, since the religious of the missions in their charge come,
when ill, to this convent to be treated. Consequently, this city is
constrained to petition your Majesty, with all due humility, to be
pleased to order that 250 pesos and 250 fanegas of rice be annually
contributed to them on the account of the royal treasury of your
Majesty--which amount was given them as a stipend for four ordained
religious (although there are always more)--as well as 150 pesos for
medicines. [We ask for] the continuation of the extension conceded
by the decree of May 3, 1643, without any time-limit being set; for
the great affection with which our Lord and your Majesty are thereby
served merits it. This city petitions your Majesty to be pleased to
grant the said order license to send as many religious as you may
please from those kingdoms to these islands, in consideration of the
remarkable necessity for religious in their so distant missions--where,
because of the poor nourishment from the food which they use for the
sustenance of human life (treating themselves like actual beggars),
with the great abstinence which they observe, and where no discomforts
of sun or rain keep them back (for they go through dense forests and
over inaccessible mountains in order to reduce to our holy Catholic
faith the thousands of souls in those districts who have no knowledge
of it), many have perished in that work; for in this year alone such
number more than twelve. To some of them no companions have come for
this vineyard of the Lord, and the increase of the royal estate and
crown of your Majesty--whose Catholic person may the divine Majesty
preserve, as is needed in Christendom. Manila, April 30, 1648."

242. These letters--which are authentic, and preserved in our general
archives--are those written in the year 1648 by the city, the cabildo,
and the royal Audiencia. The order to demolish Tandag was given in the
year 47, and it was apparent to them that the fear of the [Indians']
insurrection and flight with the other motives for suspending the
execution proceeded only from that junta of the captains, and that
there was no resistance on the part of the minister. Further, it was
clearly proved in the year 55 that that information was not written
by the royal Audiencia (nor could it be, since that is a fount whence
the truth flows with so great purity); but that the secretary Was
mistaken in thus ascribing to so upright a tribunal what was only
signed by an inferior, who desired to dazzle by giving the first news
which generally arrives very much garbled.

[Section iv is a vindication of the Recollects in regard to
the demolition of the convent and church of Tandag. Juan Garcia,
alcalde-mayor and captain of the fort of that place at the time of
the demolition, declares (July 29, 1654) that "he proceeded with the
razing of the building without the religious losing their composure,
or threatening that their natives would revolt; and that neither
before nor after was there any insurrection or disquiet in Tandag or
throughout its districts; neither did the natives desert and flee to
the mountains; neither did he see or know of any such thing while
he was alcalde-mayor, or during the many months after that while
he resided in the said village." The following section treats of
the life of father Fray Pedro de San Joseph (whose family name was
Roxas) prior of Tandag in the time of the above troubles. He was
born in Manila (where he took the Recollect habit) April 21, 1621. He
achieved distinction in the study of moral and mystic theology. At the
completion of his studies he was sent to various villages to preach,
proving himself a successful preacher. In 1635 he was sent to the
island of Romblon, where he worked with good results in spite of the
hostile attempts of the Moros in that district. At the completion
of his term of service at Romblon he was sent to Tandag, where he
had to contend against the Spaniards themselves, on account of their
excesses toward the natives. After the demolition of his convent and
church he returned to Manila, arriving there on May 26, 1650. That
same year he was sent to Taytay in Calamianes, although he desired
to remain in retreat in Manila. His death occurred in the following
year at Manila, to which place he went as his last illness came on.]




Sec. VI

The insurrection in the village of Linao

257. It has been stated above that when the Dutch enemy came in the
year 48 to bombard Cavite, they had treated with certain Indian
chiefs, saying that they would return with a larger fleet in the
year 49. They gave the Indians to understand that they only would
treat them as their friends and not in the domineering manner of
the Spaniards, who (as the Dutch said) treat them as slaves; and
therefore they hoped to find the Indians prepared, so that, having
become well-inclined toward the Dutch power, they might be able to
free themselves from so heavy a bondage. That proposition continued
to spread from one to another; it was agreeable to them all because
of the liberty that it seemed to promise, although it was offensive
to many because it incited the natives to seditious movements. At
that time Don Diego Faxardo, governor of Manila, despatched a decree
ordering a certain number of carpenters with their wives and children
to go to that city from each one of the islands. The effects produced
by that mandate were especially fatal for the village of Palapac in
the island of Hibabao. For they refused to obey the governor, killed
their minister, a zealous father of the Society, took their possessions
to the mountains, and commenced to gather to their following a great
number of rebels.

258. That decree caused a great disturbance in the island of Mindanao,
for of its five divisions scarcely one is reduced to obedience;
therefore those who live unsubdued in the mountains only wait for such
opportunities in order to foment disturbances and restlessness. Many
of the natives hid their property in the province of Caragha, and
proved so unquiet that although the Butuans were the most trustworthy
Indians, the father prior, Fray Miguel de Santo Thomas, had to work
hard to restrain them. Those of Linao descended to the last vileness,
and it is presumed that the same would have happened in the district
of Tandag if the alcalde-mayor, Bernabe de la Plaza, had not concealed
the decree. That was afterward approved by the auditors in Manila,
as they had experienced that that decree had been a seed-bed for
many troubles. All that disquiet continued to operate with the
manifest disturbance of the public peace, even at the news alone of
the above-mentioned decree. Even the hint of it succeeded in Linao
where the insurrection took place in the following manner.

259. There are certain wild Indians in the mountains of Butuan,
located in the province of Caragha, called Manobos. [28] They have
kinky hair, oblique eyes, a treacherous disposition, brutish customs,
and live by the hunt. They have no king to govern them nor houses to
shelter them; their clothing covers only the shame of their bodies;
and they sleep where night overtakes them. Finally, they are infidels,
and belie in everything, by the way in which they live, that small
portion that nature gives them as rational beings. Among so great a
rabble, but one village is known where some people are seen far from
human intercourse. They are a race much inclined to war, which they are
almost always waging against the Indians of the seacoast. There lived
Dabao, [29] who had become as it were a petty king, without other right
than that of his great strength, or other jurisdiction than that of his
great cunning. His wickedness was much bruited about, and he made use
of subtle deceits by which he committed almost innumerable murders. He
was often pursued by Spanish soldiers, but he knew quite well how to
elude them by his cunning. For on one occasion, in order to avoid the
danger, he went to the house of an evangelical minister saying that he
wished baptism, and that the minister should defend him, as it would
be the motive for many conversions; but he only made use of that trick
to save his life. Father Fray Agustin de Santa Maria--a very affable
religious, and one who labored hard to attract the infidels--was prior
of the convent of Santa Clara de Monte Falco of Linao, a place forty
leguas up-stream from Butuan. He visited Dabao, and won him over so
well by presents and gifts to intercourse with the Spaniards, that
he spent nearly all the day in the convent and entrusted father Fray
Agustin with the education of one of his sons--being quite eager in
that in order to work out the treachery that he had planned.

260. Dabao went by night to the houses of the chief Christians. He
laid before them the harsh decree of the governor, the offers that
the Dutch had made, and especially the attaining of freedom to keep up
their old religion. Since they were not well rooted in our holy faith,
those discussions were very agreeable to them. That faithless Indian
was so contagious a cancer that he infected the greater part of the
village with his poison. Therefore, almost all of them assenting to
his plan, the day was set on which he resolved to kill the Spaniards
and the minister. He warned the people to be ready with their arms
to aid him. He had previously held a meeting with his Manobos, in
which they decided that if the provincial sent a visitor and did
not come personally to make the visitation, it would be a clear sign
that the Dutch were infesting those coasts. When they learned with
certainty that the father-provincial, Fray Bernardo de San Laurencio,
had not gone out for the visitation, but that he was sending the
father ex-provincial, Fray Juan de San Antonio, as visitor, they
were confirmed [in the belief] that the hostile fleet was coming,
and began immediately to stir up the country.

261. The father visitor had already reached the convent of Butuan,
and Dabao sent his Manobo Indians to the river Humayan with obsequious
appearances of readiness to receive him, but with the peremptory
order to kill him. God so arranged that the father visitor, Fray
Juan de San Antonio, should pass to the convent of Cagayang without
stopping to visit that of Linao. He left a letter for the father
prior of Linao which he sent by Juan de Guevara, one of the soldiers
who was later killed in the fray. That soldier met the Manobos who
were waiting at the river; they asked him for the father visitor,
and he told them simply that he had left Butuan. They, without asking
whether the father were to pass that way, returned to their village
to inform their leader of the matter. Thus did God save the life of
His minister for the second time, thereby allowing one to see even
in so slight occurrences the height of His Providence.

262. At that time some hostile Indians began to harass the peaceful
Indians, from whom they took a quantity of their rice and maize. Dabao
offered to make a raid in order to check so insolent boldness with that
punishment, and he assured them that he would immediately return with
the heads of some men, from which result their accomplices would take
warning. He selected, then, eight robust and muscular Indians, whose
hands he bound behind their backs, but by an artifice so cunning that
they could untie themselves whenever occasion demanded. Thus did he
bring as captives those who were really Trojan horses; for, concealing
their arms, they showed only many obsequious acts of submission. The
captain ordered them to be taken to the fort where the father prior,
Fray Agustin de Santa Maria, was already waiting; and when the order
was given that the feigned captives should be set in the stocks, at
that juncture Dabao drew a weapon which he had concealed, and broke
the captain's head. The Indians untied their bonds, the rebels came
with lances from the village, and a hotly-contested battle took place
in which almost all our men lost their lives. Only the religious and
four Spanish soldiers and a corporal were left alive. It did not occur
to them, in the midst of so great confusion, to take other counsel
than to drop down from the wall. We shall leave the father prior,
Fray Agustin, for the present, and speak only of the soldiers who
opened up a road with their invincible valor by means of their arms,
in order to take refuge in the convent. But finding it already occupied
by the insurgents, who had gone ahead to despoil it, they fought there
like Spaniards, hurling themselves sword in hand on the mass of the
rebels. However, they were unable to save the post, for the convent
and the church were blazing in all parts. Thereupon it was necessary
for them to hurl themselves upon a new danger in order to return to
the redoubt, where they arrived safely at the cost of many wounds,
although they found the fort dismantled. Thence they sent the Indians
in flight to the mountains by firing their arquebuses at them.

263. Only the family of one pious woman remained in the village, who
(although sparingly) gave them food every day. But that charity could
not last long, for necessity forced that family to take refuge with
the insurgents, thus leaving the Spaniards destitute of all human
consolation. They, seeing themselves wounded and without food, made
a small boat of bamboo, dangerous at any time, and embarked in it in
order to go to Butuan by way of the river, after they had dismantled
the fort and spiked the artillery. In order that the so evident risk
of that voyage might be more increased, their opponents pursued them
with swift caracoas, from which firing many arrows they multiplied
the wounds of the soldiers. The Spaniards, seeing that they could
not defend themselves, entered the village of Hoot where the people
had not yet risen. There they met an Indian called Palan, who was
going to Linao for his daughter, so that she might not be lost amid
the confusion of that so barbarous race. He took compassion on those
afflicted soldiers, and, availing himself of fifteen Indians who were
with him, accommodated them in his bark and took them to our convent of
Butuan. They arrived there twenty days after the insurrection at Linao,
so used up and crippled that they were already in the last extremity.




Sec. VII

Relation of the punishment of the rebels and their restoration to
their villages

264. As soon as father Fray Miguel de Santo Thomas, prior of
our convent of Butuan, learned what was passing in Linao, he
sent a messenger to Tandag and to the royal Audiencia of Manila;
for promptness is generally the most efficacious means in such
cases. Afterward the afflicted Spaniards arrived at his convent,
and he received them with great love, accommodated them in cells,
set up beds for them, and gave them medicines--assisting them with
the compassion of a father, to their consolation, and with extreme
charity aiding in their entertainment. One of those soldiers, who was
named Juan Gonzalez, had broken a leg, his body was full of wounds and
a poisoned arrow had pierced his loins. When he was treated, he was so
lifeless that all thought that he had expired. The father prior was not
a little afflicted at that, for the man had not yet been confessed,
as the father had been assisting the others. In that extremity the
father applied to him a picture of St. Nicholas of Tolentino, and
at its contact the dying man returned to his senses, confessed very
slowly, and received the other sacraments with fervor; and had even
twenty-four hours left in which to bewail the carelessness of his life,
as he did. All held that event as a miracle worked by St. Nicholas,
for whom the sick man and the religious had great devotion.

265. That fatal news having reached the city of Manila, a general
revolt was feared as in the former year of 1631, when our churches
were burned, our convents pillaged, our sacred images profaned,
and our ministers seized and killed. In consideration of that,
Governor Don Diego Faxardo sent Captain Gregorio Dicastillo to
Tandag with a small band of Spanish infantry to join Bernabe de la
Plaza, alcalde-mayor and captain of that fort, so that they might
try all means to reduce the insurgents. They went to Butuan where
they established their military headquarters. A general pardon was
published with the warning that those who did not submit would bring
upon themselves the full rigor of the war. But many of the Indians who
presented themselves were hanged, and there were very few of those who
descended the mountains to surrender who were not made slaves. The
very persons who were under greatest obligation to fulfil the word
that they had given in the name of their king broke that word.

266. Our whole convent of Linao was consumed by fire, except
two chalices and some vestments from the sacristy, which three
Indians were able to carry out. They presented themselves with it,
thinking that they would thereby secure their freedom; but they were
immediately thrown under the heavy yoke of slavery. With such acts
of injustice, although the rebels were subdued by that expedition,
their hearts were more obstinate than ever. The city of Manila and
its environs were full of slaves. The Butuan chiefs who were the
mirror of fidelity, suffered processes, exiles, and imprisonments;
and although they were able to win back honor, it was after all their
property had been lost. Some heedless individuals blame the superior
officials with what their inferiors have done, and the excesses and
abuses of others are considered to be done by the influence of the
superiors. But the uprightness and honesty of the royal Audiencia
of Manila can be seen in what they did. For after two years of
imprisonment of one of the Indians whom that expedition prosecuted,
his property was confiscated. Another was tortured and condemned to
death by decapitation. Another was reduced to extreme poverty. All
were persuaded that the heavy hand was entering there. Finally the
governor committed the examination of the causes to Licentiate Manuel
Suarez de Olivera, auditor-general of war and assessor of the governor
of Manila. He declared in favor of the Indian slaves, and freed them
all. The wretched Indians were overjoyed at the decree, but they were
troubled because they had no one to solicit their freedom for them
by attending to the necessary expenses of the court; consequently,
they regarded the day of their redemption as a thing impossible to
attain. They did not dare to ask the aid of the Recollect fathers,
as they thought that the latter were angry at them, as they had
murdered a religious in that insurrection. But since the Recollect
fathers regarded that as [the vicissitude of] fortune, they took the
part of the Indians and did considerable in their defense.

267. Father Fray Agustin de San Pedro was secretary of that province,
who was known by the name of Padre Capitan because of his military
feats which will be explained in part in recording his life. He had
illumined those Indians with the light of the gospel, for which they
held him in great affection. Therefore, he made a list of the slaves
who were in Manila, and its environs, giving the name and surname of
each, and the village where he lived. In the list he included many
others who were not contained in the processes. He presented that
list to the governor and asked him to order the slaves to be set at
liberty. Such a writ was despatched very promptly, and the father
went with the notary through all the houses in order to place the
order in execution. That was a work that caused him great fatigue,
and produced violent contentions. For since those who had paid their
money for slaves were deprived of them, scarcely did he arrive at a
house where some insult was not heard. The expenses were increased,
but he obtained his purpose; for he secured all the slaves, and the
[Recollect] order took care of them, providing them with all the
necessities of life until they were taken to their own native places. A
religious accompanied them, as it was considered necessary to have
a person to defend them in case that any one attempted to injure them.

268. That race is not so rude that it cannot be conquered by kind
acts. Therefore, those Indians talked over among themselves what
the Recollect fathers had done for them without remembering that
the Indians had killed a religious. As they did not remain in their
villages, the notice of our method of procedure spread to the most
hidden recesses of the mountains. In the year 1650 father Fray Joseph
de la Anunciacion was elected provincial; and at the beginning of
the following year, while making his first visit to the province
of Caragha, he arrived at Butuan where he learned that the Indians
were having some trouble with the soldiers. But they were very mild
in telling them of the Recollect fathers. He became encouraged at
that, and having placed his confidence in God, directed himself
to the village of Linao. He entered the mountains, talked with the
Indian chiefs, and exhorted them to become peaceful and return to
the vassalage of his Majesty. He obtained that in a very few days,
and left that region in the utmost peace.

269. At this point we must reflect upon what was insinuated above. I
said that the king our sovereign wrote to the father provincial of
Philipinas ordering him to see to it that his religious did not rouse
up the Indians, since they ought, on the contrary, to take part in
calming their minds. His royal letter is dated May 27, 1651, and
in regard to it I mentioned that at the same time when his Majesty
ordered it, he was obeyed in the village of Linao, and with that
statement is already given the proof. I add to this that on the tenth
of July of the above-mentioned year, while the father provincial,
Fray Joseph de la Anunciacion, was in Manila, he wrote to our father
vicar-general informing him of the visit to Caragha. Among other
things (which do not concern the matter) he wrote the following,
which is very suitable for our purpose: "I made the first visit to
the province amid remarkable sufferings and contrary winds, and thus
spent about one year there. But I considered that labor as well spent
because of the fruit that was obtained from it; for God was pleased
by my assistance to reclaim more than six hundred tributes in Linao,
who had revolted and were disturbed, without greater cost than one
decapitation and some punishments of little importance. All was
left as quiet as it had been before, and it has been increased by
some tributes. The only thing that especially troubled me was, that
I could leave no more than one religious in each mission, while some
missions were such that two were not sufficient. These are so separated
from one another that the distance is at least twenty leguas. That
distance must be made over troublesome seas, for the winds are not
always favorable, so that one can only occasionally favor or console
the other. It is a mercy of God that zeal for the conversion of souls
has penetrated all, so that they put away their own welfare, relief,
and consolation for those of others."

270. That section proves, first, the care of the superiors in aiding
to pacify the Indians; secondly, that, to maintain them in peace,
one cannot accomplish so much by the severity of punishment as
by the mildness and gentleness of love; thirdly, the vast amount
of hardship that those poor ministers suffer. I must only add now
that some who had but little fear of God, seeing that the Indians
in Tandag had become quiet through the efforts of father Fray Pedro
de San Joseph Roxas, ascribed the sedition of Linao to father Fray
Agustin de Santa Maria. No investigation was made in order to give
the lie to the enormity of that falsehood, for he was purified from
that accusation by the blood from his veins, and because Heaven itself
gave some more than ordinary testimonies of his innocence. I am going
to mention them by compiling a treatise on his life.

[Section viii treats of the life of father Fray Augustin de Santa
Maria. He was born in Macan of Portuguese parents, and entered
the Recollect order. After being ordained as a priest, he was sent
to Caragha to learn the language of the natives, where he labored
diligently. Some years later he was sent to Linao, where he was killed
by the insurgents, May 16, 1651. His body, after being treated with
indignities by the natives, was finally buried by a pious native
woman. The section and chapter close with the recitation of several
miraculous occurrences.]




CHAPTER II

Life of the venerable father Fray Francisco de la Resurreccion;
and other events that happened in the year 1651.

[Section vi is the only part of this chapter referring to the
Philippines.]




Sec. VI

The eleventh mission goes from Espana to the Philipinas Islands

328.... Our holy province of Philipinas was burning with the most
ardent desire to enlighten the wretched Indians with the rays of
the faith; but it found itself opposed by contrary winds; these
blowing forcibly against the four corners of the house (as happened
there with Job), God proved it in patience. The church and a great
portion of the convent of the city of Manila had been ruined by
earthquakes, and the religious had no other habitation left than
some wretched cells, or rather huts, that they had set up in the
garden. Governor Don Diego Faxardo had ordered the convent of Tandag
to be demolished. The insurrection of that village (which thus far
has not succeeded) was said to have been caused by our religious. The
village of Linao had been withdrawn from its subjection to Espana,
and the venerable father Fray Agustin de Santa Maria had been killed
by lance-thrusts. The triennium of our father Fray Juan de San Antonio
was passing; and during that time some missionaries had been seized
and made captives--among them fathers Fray Martin de San Nicolas,
Fray Miguel de la Concepcion (a native of Guadix, or as others assert,
of Granada), and brother Fray Joseph de la Madre de Dios, a native
of Mexico. The Jolo Moros practiced the greatest cruelties on those
men; they also pillaged and burned the convents of Cuyo, Romblon,
and Marivelez. The Chinese occasioned a great fire in the convent
of San Sebastian de Calumpan, and the Dutch another in the convent
of Cigayan. All those unfortunate events kept that holy province
harassed to the utmost; but their fervor did not cool one whit. On
the contrary, the fire of their zeal always mounted high and blazed
more brightly the more they were oppressed by misfortunes, as it was
a flame that never knew other paths.

329. In the year 1646 was celebrated the intermediary chapter of that
holy province, during the provincialate of our father Fray Juan de San
Antonio. In it the venerable father Fray Jacinto de San Fulgencio was
chosen to come to Espana and attend, as one of the voting fathers,
the seventh general chapter which was to be celebrated in the city
of Valladolid in the year 48; and especially, so that he might enlist
evangelical soldiers who should go to work in the spiritual conquest
of the Indians--for, since so many religious had been captured, there
was a lack of them. The said father Fray Jacinto could not embark that
same year, because of the great disturbances caused on the sea by the
Dutch, as already remarked. Consequently, he did not reach the city
and court of Madrid until March, 1649, after the chapter had already
been held. In that chapter, our venerable father Fray Pedro Manuel
de San Agustin was elected vicar-general of all the congregation.

330. The said our father vicar-general was outside the court visiting
the provinces, when the father commissary arrived. Accordingly, the
latter wrote to him, petitioning him to advise the convents of his
coming so that the religious might in that way learn of the opportunity
presented to them to go to employ their talents in the new world. Our
father vicar-general attended to that with the so holy zeal that he
was known to possess. His pastoral letter was filled with the flames
of divine love; for he inspired the souls of the religious in such a
manner that, in a few days, he had the signatures of more than fifty of
them. At that same time his Reverence received a paper from the convent
of San Carlos de Turin (which belongs to our Recollect congregation
in Italia) in which father Fray Celestino de San Christoval, lecturer
in theology, father Fray Bruno de San Guillermo, and father Fray
Archangel de Santa Maria petitioned him very urgently to admit them
in that mission, binding themselves to get the permissions of their
prelates. But, praising their good intention, our father vicar-general
refused to admit them on the ground of the royal decree that forbids
the passing [to the Philippines] of foreigners.

331. While all the above was happening, the father-commissary, Fray
Jacinto de San Fulgencio, delivered to his Majesty the letters of
the royal Audiencia, the city, and the most illustrious cabildo of
Manila, which were given above for another purpose. He obtained a royal
decree to take back eighteen religious. The king our sovereign gave
him three hundred and sixty-two thousand three hundred and ninety-two
maravedis for the journey, beside what his Majesty had assigned for the
maintenance and transportation of the missionaries in Cadiz, Vera-Cruz,
Mexico, and Acapulco. His Majesty also continued the alms for the four
ministers of the convent of Manila, and the medicines; ordering also
that four thousand pesos be given them in Mexico for the repair of the
said convent, which had suffered almost total ruin in the earthquake
of the year 45. In addition to that, the father-commissary petitioned
that the father-procurator at Roma urgently request permission to
send evangelical ministers to Japon, China, Siam, and other near-by
kingdoms, showing in all his great zeal for the conversion of souls.

332. The eighteen missionaries whom the king hail conceded to the
father-commissary for that so distant harvest in the Philipinas
Islands gathered to him in a few days. He also took six more religious
at the cost of that holy province, in its name contracting many new
obligations, in order not to fail in the cultivation of the vineyard of
the Lord. Of those who had volunteered, those who appeared to be most
intelligent and zealous were chosen; and the procurator tried to get
them to Sevilla as soon as possible, where they arrived on February
20, 1651. They finally embarked, and celebrated their spiritual
exercises on shipboard just as if they were in the retirement
and quiet of their own convents. They preached many afternoons;
persuaded the sailors to be present at the prayer of the rosary
daily, exhorted them never to let the sun go down on their sins,
since they had the sacrament of penitence so near at hand; and were
very urgent in teaching them all the Christian doctrine. God granted
them the consolation of experiencing considerable fruit by that means;
for morals were considerably reformed, and oaths and blasphemies were
banished, so that the ship was like a religious house. The religious
gave many thanks to God, because at their exhortation He conquered the
obstinacy of a Moro who begged them to wash him with the holy waters
of baptism. The Moro received those waters with great fervor, and died
shortly after, leaving all in the great hope that he attained glory.

333. For twenty days they suffered violent and contrary winds, but God
delivered them from that peril and from other very serious dangers. He
preserved them also from an epidemic that was raging in the port of
Vera-Cruz--a disease called vomito prieto, [30] from whose malignancy
the greater part of those who had embarked died, although only one of
our religious perished. They reached Mexico all worn out, and remained
in that city until March 10, 1652. Finally they reembarked in the port
of Acapulco, whence they had a fortunate passage to the Philipinas
Islands. They arrived there so opportunely that the fathers were
discussing the abandonment of some of the missions because of their
so great need of ministers. Consequently, they gave many thanks to the
divine Majesty for those religious who arrived at so suitable a season.

[Chapter iii consists of accounts of the lives of various Recollect
fathers. Those who labored in the Philippines are the following. Miguel
de Santa Maria was a native of Cadiz and a son of Rodrigo Lopez de
Almansa. He professed in the Manila convent June 26, 1618, at the
age of 28. Later he became prior of the Caraga mission, and founded
the convent of Tandag. In 1624 he was elected procuratol-general
of the Philippine province. He attempted in 1629 and 1630 to go
to Japan; but in the first year the vessel was wrecked, and in the
second the governor forbade the journey. He was sent finally to the
mission at Cuyo, but the troubles with the Moros compelled him to
flee. Reaching Manila, he refused the offer of the secretaryship to the
visitor-general, and the remainder of his life was spent in that city,
his death occurring in the year 1644 or 1651. Gaspar de Santa Monica
was a native of the city of Orihuela, in Valencia, his family name
being Padros. He took the habit in the convent at Valencia, November 1,
1613. He joined the mission organized by Andres del Espiritu Santo, and
arrived at Manila in 1622. The following year he was appointed prior
of the convent of Marivelez; and in 1624, when the first provincial
chapter of the order was held in the Philippines, he was elected
prior of the convent of Cuyo, where he suffered many hardships. He
became secretary to Andres del Espiritu Santo upon the election of
the latter to the provincialate in 1626; but, falling ill, he was
unable to perform the duties of that office and was made prior of
the convent of Calumpan, in 1627. In 1629 he was one of the religious
shipwrecked in the endeavor to reach Japan surreptitiously. He became
definitor of the province in 1632, and in 1638 prior of the convent
at Linao. On the completion of that office in 1642 it does not appear
that he filled other posts. He died in the city of Manila in 1651.]

[Chapter iv treats in great part of the life of Pedro de la
Madre de Dios. He was born at Salamanca in 1580, and his family
name was Lopez. He took the habit in the convent at Valladolid,
in 1605. Somewhere between the years 1612-1614 he was sent as
vicar-provincial to the Philippines, with the brief for the separation
of the Recollects from the regular Augustinians, conceded by the
pope. After the expiration of that office in 1615 he spent the time
until 1623 in work among the novices and as prior of the convents
of Manila and Cavite. July 1623 to February 1624, he acted again
as vicar-provincial. In the latter year he was chosen procurator
to Spain, and the representative of the Philippines to the general
chapter of the order to be held in 1627. Sailing from Manila in 1625,
the remainder of his life was spent in Spain in various employments and
in retirement. His death occurred between the years 1649-1652. Section
vi of this chapter treats of the Recollect convent of San Juan
de Bagumbaya (for whose early history given in summary here,
see VOL. XXI). In 1642, the governor Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera
ordered all the buildings in the village of Bagumbaya to be torn down
for fear of the Dutch, among them the convent. Despite the endeavor
of the religious to save their convent, it was demolished and a new
fort begun there. The order had refused the 4,000 pesos offered them
by the governor, saying that their possessions were worth more than
50,000. This action of the governor was made part of the charges in
the residencia, and he was condemned to pay the order 25,000 pesos,
and the ground-plots were restored to them. Thereupon the fort was
demolished, and a new convent and church erected. Section vii details
the placing of the holy image of the Christ of Humility and Patience
(Santo Cristo de Humildad y Paciencia) in the Recollect convent at
Manila in the year 1652.]

[Chapter v contains treatises on the lives of the following Recollect
missionaries in the Philippines. Diego de Santa Ana was a native of
Zaragoza (his secular name being Ribas), and was born in 1599. He
professed in the convent of that city, July 26, 1616. Volunteering for
the Philippine missions in 1620, he arrived at Manila in 1622. That
same year he was sent to the islands of Calamianes, in company with
Francisco de San Nicolas, where he labored amid great difficulties for
the conversion of the rude people inhabiting those islands. In 1626
he was sent to the village of Caviscail in Paragua, where he labored
for a year; then he was appointed prior of the convent of Linacapan,
the most dangerous mission of the Calamianes, which was infested by
the hostile Moros. He was in the district of Butuan in 1629 when the
insurrection of Caraga broke out, where he was in considerable danger
of losing his life. He remained in Caraga for several years after the
insurrection was put down; but asked leave to return to the Calamianes
missions. In 1652 he suffered extreme hardships while hiding in the
mountains from the Joloans, who had made one of their numerous raids
in the village of Dinay in the island of Paragua. Some assert that
he died in the Manila hospital, while others say that he met his
death in the mountains about Dinay. Lorenzo de San Facundo was born
in Calaceyte in Aragon (his family name being Valls) and professed
in the convent of Zaragoza, July 8, 1618, at the age of 36. He went
to the Philippines in 1621. There he became prior of the convent
of Marivelez, and afterward of Binalgaban in the province of Panay,
of Masingloc in the province of Zambales, and lastly of Bacoag where
he suffered various hardships and captivity. He especially obtained
good results by his preaching in the island of Cuyo, and in Siargao
in the province of Caraga. He was afterward president of the chapter,
definitor of the province, and procurator to Spain with a vote in the
general chapter (although he was unable to arrive in Spain in time
for the chapter). In company with Juan de San Joseph, he was taken by
Corcuera on his Jolo campaign to look after the Caraga natives in his
army. The two religious penetrated the mountains alone in an endeavor
(partially successful) to reduce the Joloans to peace. He died in 1652,
after a long and deep-seated infirmity. Antonio de la Madre de Dios,
son of Fernando Romero Pizarro of Truxillo, professed in the Madrid
convent, September 24, 1615. He went to the Philippines in 1621. He
was sent to the island Hermosa, where he remained until that island
was abandoned by the Spaniards. On returning to the islands he was
employed in various missions, dying in 1652 from fever contracted while
nursing a secular priest. Juan de San Joseph was a native of Granada,
and took the Recollect habit in Manila. Being sent to the missions of
the Calamianes he proved very successful in the snaring of souls. He
was captured in 1632 by the Joloans, and was a captive among them
for more than two years. After his service in the Jolo campaign he
returned to Manila, and finally died in the mission of the island of
Romblon. Diego de San Juan Evangelista, son of Pedro de Olite, was
a native of Zaragoza and took the habit in the convent of Manteria
in Zaragoza, April 3, 1606. Shortly after, he deserted the order;
but afterward returned to it. He left for the Philippine mission
in the year 1622, where he became an eloquent preacher. He served
as chaplain in two fleets, missionary in the Calamianes, and prior
of Cavite and Manila. Death came to him in the convent of Bagumbaya
in 1652. Antonio de San Agustin was a native of Manila (being born
about 1592), where he professed. In 1634 he obtained permission to go
to the Japanese mission, but the Chinese who had been hired to take
them failed to fulfil their contract. In the great Chinese revolt
of 1639 he acted as minister to the Zambal archers in the Spanish
army. He served in various capacities, among them being the office
of definitor. His death occurred in 1652.]

[Chapter vii treats of the lives of Onofre de la Madre de Dios and
Augustin de San Pedro, the famous "Padre Capitan." The first was the
son of Joseph Boquet, and was born in Perpinan in 1584, and professed
in the convent of Zaragoza, March 16, 1606. Joining the Philippine
mission, he reached those islands in 1620, where he was immediately
sent to the new missions in the south of the archipelago, with the
appointment of prior of Cebu. In 1624 he was elected first provincial
of the order in the Philippines, serving in that office for two years,
during which time he visited his province at the risk of capture from
both Dutch and Moros. After the expiration of his term he asked and
obtained permission to go to the Calamianes, and worked faithfully
in the island of Culion, where he mastered the language. In 1627 he
was sent to Spain as procurator, but did not return thence, as he
was elected provincial of the province of Aragon. His death occurred
in the convent of Calatayud in Spain, in 1638 (reported wrongly to
have occurred at Barcelona in 1653, as he was confused with another
religious of the same name). "Padre Capitan," the son of Miguel
Rodriguez, was born in Berganza, Portugal, and professed in Valladolid,
in 1619. Arriving at the Philippines in 1623, he was speedily sent to
the Caraga missions, where he labored for the rest of his life in the
conversion of its natives, and in defending them from the inroads of
the Moros. He was many times prior of Butuan, Cagayang, Linao, Tandag,
and Romblon. In Mindanao he personally baptized more than 10,000
adults. His death occurred in 1653, and he left behind a name long
revered among the natives because of his prowess. The seventh section
of this chapter is an answer to Father Combes of the Jesuit Society
(who had tried to belittle the efforts of the Recollects in Mindanao),
in which the good work that the Recollects have accomplished is shown.]






BOOK SECOND OF THE SEVENTH DECADE


CHAPTER II

The attempt is made in Philipinas to subject the religious who are
parish priests to the visitation of the bishops.




Sec. I

Relation of the practice that has always been followed in the spiritual
administration of the islands; and what happened when the attempt
was made to change it.


Year 1656

[In 1654 the first mutterings of the storm caused by the visitation of
the regulars by the bishops break in the Philippines. The dates of the
arrival of the various orders are given; and the narrative continues:]

719.... Those holy orders, each one doing its share, declared pitiless
war against paganism, and achieved signal victories in that war,
destroying the idols of Belial and planting solidly the health-giving
sign of the cross; so that whatever is conquered in the islands is
due to their fervent zeal. For they planted the faith, and watered
that land with blood so that it might produce fruit abundantly; and
God was the cause of so wonderful an increase. The system that they
have always followed in the spiritual administration of the missions
and villages which they have formed at the cost of their sweat is
the same as that observed in America in the beginning by various
apostolic privileges. In the provincial chapters held by each order,
they appoint as superiors of the houses established in the villages
of Indians who are already converted, those religious who are fit to
exercise the office of cura by their learning, their morals, and other
qualities. The same is also done in regard to the residences of the
active missions, where those thus appointed continue the preaching to
and conversion of the heathen, with very perceptible progress. Both
the former and the latter exercise the ministries to which they
are destined, without need of other approbation than that of the
definitors--who entrust to these heads of houses the administration
of the sacraments and the spiritual cultivation of those souls, in
the respective territory where the convent is located, a superior
being elected for each convent. This is done independently of the
bishops. Likewise the definitors of each order in their meetings
appoint various of the most learned and experienced men, to whom is
entrusted and delegated the faculty of giving dispensation in regard
to the obstacles of marriage, and the exercise of other favors and
privileges contained in the pontifical briefs. Those powers are never
exercised if the diocesans are intra duas dietas, [31] without their
permission and approbation; and always this is done [only] in cases
of evident necessity.

720. The provincials visit their provinces annually; and the said
religious not only in what concerns their profession and regular
observance, but also in what relates to their activities as curas. The
diocesan prelates appoint their outside vicars for those territories
which are in charge of the orders. They almost always avail themselves
of those same religious for that, because of the great lack of secular
priests. The religious submit to the visitation of the diocesan in
matters touching the erection of chaplaincies, charitable works, the
inspection of wills, and confraternities that are not exempt. They
resist only what includes the violation of their privileges granted
by the supreme pontiffs to the said holy orders for the purpose of
the propagation of the faith in regions so distant. Such privileges,
although not used in other parts of the Indias, ought to be maintained
in Philipinas, for reasons that will be stated below. This is what
has been observed from the discovery of the said islands until the
present time; and the contrary has not been ordered by the king as
patron, by the royal Council of the Indias, or by the apostolic see,
although they have had full knowledge of the cause. This method has
been practiced, both before and since the Council of Trent; and there
has been no change in it--not even since the year 1652, when special
provision regarding it was made for Nueva Espana and Peru; and it
was ordered that the missionary religious of those provinces should
receive collation and canonical institution from the ordinaries of
those countries, in order to continue their exercise as curas; and
that consequently they must submit to the visitation and correction
of the bishops in officio officiando et quoad curam animarum. [32] But
however thoroughly that was placed in execution in those kingdoms, it
could not be carried out in the Philipinas Islands; for there even the
reasons which influenced the exemption of the regulars are in force.

721. It is true that the bishops have always made the strongest efforts
to subject the parish priests who are religious to their jurisdiction;
but they have never been able to succeed in it, for the religious are
unwilling to accept the charge with that burden. The first bishop
of Manila and of all the islands, Don Fray Domingo de Salazar,
tried to establish that subjection. The Observantine Augustinian
fathers and the Franciscans made use of the means which prudence
dictated, in order to quiet their scrupulous consciences. Seeing
that nothing [else] was sufficient, they resigned their missions
before the governor, as vice-patron, protesting that they would care
for the conversion of the heathen, but that they could not keep
the parochial administration of those who were converted, without
the enjoyment of all their privileges. Therefore, his Excellency
was forced to desist from his attempt, as he had no seculars to
whom to entrust that administration. In 1654, the attempt was made
to establish in Philipinas the practice recently adopted in the
kingdoms of Peru and Nueva Espana by petition of the fiscal of the
royal Audiencia. That body ordered that plan to be carried out, by
a decree of October 22; and since the chapters of the two provinces
of the order, the calced and discalced, were to be held in April of
55, that decree was communicated to them, with the warning that if
they were not obedient they would be deprived of their missions, and
the missionaries of the emoluments which had been assigned them for
their suitable support. All the orders opposed that change, following
logical methods in their defense, and averse to seeing the necessity
of abandoning their missions. But at last, as there was no other way,
the venerable fathers-provincial were reduced to handing over to the
governor and bishops all the ministries in their charge, so that,
as the former was the vice-patron and the latter were the ordinaries,
they might appoint whomever they wished to the curacies.

722. That resignation was handed to the fiscal, and in view of
it, in order that the most suitable provision might be made, with
full knowledge, he asked that writs be made out--first, to show how
many secular clergy were in the four bishoprics; second, so that the
officials of the royal treasury might attest the amount of the stipends
paid to the religious employed in the missions, and third, so that
the provincials might send the names of their subordinates employed in
the missions. That was ordered by a decree of May 10 in the said year
1655. It resulted that, in all, 254 religious were occupied in 252
missions; that the royal treasury only paid stipends corresponding to
141 missionaries; and that there were only 59 suitable secular priests
in all the islands. The fiscal, seeing that according to the report
the procedure that had been taken could not be maintained, in order
to obviate the inconveniences that would ensue to the natives and
inhabitants of those dominions if the religious were withdrawn from
the villages, petitioned on January 4, 1656, that without innovation
the orders be maintained in the missions, until it should be proved
that there was a sufficient supply of secular priests to take care of
them; and that they be assisted with the usual emoluments. He asked
and charged the reverend fathers-provincial to look after the spiritual
administration with their accustomed zeal. The royal Audiencia having
so ordered in toto by an act of February 17, the holy orders returned
very willingly to apply their shoulders to the work. Those acts
were sent to the royal Council of the Indias. The cause having been
discussed there, in view of the reports of the governor (which were
throughout favorable to the orders), and of the manifestos presented
by the orders in justification of their rights, the documents were
approved on October 23, 1666, and the result was to make no innovation
in what had been decided, and it does not appear that any other decree
was enacted against the observance and practice that the religious
have always maintained in those islands. Therefore the archbishop,
having claimed that the appointments for the missions devolved on him
by the form of canonical collation in cases where his Majesty did
not make use of the privilege which belonged to him as patron; and
endeavoring by that means to deprive the orders of the right which
they possess of making those appointments without the intervention
of his Excellency: the royal Council by a decree of September 26,
1687, ordered that the matter be continued in the form in which it
had been administered until then, and that no change be permitted.

723. Shortly after the archbishop of Manila, Don Diego Camacho, making
use of the most powerful means, attempted to subject the religious to
his approbation, visitation, and correction in officio officiando. For
that purpose he had recourse to his Holiness, to whom in the year 1697,
he represented that there were many religious in the islands employed
in more than seven hundred parishes, who had refused and were refusing
to receive the visitation and correction of the diocesans; and he asked
that they be compelled to receive such visitation. Upon seeing that,
his Holiness Clement XI decided (January 30, 1705) that the right
of visiting the parochial regulars belonged to the said archbishop
and other bishops; but he made no mention of the other points which
had been referred to him, and which were also under dispute. This
appears from the brief despatched in this regard. This brief having
been presented in the Council of the Indias, it appears that it was
confirmed on April 22 of the same year. The said archbishop ordered
it to be executed (October 26, 1707) with the most strenuous efforts;
but he encountered in this such dissensions and disturbances that it
is considered advisable to omit the relation thereof. It was necessary
to resign the ministries once more, the superiors [of the orders]
protesting that they would never agree to such a subjection, and
that the archbishop could make appointments to the curacies as he
wished. By that means his Excellency was so balked that, the cause
having been fully proved, the evidence received, and the proofs
adduced by both parties, the petition introduced by the orders was
allowed on March 30, 1708; and it was ordered that the necessary
official statements be given them. The authority of the governor
was interposed extra-judicially, and he ordered that the religious
should occupy the abandoned curacies, and that there should be no
change. The archbishop himself, who had put forward that claim,
was obliged to confess that he could not put it into practice.

724. It was sufficiently clear by that alone that the holy orders have
more than enough reason for the independence from the bishops that they
enjoy in their parochial ministry. For if they did not have in their
primitive being the causes and motives for the apostolic privileges
which exempted them, even from that of the ordinaries, it would not
have been possible for them to maintain themselves so long with that
prerogative which could not subsist in the kingdoms of America. But,
since there are some persons who, as their understanding is on a
par with their bodily senses, register events on the surface only
without going within for the reasons (from which the report has been
originated and spread through Europa, that the orders of Philipinas
have seized all the authority without other reason than because they
wish it so), I am compelled to vindicate them from so atrocious a
calumny by making known some of the reasons why they have made (as
they still do) so strong a resistance to this subjection. I shall
first discuss all the orders in common, and then our reformed branch
in particular. But I give warning that I do not intend to transform my
history into formal charges. Adequate apologetic writings, founded on
law, have been scattered through those holy families to demonstrate the
exemption that attends them. Quite recently, in the former year 1734,
a formal statement was presented in the royal Council by twenty-three
graduates of the famous University of Salamanca (confirmed by eight
who are not regulars) in which their testimonies agree in affirming
that the religious act according to the dictates of conscience in
administering the curacies without subjecting themselves to the
bishops. Some add that they are bound in conscience to resist this
subjection, as it is an imposition on the regular religious. Therefore,
I shall treat that matter simply as an historian, taking for granted
the right which, according to various apostolic privileges, supports
them in not subjecting themselves to the bishops; and, in case the
latter attempt this, in abandoning the ministries.




Sec. II

Some of the arguments that support the orders in Philipinas in not
submitting to the visitation of the ordinaries in regard to the
ministries.

725. That various supreme pontiffs, especially St. Pius V, conceded to
the regulars of the Indias the privilege of obtaining their ministries
with complete independence from the bishops, no one is so bold as to
deny. The motive for that concession was the lack of secular priests
in those countries. Consequently, the question (or doubt) as to
whether that indult is or is not to be observed is not one of law,
but one of pure fact. Its solution depends on ascertaining whether
there are in those regions a sufficient number of clergy suitable
to serve their parishes and exercise the care of souls. For, in case
there are, it is not denied that that duty belongs to the seculars;
for it is the peculiar duty of the religious to devote themselves to
God in the retirement of their cloisters. If, on this hypothesis,
the regulars should desire or be permitted to take charge of the
said spiritual administration, they ought to submit to the bishops
in officio officiando for then the cause of that indult would not
exist. The fact of the exemption having ceased for the great part in
the kingdoms of Nueva Espana and Peru, did not arise from the said
privileges having been revoked (for they are not, especially that
of St. Pius V) but only and necessarily because the impelling cause
for conceding such exemption did not actually exist. For, in those
kingdoms, the number of secular ecclesiastics increased so greatly
that enough of them were found to administer the holy sacraments to
their inhabitants. Since the motive has ceased, the privilege cannot
endure. Now then, I suppose that there are more than two millions
of people in the Philipinas Islands who confess the name of Christ,
through the influence of the fervent zeal of the religious. In the year
1655, as was stated in the preceding paragraph, for two hundred and
fifty-two missions in charge of the orders there were only fifty-nine
secular priests. In 1705, when that subjection was attempted so
earnestly by Archbishop Don Diego Camacho, the parishes were extended
by his deposition to the number of more than seven hundred. For those
parishes, according to the certification of the secretary of that
prelate, only sixty-seven secular priests were found in his diocese;
and of those only ten were suitable for administering the missions,
as the rest were occupied in the duties of necessary residence. At
present, the number of seculars is not much greater nor will it ever
be--partly because those of Europa do not have any inducement to go
to those islands, and partly because, since the Spaniards there are so
few, there cannot be many persons sprung from these kingdoms who rise
to the priesthood; further, because the Indians are generally unfit for
that holy ministry. In view of all the above, who does not see that
the orders avail themselves of their right in resisting the burden
of the visitation which the bishops are trying to impose on them?

726. Nor does it avail the opposition that Pope Clement XI determined
and declared, at the petition of the said archbishop, on January 30,
1705, "that the right of visiting the regulars in what concerns
the care of souls and the administration of the holy sacraments
belongs to the archbishop of Manila and the other bishops of the
Philipinas Islands." For besides the defects of misrepresentation and
surreptitious measures [obrepcion y subrepcion] which were then made
manifest, contained in that brief, the said pontifical declaration,
whether it be conceived as a law, as an order, or as a sentence,
cannot fail to be appealed from. This is what the orders did,
appealing to his Holiness, alleging before the archbishop who put
the brief into execution the motives which, according to law, they
rightfully had for resisting that visitation. In order to establish
the truth that the religious had many arguments in their favor, it is
not necessary to adduce other proof than what results from the fact
that the said archbishop, who was the person most interested, desisted
from the execution of the brief. Other diocesans of the islands who,
notwithstanding the above-cited brief, have tolerated and tolerate the
exemption of the orders for no other reason than the actual scarcity
of secular priests, have authorized that procedure. Therefore, they
practically admit that the indult of St. Pius remains in force, and
that the mandate of Clement XI is impossible whenever the religious
abandon the curacies.

727. Besides, the same fact that the said metropolitan did not put
into execution the above-cited brief of Clement XI as its nature
and authority demanded, gave one to understand either that it was
notoriously surreptitious, or especially grievous and productive of
some scandal, or of irreparable injury to the Catholic religion;
for only through such motives can the mandates of the pope be
suspended. If the first be correct, it is an implied or virtual
declaration that the said order is null and void; therefore,
the regulars can legally proceed with the administration of the
missions without subjecting themselves to the ordinaries, making use
of their former privileges. If the second or third--his illustrious
Lordship having offered in that same act in which he provided for the
suspension of the brief, to inform the pope of the predominant reasons
that determined him to supersede the said brief--in the meantime,
until the said information shall reach him, and the effect that is
produced by it on his Holiness's mind shall be made known to the
religious, the fact that they avail themselves of their privileges
in the administration of the parishes cannot be imputed to them as
guilt. The reason for that is, that they cannot believe that that
prelate will neglect to inform his Holiness of the motives why he
did not proceed with the execution [of the brief]. The fact that the
Roman court has not made any new provision in regard to that matter
shows that, just as in virtue of the allegations of the regulars
the said archbishop found it necessary not to carry his pretension
farther, so likewise the supreme pontiff has tacitly approved and has
left the religious with the exemption that they enjoyed before the
above-mentioned brief. Therefore, in regard to either law, they will
safely be able to proceed with the administration of the churches in
their charge without the intervention of the bishops.

728. Much less can the said brief of Clement XI stand in regard
to the decree that "the regulars cannot resign from the missions
or parishes under penalty of censures, loss of benefices, and
other arbitrary penalties." For this clause alone is sufficient to
persuade one that the representations that were made to obtain that
decision from the pope were not ruled by truth. For had his Holiness
well understood all the circumstances, how could he have issued an
order from which would follow the inference of injuries terrible and
irremediable to the holy orders? If those religious, in so far as
they are curas, were to become subject to the bishops, they would
not hold their curacies as a reward after serving his Majesty so
much, but would regard their position as lower than that of those
who remain free from responsibility in their communities. For the
latter have no other obligation than to obey their superior or his
two subordinates, so that there can never be any contrariety in the
orders or any doubt for the religious of what he is to do; while
the former, after all their anxiety, have to study very carefully
over obeying their legitimate superiors and in keeping the bishops
content (which, as will be said, would both be impossible things),
whence must originate many disturbances and much restlessness. And
if it is intolerable that he who serves his king with faithfulness be
not rewarded, the order would be inverted on this occasion; for after
so much labor they could only succeed in multiplying subjections, and
be less free in their ministries. The orders would receive as their
reward the abolition of the exemption which the holy see conceded to
them as a recompense for the noble fruits which they have gathered
in the universal Church by their virtue and holiness--preserving it
fresh and beautiful by watering it with the blood of so many martyrs,
by which they made it illustrious; and increasing it with new worlds,
provinces, and millions of children whom they have subjected to it,
of which the histories are full. They will be obliged to place in the
curacies those who solicit them the most urgently, importuning by means
from which the more retiring and the more worthy shrink. They will
expose their religious to danger even after they have well fulfilled
the obligations of their ministries, in case that they are not to
the liking of the ordinary--besides many other annoyances which will
inevitably come upon the regulars. And if the orders have no other
means to avoid that and the rest which will be stated below than to
resign their missions, how could the benign pontiff oblige them to
stay therein if he knew those circumstances fully?

729. It cannot be denied that the office of parish priest even with
the exemption from the ordinary is altogether accessory, and a heavy
responsibility superadded to the religious estate. For in order that
they might administer in the said form, an apostolic dispensation
has been necessary which is founded on grave reasons--and that with
attention to only what the religious estate demands from him who has
entered it, according to what is taught by common law and the doctrine
of the saints. If that method of administering with exemption from
the ordinary is changed, and the regular who has charge of a parish
should as such become subject to the correction and visitation of
the ordinary, and in other respects to the heads of his order, it is
certain that it would be an innovation so great that they would be
quite changed in their respect for public opinion, and in their mode
of life; and the religious would be like a man cleft in two, those
in some houses being subject to one superior and those in others
to another, all of different hierarchies, and with the dangerous
consequences that will be stated. Will the piety of the pope bind
the religious to so great a cross?

730. Let us suppose (as is feasible) that the bishop were to become
displeased with any order, or with any missionary. In such case
he could maintain or remove the missionary against the will of his
provincial by very specious pretexts. If necessary, he could even
threaten the latter with censures, in order to make him submit to
his authority. How fecund a source of perdition and total ruin that
would be for the orders, any one can conceive; but only those who
have experience in those islands could perfectly comprehend it. Let
the regulars of America tell how they have to tolerate it through
compulsion. If a religious is found lacking, and the offense has
the appearance on one side of belonging to morals and life and on
the other to the office of cura, the poor missionary is left in the
sane position as those goods which the law styles mostrencos [i.e.,
goods which have no known owner], and shall belong to the first one
who seizes them; and even he is in much worse condition, because
of the contests that must necessarily ensue. For, if the provincial
commences to form a process and it comes afterward to the notice of the
ordinary, the latter will issue an act--and, if it should be necessary,
a censure--ordering the said provincial to quash the entire process,
to deliver it to him, and to desist from the cause by saying that he
alone has the power to try it. The provincial appeals to the judge
delegated by his Holiness and he, as he has entire jurisdiction of
the case, commands the ordinary with the warning of censure to leave
the cause alone and deliver up the acts. The latter not obeying,
the matter may be carried to such an extreme that two ecclesiastical
prelates excommunicate each other, and threaten each other with
interdict and the cessation of divine service. This is not fancy,
for that has happened in like case in Manila. That is the greatest
danger since, because of the great distance, redress moves with
very dilatory steps. But in the meanwhile the suits concerning the
religious are proceeding from tribunal to tribunal, contrary to the
clearly expressed privileges of his exemption.

731. But let us suppose that the regular parish priest is unworthy
to persevere in his mission because of secret sins, and that, even
if he remain in it, he may run some risk of his salvation. The
provincial learns of the matter secretly. In such a case, justice
requires two things--one, the punishment of the guilty person; and
the other, that the delinquent shall not lose his reputation by the
declaration of his fault. Charity urges him to remove his subordinate
from danger. If that regular administers without canonical institution
and subjection to the ordinary, everything will be settled very easily,
and justice and charity will be satisfied without any infamy to the
criminal or any dishonor to the order. But if he is subject to the
ordinary, the provincial cannot remove him by his own authority; but
he must have recourse to the ordinary himself, and to the vice-patron,
and then those two agree on the removal. In that case, what can the
provincial say to them? If he should say that he will impart to them
in all secrecy the [nature of the] crime of his subject, that means
is harsh and less safe. The ordinary and the governor, as the father
and the master, may correct and punish the faults of their inferiors
without the least wound to their honor; and must a provincial do so by
dis-accrediting his subordinate with the heads of the community? If
it is decided that the superior do not tell the kind of crime, but
that he asseverate in general terms that there is cause to remove the
religious from that place, the trouble is not avoided. First, they may
think that he speaks thus in order to go ahead with his oldtime custom;
second, because even though the cause of removing him be not a fault,
it can easily be alleged to be one, and the fact that he does not offer
more explanation in that case comes to be the same as manifesting
its gravity by his silence. Finally, honor is very delicate and is
lessened by rumor and suspicion. Since God made the religious exempt
from the secular judges, and the apostolic see exempted them from
the ordinaries, the religious, when they have not professed as curas,
will find themselves without courage to assume that charge with so many
dangers and burdens. And will the apostolic see force them to that?

732. The fact that common law decides that the regular parish priest,
as such, is subject to the visit of the ordinary furnishes no argument
against my statement. For, leaving aside the fact that the supreme
pontiff may abolish such a law--as in fact was done by Pius V, after
the holy Council of Trent, while Urban VIII confirmed this action
afterward; and various statements of the most eminent cardinals
favor this when there is a lack of secular priests as happens in the
Philipinas--it is answered that common law which orders such subjection
is only in point when they wish to persevere in being parish priests;
but does not order that they be so under compulsion. If a secular
priest to whom the curacy has been given permanently by canonical
institution can resign it, and the law does not therefor disqualify
him, why cannot the regulars make that same resignation in order not
to live with the risks from having so many superiors? The regulars
are not curas for justice, but for charity, and they have taken
charge of the missions for lack of other ministers. They do not
administer them through right of proprietorship, but are removable
at will. Consequently, they can be deprived of those missions even
though they live like saints. Is it possible that when the will of
another is sufficient to remove them from their curacies, their own
volition will not suffice with the knowledge of the dangers which
will follow from such a charge? Further, is the regular incapable
of being a proper parish priest, or is he not? If he is, why, if the
secular cura is perpetual--so that, if he does not become unworthy,
neither the ordinary nor the vice-patron can remove him--will not the
regular also remain a cura, supposing the incumbrance of collation and
canonical institution? Why does that institution give all favorable
things to the secular and deprive the regular of all relief? It
imposes upon the regular the duty of feeding the sheep. It binds him
to the territory, so that the provincial cannot remove him without
the consent of the vice-patron and of the ordinary. He loses in great
measure the privilege of the exemption, and with those duties does
not have the comfort of being secure in his curacy, for he does not
hold it for life. Neither is he master of the emoluments which the
parish yields, unless it be imagined that he be dispensed from his
vow of poverty. Consequently, he only gets the burdens by reason of
the collation, and nothing to his advantage. If it be said that he
is not capable of being a parish priest, why the pledge in this new
form of administration?

733. Those who are striving for the subjection of the regulars
as parish priests generally oppose the fact that that form of
administration has been introduced into America, and that therefore it
might serve as an example for the Philipinas Islands. But that argument
is not convincing, and contains many remarkable disparities. First,
because there are plenty of secular priests in Peru and Nueva Espana;
therefore the bishops rightly compelled the religious either to abandon
the administration of the parishes, or to submit to the visitation. For
the motive of the privilege of St. Pius V was lacking, not by any
revocation that he made of it, but because its force had ceased,
its object not being realized. Second, because no one will say that
the orders of America were obliged to remain in the charge of souls,
with the insupportable burden of the visitations. On the contrary,
they agreed to it willingly in order not to abandon the parishes. The
fact that they consented to it there is no proof that they have to do
the same in Philipinas. Third, because the experience of what happened
in Mexico and Peru in regard to the diminution of strict observance
by the regulars, which originated beyond doubt from that subjection,
ought to open the eyes of the superiors of orders in Philipinas to
prevent such harm in their houses. This is not to cast blame on those
who are now enjoying the curacies in this manner in the said kingdoms;
we ought to consider them all as very excellent religious. But it
is an undoubted fact that, with the practice by which the missions
are maintained, in a manner almost perpetual, the provincials not
being able to dispose of their subordinates with complete liberty,
that oldtime strict observance which was planted in those provinces
at their first erection has been greatly obscured. Human nature
is easily inclined to what promotes liberty; and as St. Bernard
teaches, the same ones who love retirement because of their austere
training in the rigors of the order from childhood, when they come
to taste the life that is not so well regulated, desire, procure,
and solicit it. Nothing of that has been seen hitherto in Philipinas,
where, however much they have the parishes in charge, the holy orders
flourish in the most strict observance--for no other reason than that,
if a religious sins, the remedy is quite near at hand since it is
administered solely by the head of the order.

734. Fourth, because there are things more to be wondered at than to
be followed. Although the religious orders are alike, we see that,
while the Church is also one and the same, one person elects one
condition which the other does not adopt. From the same order some go
to the Indias, and others do not go. Then why cannot the same thing
happen in regard to being parish priests subject to the ordinary? Let
the histories of the Indias be read. All of them consider earnestly
whether the religious are to be curas of souls, and much more whether
they are to be curas of justice. Resolutions of entire provinces will
be found on the question whether they should abandon the missions;
generals and illustrious men of the same orders will be found who
approved it; and the reader will find bitter complaints for having
admitted such a burden, recognizing it as the seminary of interminable
discords. For, if those on the mainland, seeing a furious hurricane
on the sea which is dashing the ships to pieces and endangering the
lives of those who are sailing, fear to embark, how much should
the regulars in Philipinas take warning from the new practice in
America? How can one wonder that they follow the example of those
who abandoned the missions joyfully, rather than of those who now
live sorrowfully because they adopted the new method? The fact is,
that no one can take it ill that each one procures what he thinks
best so long as he uses means that are not unlawful in order to get
it. This is what the religious are doing in the present case, taking
care that no detriment follows to their estate and profession. For,
before the souls of others, one ought to watch over his own. Let
it not be (as says St. Paul) that we, preaching to others, behold
ourselves in the irreparable danger of becoming reprobates.

735. Fifth, because the provinces of Philipinas are not, nor can
they be, like those of America, but are as distinct as they are
separate. The latter include, besides the ministries, many community
convents where there are plenty of religious, who greatly exceed
the parish priests in number. The former have but one convent apiece
in Manila, which enjoys an adequate community as do the convents of
Europa. The other houses are located in the villages of the Indians
where those who have charge of the spiritual administration live, and
there is no more community at times than the head of the house alone;
and at the most he has one or two associates, if they are considered
necessary for the exercise of the duties of the mission. Since that
is true, an undeniable inconvenience will follow, namely: if they
are subjected to the visitation and correction of the bishops all can
call themselves not regulars--those outside, because they are parish
priests; and those of Manila, because they have to go to take the
places of the others in case of absence, sickness, or death. They
cannot be excused from that by either the actual definitors of the
outgoing provincials, and all to have to be employed if there is a
lack of ministers. Since the provinces are composed of them almost
entirely, and the consent of the ordinary and the vice-patron would
be necessary for their removal, there would be some provinces which
would have the name of religious government and in reality would be
under the secular government, dependent on those two wills, to which
they would make no vow of obedience. It is a fact that it would be
a real change which those religious would have to endure, from free
and unhindered evangelical ministers to seculars bound in justice to
the care of souls. Can it be considered ill that they resist so great
a transformation, and leave the missions if they find no other way?

736. Sixth, and last, because in America the practice of presenting
three religious for each mission in the form ordered by the king can
be easily observed, as there are many religious. But that presentation
is mortally impossible in Philipinas because of the great scarcity of
religious. For although the orders make the most painstaking efforts
to get them from Espana, they succeed in this with difficulty. For
lack of workers, they are often obliged to entrust the administration
of many villages to one person, and sometimes to abandon districts in
toto. Then how can three be presented for each ministry when there
is scarcely one for each mission? Besides, since there are so many
languages, there is no order which does not minister in four or five
languages; and although all of them apply themselves to the study
of the languages, few attain them so perfectly that they can explain
entirely the height of the mysteries of our holy faith; and since there
are so many missions, what order can present three times the number of
ministers who will worthily serve the missions? Let us suppose a case
also where there would be a sufficient number of capable religious. On
that account there would be no assurance of better results; for
of the three who would be presented, it is possible that the least
capable would be chosen, as there would be no accurate information
of his being less competent. That would be known better within his
own order, where by continual intercourse it is learned who is most
suitable for the ministry. Besides that, there might be a religious
whom it would be proper to retire because of his demerits, but by
virtue of the fact that the prelates have to present three religious
for each mission, they are obliged to include him in the presentation
for the sole purpose of completing the number. Who will prevent a
froward one from slandering the electors, discrediting the worthy,
and gaining the favor of friends and relatives by putting forth all
his efforts to attain the desired liberty in order to escape from the
observance and the cloister? Oh, beginning so full of troubles! If
one had to describe all the troubles, it would be necessary to use
much paper. Let the above suffice, so that it may be recognized that
the reason why the holy orders resist subjection to the bishops is
not so much for the sake of preserving their authority, as because
they see the grave dangers that must ensue for them. Finally, they
exercise their right in that, of which no one can complain, for they
are doing wrong to no one.




Sec. III

Continuation of the matter of the preceding section, with especial
bearing on our discalced Recollect branch.

737. The reasons thus far advanced touch all the orders in common. Let
us now pass on to speak of our own in particular. There is no doubt
that St. Pius V conceded the above-mentioned exemption to the regulars
because they were employed in the conversion of the Indians, and so
that they might proceed in their apostolic missions. That reason is
clearly expressed in the bull; consequently, whenever it is found to
exist, the orders ought to be maintained in the possession of that
grace so long as it is not annulled by express revocation. Hence it
is that, until the present, the bishops have not attempted to subject
the missionaries who are laboring to allure the heathen to our holy
faith and withdraw them from the darkness of their infidelity; for in
order to effect those ends they acknowledge in its force the privilege
of St. Pius V. I agree then that all the missions held by our holy
reformed branch in the said islands ought to be considered as active
missions, where the religious, although as parish priests they minister
spiritually to those already converted, exercise also the arduous
employ of missionaries, as the villages are surrounded by infidels,
whose conversion they secure by the most diligent efforts. Therefore,
the parishes of our jurisdiction ought to be considered not as villages
of converts [doctrinas] already formed, where the only care is to
administer the holy sacraments, but as new conquests where the flock
of Christ is continually increased by apostolic attempts.

738. There are at present one hundred and five villages (besides
those called active missions, which do not enter into this account)
at present in the charge of our holy discalced branch, and they
lie in more than twenty islands. In the principal island of Luzon,
where the city of Manila is located, the order administers fifteen
villages; in that of Mindanao, the second in size, thirty-four;
in that of Paragua and others of the Calamianes, twelve; in that of
Mindoro, twenty-four; in that of Romblon and its outlying islands,
eleven; and in that of Masbate and its intermediate islands, nine. It
is seldom that one of those villages has no infidel inhabitants;
and the religious are kept quite busy in converting them. For
beginning with the island of Luzon and the mountains of Zambales,
the villages of Marivelez, Cabcaben, Moron, and Bagac are surrounded
by blacks who are there called "de Monte" [i.e., "of the mountain"]
[33] who are being constantly converted to our holy faith, for they
are of a very peaceful disposition. Subic is a new conquest, where
various Indians are settling who wander about and are forgotten by the
Christianity of those districts. The settlements that follow from that
point to Bolinao are so near to the black Zambals and Aetas that,
when the latter revolt, one cannot go there without running great
risk of his life. But when peace makes them tractable, some souls
are obtained for God. The villages of Uguit and Babayan, which have
recently been founded in this century with the converted blacks and
wild Indians, [Zimarrones] clearly attest that fact. In Mindanao
the territory conquered by our religious, namely, the district of
Cagayang and the province of Caragha, ought to be considered as the
rose among the thorns, oppressed by Moros, Mindanaos, and Malanaos,
and by infidel Tagabaloyes and Manobos. Of those peoples, the former
keep the evangelical ministers in continual fear, because of their
persecutions; the latter keep us in a perpetual mission for converting
them to our holy Catholic faith. As proof of the great and continual
advance of Christianity there, it suffices to state that at the end
of the last century the tributes which those who have been subdued
paid to the king did not equal the expenses occasioned to the royal
treasury by the maintenance of the said province; in the year 1720,
the expenses and collections were equal; but now the royal income
exceeds the expenses necessary for conservation. [34] Since the
expenses have not decreased--for there is always the same number
of infantry forces in the presidios of Tandag, Catel, and Linao,
to which all the expense is reduced--it is inferred that the royal
tributes have increased, and consequently the number of Christians.

739. There are so many heathen in the islands of Calamianes, especially
in the island of Paragua, that at least one hundred heathens will be
found for each Christian. In the island of Mindoro only the coasts are
conquered, and heathen fill all the interior of the island. The same
success as I said was obtained in the province of Caragha has also been
secured in the above two provinces; although a very notable decrease
of Christianity has taken place in them because of the invasions
of the Moros of which I shall speak later. The island of Zibuyan,
whose mountains are peopled by infidels--who, as they are exceedingly
obstinate in regard to conversion, give us considerable anxiety,
although some converts are obtained among them--is located in the
Romblon district. The island of Maestre de Campo, formerly peopled
by Indians who were almost all apostates from religion, has now in
great part embraced the faith through the efforts of the religious,
who scarcely ten years ago founded a new village peopled by families
of the said Indians. It is not many years since the wild Indians
[Zimarrones] were feared in the island of Masbate but these are now so
few, through the persuasions of the religious, that one can cross the
island without danger. The villages have increased greatly with the
people who have been reduced to a Christian life and civilization. The
village of Camasoso is a new colony peopled by that before indomitable
people; and the same has happened in the island of Burias. Now then,
I ask, since this is so (and it is a fact, and one that can be proved
whenever necessary), in what are these ministries or curacies different
from those in Nueva Espana and Peru, when St. Pius V conceded the
exemption of the regulars? What difference is there between those
missions or parishes and those founded in the Philipinas Islands
when they began to be subject to the crown of Espana? There appears
to be no difference. If the privilege conceded to the religious in
America with those circumstances was considered justifiable, and was
also observed in the said islands at the beginning, our discalced
religious will proceed quite conformably with right in resisting any
change with all their strength, as long as their individual parish
priests are also, as stated, engaged as missionaries.

740. More force is given to this argument if one considers that,
even in carrying on missions in infidel lands, our religious could
not suffer greater hardships than those which they endure in the
said ministries. That it may be seen that this is not imagination,
I shall give a rough outline of what happened recently from the
year 1720 until the present. I shall do it as briefly as possible,
for those regrettable tragedies will occasion great extension to this
history in due time. It is well known that our villages are the most
exposed to the invasions of the Moros; consequently, they always
serve as the theater of war and as the object of disasters. In the
said year, then, they attacked the province of Calamianes with a
powerful fleet. Landing on the island of Linacapan they burned the
village, convent, and church; outraged the sacred images; and killed
with lance-thrusts the venerable father, Fray Manuel de Jesus Maria,
a native of Lupiana in Alcarria--while another religious who was there
was able to escape miraculously, at the cost of incredible hardships
that he suffered, by hiding in the mountain. In the year 1721 they did
the same thing in the village and island of La-Agutaya, [35] and in
Manaol, which is located in the island of Mindoro. The evangelical
ministers fled thence in a small boat and thus saved their lives,
although after very prolonged hardships; and from there they took
refuge in the mountains, in order to endure, without other relief
than that of God, the discomforts that one can imagine. In the year
1722 the Moros landed on the island of Cuyo, and although they could
not take the redoubt, for the Indians (captained by our religious)
defended it bravely, one can imagine what the latter suffered in a
siege so immeasurably prolonged. In the year 23, the Moros bordering
on the province of Caragha besieged the presidio of Catel. Father
Fray Benito de San Joseph, son of Casal de Caceres in Estremadura,
who, as its minister, undertook to attend to its defense, was left so
exhausted from the fatigues of war in which no relief came, that after
the retreat of the Moros, he lived but little longer; for he gave up
his soul to God amid the plaudits of victory. Almost at the same time,
in the island of Camiguin, the religious were compelled to hide in
the mountains, where they were besieged by many fears. In Paragua,
they killed father Fray Juan de la Purificacion (a native of Atea in
the kingdom of Aragon) with an insidious poison. The invasions of the
said Mahometans were continual until the year 30 through Calamianes
and other districts; for, although they were not seen in large fleets,
a great number of pirates were never lacking, and they caused those
persecuted ministers repeated troubles. But in the above-mentioned
year they had the boldness to assault the presidio of Taytay [36]
with such swiftness and fury that two of the three religious who
were there succeeded by great good luck, and without any preparation,
in retiring afoot to the mountains; while the other, only saving the
chalices and ciborium, retired to the redoubt where he suffered the
hardships of the siege.

741. In the year 31 they attacked the village of Culion; in 32, that
of Linacapan and all the villages of Paragua, where they committed
innumerable acts of cruelty. In 33 they ruined the village of Calatan;
and father Fray Antonio de Santa Ana (whose death I shall relate
later), had no other opportunity than to flee to the mountain afoot
and naked as he was in his bed, so that one can imagine what he
suffered. In the year 34 they destroyed the villages of Malampayan,
Dumaran, and Linacapan. Father Fray Domingo de San Agustin, a native
of Aldeguela near Teruel, while escaping to the mountain remained for
five days in a cellar with the water up to his waist without eating
anything else than herbs. As a consequence of that and other hardships
that he suffered on various occasions, various illnesses came upon
him which finally ended his life, he refusing to turn his back on the
evangelical enterprises, although he could have done so. Father Fray
Juan de la Virgen de Moncayo (a native of Anon in Aragon) retiring
first to the redoubt of Taytay and then to the mountains, as he had
done at other times, became so ill that he surrendered his soul,
though always fighting, in the island of Mindoro. The Moros went to
that island also in the above-mentioned year and attacked several
villages, and the religious remained in the mountains for a long time;
this caused father Fray Joseph de San Agustin (a son of Azaret, in the
said kingdom of Aragon) to contract his last illness, and he retired
to Manila, where he ended the miseries of this life in order to pass
to life eternal. In the year 35 they became masters of the villages of
Paragua, whose Christian faith is little less than lost. In the year
36 they again besieged the presidio of Taytay; and although it was
possible to defend it at the cost of miracles, in one of the assaults
a bullet took away the life of father Fray Antonio de Santa Ana, a
native of Gandia in the kingdom of Valencia. In the years 37 and 38
the Moros, already masters of the sea, filled Calamianes and Mindoro
with horror. In the year 39 they had so closed the passage from the
said islands to Manila that for more than six months nothing could be
heard from the religious living in those fields of Christendom. In the
year 40 they went to the coast of Mindoro opposite Luzon, where they
inhumanly killed father Fray Leon de San Joseph (a son of Peraleda in
Castilla) and captured another religious who was going as missionary to
Mindanao; and it was a miracle that they did not capture all those who
were returning from the chapter-meeting. In that same period, although
I do not know definitely the year, they also landed at Hingoog, a
village of the province of Caragha; in the island of Camiguin, which
belongs to the alcaldeship of Zibu; and on the coast of Zambales at
the boundaries of the village of Cabangan. The inference from the
above is that the missionary religious had to hide in the caverns
of the mountains in all districts; to look for their sheep in the
deserts; go without food, or live on herbs of the field; to suffer
the inclemencies of the weather, which is a martyrdom in Philipinas;
and always to flee from one part to another without other relief
by sea or land than fears and fatigues. What is lacking, then,
to those ministers of the evangelical doctrine to enable them to
say that they are toiling in apostolic missions? Now, did those who
began the conquest of America or those of Philipinas endure the more
grievous and continual persecutions? Therefore, if those were worthy
of receiving the exemption, because they were employed at the cost
of their lives in the promulgation of the faith, no change ought to
be introduced in these missions.

742. The procedure of our religious in resisting the subjection
of the ordinaries is justified even more by that which causes the
anxiety of the ministers, if one considers the fact (on which their
resistance is founded) that the proper administration of those souls
is morally impossible. For that we must assume that the king assigns
one missionary to each five hundred tributes or families. But our
districts, especially those of the islands of Luzon, Calamianes,
and Mindoro, although each does not exceed three hundred tributes;
need each one or two religious in order that they may be looked after
as is necessary for the preaching and for the [spiritual] food of
the holy sacraments. This arises from the fact that each mission
is extended over a distance of twenty or thirty leguas, without
its being possible to make any other arrangement. For although the
reduction into large settlements has been attempted, for the more
suitable spiritual administration it has been impossible to attain
that. On the contrary, whenever it has been attempted, Christianity
has decreased. In the islands of Mindanao, Romblon, and Masbate,
the missions have more people, for they contain from six to eight
hundred tributes. But, for the same reason, each one needs three or
four religious; and even that number must be on the road continually
in order to fulfil their obligations as parish priests. Hence it
results (the stipends not being received in proportion to the number
of the religious but in proportion to the tributes), that they have to
maintain three and sometimes four religious with what the king assigns
for one minister. It is endured with the greatest kind of poverty,
and they even lack the necessities for the maintenance of life.

743. I suppose also that, when once the new form of administration
would be established according to the subjection that is claimed,
it would follow that each ministry would have a prior appointed in
the chapters, and a cura assigned by the ordinary with canonical
institution. For this is the observance in America, in order to save
the freedom of the elections in what concerns the regular superiors,
and in order to prevent the religious who are curas from being free
from the vow of obedience. Of these, the parish priest cares for
the administration, the prior looks after matters pertaining to the
regular estate but cannot assist in what pertains to the instruction
[doctrina], for generally he does not know the language. The former
has increased expenses with the visit of the bishop and other matters
relating thereto; and the latter, with the journeys to the chapter
and the visitation of the provincial; and all these expenses must be
paid by the stipends of the mission, for there is no other source
of income. Consequently, it is inferred that it would be necessary
in this case, to reduce the ministries to a new form and assign one
single cura to each five hundred tributes. It would be doing well if
the product of those tributes sufficed for the maintenance of the
two religious, prior and parish priest, with the other unavoidable
and necessary expenses. But if at present two priests scarcely
suffice to administer two hundred families well in our villages,
how could a single one look after five hundred families? Then, if
(and this could be proved with exactness) the children or neophytes
begged the bread of the teaching of the faith, there would be no
one to attend to that need. Therefore, our holy reformed branch
foreseeing so formidable and unavoidable consequences do very well
in abandoning the missions. For there is no reason why they should
load injuries upon themselves which cannot be corrected afterward,
and of which their prelates must render account to God.

744. Let us conclude this matter by stating one other motive for the
justification of our religious in resisting exercise as parish priests,
when one tries to subject them to the visitation and correction of the
bishops. It is a constant fact that the Christianity of the Philipinas
Islands cannot maintain itself unless numerous missions be continually
taken thither from Europa. For there are few sons of Spaniards there
(to whom only the habit can be given), and of those few the smallest
number are inclined to the religious estate. I state then, that in case
of the said subjection it would be impracticable to take missionaries
there, especially those of our holy discalced branch. Consequently,
the administration of the missions could not be cared for, as is
already seen, when affairs are going to the prejudice of the Catholic
faith. In order to prove the aforesaid, we must take it for granted
that each religious causes an expense of practically one thousand
pesos from the time he leaves his convent in Espana until he sets foot
in Manila--about one-half of which is paid from the royal treasury,
while the remainder is supplied by the order. To realize that sum,
which amounts to huge figures, the ministries contribute with some
voluntary offerings, and the province applies all its incomes and
alms. Compare this now with that alleged in the preceding number,
and it will be seen that in the said case it would not be possible
for the missionary religious to attend to that necessity. For, even at
present, they have to live like beggars in order that they may assist,
taking from their necessary support what they give, so that they may
support that expense. On the other hand, the province would not be
able to employ its incomes in this either, for it would have to use
them in establishing solidly the convents which are not ministries,
There are five of these, namely: in Manila, in Bagumbaya, in Cavite,
in San Sebastian, and the convent of La Concepcion in Zibu. Of that
number only the first has a community at present, for the others can
scarcely support two religious apiece. But in the said case it would
be indispensable, so that the province might maintain itself as such,
to place communities in the convents and to apply to them the incomes
that it possesses; and on that account it could not attend to the
expenses of the missions.

745. But let us suppose that some funds existed for those expenses. The
trouble remains that the religious of Espana would not consent to
go to the islands, if they were informed that they had to be curas,
and submit to the bishop in what they have not professed. Thus has
experience shown by what has happened to our province, because no
religious went from these kingdoms from the year 1692 until that of
1710, during which time Archbishop Camacho was attempting to bring
about the subjection. That is a precedent which induces the strong
suspicion that no one could be found who would voluntarily submit to
correction by a strange prelate, and at times be accused and denounced
in a foreign jurisdiction as he had only promised obedience to his own
superiors. Grant that some would be allured, but those would be the
least capable who would be incited by the perverse desire for greater
freedom. As a rule, when a mission for those islands is now proclaimed,
those who volunteer in their desire for the conversion of souls are
so many that one may choose laborers of excellent qualifications; for
their zeal for the propagation of the gospel and for the spiritual
health of those poor Indians impels them. But were that subjection
inaugurated, what timorous religious after that would leave his cell
(a safe port whither to escape during storms) only to serve in the
employ of cura? That is, any change is accompanied by a very great
alteration; and he who attempts to introduce it must be responsible for
all the consequences, in order to prevent and forestall them. Nor is
it prudent not to oppose oneself to the foregoing, when one foresees
the sequel of conclusions so fatal. Therefore, our holy order opposes
itself to the innovation of this subjection, for it considers the
inevitable injuries that must result. In view of that and many other
losses, it acts most holily in abandoning the missions, in order that
they may remain in the full charge of the bishops.

[Chapter iii deals with the life of certain Recollect religious,
of whom the following labored in the Philippines. Jacinto de San
Fulgencio, the son of Vicente Francisco Claramonte, was born in
Cocentayna, and was received in the convent of Valencia January 17,
1614. He joined the mission to the Philippines which was organized
in 1619; and on his arrival at Manila began to study the languages,
becoming fluent in the Tagalog, Zambal, Bisayan, and Calamian. In 1622
he was sent with Juan de San Nicolas to Caraga, where he worked to
good effect. Later, accompanied by one religious and some converts,
he ascended the river for fifty leguas to Linao, where his labors
were crowned successfully. He was appointed prior of the convent of
San Joseph in Butuan in 1624, where he continued his work, with the
evident approbation of heaven. In 1626 he became prior of Bacoag, and
later was the first prior of Iguaquet. He was the first to preach to
the Caragas, among whom he remained for ten years, during which time
he erected six convents. In Butuan he worked for four years, where he
converted three thousand people and erected three convents. In 1635
he went to the island of Negros, where he converted six thousand
Indians; and the same year was appointed prior of Tandag, where he
brought order out of chaos. In 1638 he was elected definitor, and in
1640 became prior for the second time of Tandag, and vicar-provincial
of Caraga. He was elected procurator to Spain in 1646, and definitor
with vote in the general chapter in that country, which he reached
in March 1649. His mission which he took from Spain reached Manila
in 1652 and consisted of twenty-one religious. In the next chapter
he was again elected procurator, but he died at Manila in 1656. He
had served as chaplain for the Spanish fleets, and as ambassador to
the natives, in addition to his mission work proper.]

[Section ii of chapter v contains an account of the life of Salvador
del Espiritu Santo, who had formerly been an Augustinian of the
Observant branch, but who joined the Recollects. He went to Manila
in 1634 with the desire to go to Japan, learning some little of
that language for that purpose. After much entreaty he obtained
permission from the provincial of the order to go to Japan in 1635,
but he was unable to effect his purpose. He served as prior in
the Cavite convent, was twice superior of the convent of San Juan
Bautista in Bagnumbaya, prior of the Manila convent, twice definitor;
twice visitor of Calamianes and Mindoro. He was elected procurator in
place of Jacinto de San Fulgencio, and after various setbacks arrived
in Mexico in 1657, where he died in December of that same year.]

[Chapter vi deals with the life of Andres del Espiritu Santo. That
valiant worker was born in Valladolid in January 1585, his father
being Hernando Tanego. He made his vows in the convent of Portillo
in 1601, and joining the first Philippine mission arrived at the
islands in 1606. There he was sent immediately to the Zambales coast,
where he founded the village of Masinloc, from which as a center he
carried on his work. In 1609 he was elected vicar-provincial, which
office he kept until 1612. He was elected vicar-provincial for the
second time in 1615; and on the completion of that office in 1618,
being elected procurator, he went to Spain for new missionaries,
of whom he obtained a fine band, returning to Manila in 1622. The
following year he was elected vicar-provincial for the third time,
and in 1624 first definitor. The highest office of the province,
namely, that of provincial, came to him in 1626 and at the end of
his provincialate he asked permission to go to Japan, but in vain; he
therefore continued the work among the Philippine missions until 1632,
when he was again elected provincial. In 1635 he was again definitor,
and at the expiration of that office he was appointed prior of the
Manila convent; thence he retired to the Cavite convent where he
worked with the most vigorous men, although worn out by his excessive
toil. He finally retired to the Manila convent, where he died at the
end of 1657 or the beginning of 1658, at the age of 78.]

[Chapter viii records the death, in 1659, of Nicolas de la Madre de
Dios, who had labored in Cagayan, where he had accomplished most in
quieting an insurrection that had broken out under a native heathen
priest called Salur.]

[Chapter x contains a bull promulgated by Alexander VII, dated August
5, 1660, confirming a decree of the congregation Propaganda fide of
June 28, 1660 (inserted in the bull) forbidding Recollect religious
who had been sent to the Philippines from turning aside on the way
or unnecessarily delaying their journey. The penalty imposed by the
decree is that such fugitives are to be deprived of all active and
passive vote, and can never hold any dignity or honorary charge in the
order. That same year of 1660, a mission left Spain for the islands
but did not arrive there until 1664.]






DESCRIPTION OF FILIPINAS ISLANDS


[After a prolonged address to Fray Diego Zapata, a high official of
the Franciscan order and of the Inquisition, Fray Letona proceeds with
a description of the Philippines in numbered sections. No. 1 states
that it is written for Zapata's information; no. 2, that the voyage
from Acapulco to Manila is more than 2,500 leguas in length. The
course of the ships in that voyage is given in no. 3. Such parts of
this description as are useful for our purpose are here presented
in full; other parts are omitted, in each case stating the nature of
such matter.]

3. Acapulco, in Mexico, which is the eastern port for the South Sea
and for navigations from Nueva Espana to Filipinas, is in sixteen and
one-half degrees of latitude. If in voyaging from Acapulco to Filipinas
the ships sail in a straight line from the rising toward the setting
sun, from east to west, without change of latitude, they will arrive
at Baler, [37] a village in the northern part of the further coast of
Manila Island, which is in the same latitude as Acapulco. But usually,
as soon as they set sail from Acapulco, they descend to the eleventh
or the tenth parallel in order to find the winds with which they can
navigate; then they again go northward and follow their former course
to a point five hundred leguas from Manila, and one hundred from the
Ladrones Islands--among which they pass, in a latitude of fifteen
degrees. Thence they sail again to lower latitudes, descending to
barely thirteen and one-half degrees--on which line is the Embocadero
of San Bernardino, one hundred leguas from Manila. Thence the voyage
is made between that same island of Manila--which extends as far
as the Embocadero, and remains on the right hand--and other islands
which lie on the left, to the port of Cabite which is two leguas from
Manila. Ordinarily this voyage is made in three months, although the
return trip is usually much longer--sometimes requiring more than
seven months; while in this year, sixty-two, it lasted eight months.




Distribution of these islands

4. Although they are innumerable, hardly more than forty of the
inhabited Filipinas Islands are subject to the monarchy of Espana. The
first and chief of these, and the head of all, is that of Luzon. It is
large, being almost three hundred and fifty leguas in circumference;
and has more than twenty bays and ports where ships of all sizes
can anchor. It is the frontier [of the islands] toward Great China,
which is a hundred leguas distant from Manila. The island lies between
thirteen and one-half and nineteen degrees of latitude, and it has
the form of a square with two narrow arms--one of which extends from
south to north, the other from west to east.

5. In that which points northward lie, on its western coast, four
distinct conquered provinces. The first and nearest of these on the
bay of Manila (and belonging to the archbishopric of that name), and
in latitude 15 deg., is Pampanga; it is very populous, and abounds in rice
and other products of the soil; and it contains some gold-placers. Its
natives have the reputation of being the best and bravest, and
most faithful to the royal crown [of all in the island]; they have
a language of their own. On the western outskirts of this province
among its mountains, and within the archbishopric of Manila are some
Negrillos; they are heathen, and natives of the country (which is yet
to be conquered) that is called Zambales. They are very barbarous,
resembling the Chichimecos of Nueva Espana who eat human flesh.

6. Next at 16 deg. latitude and on the western coast [of Luzon], follows
Pamgasinam; it belongs to the bishopric of Cagayan, and is rich in
gold and other products of the soil. The natives have a language of
their own.

7. Ylocos is a province of the same bishopric, and lies next [to
Pamgasinam] on the same coast; it also abounds in the same products
and is very populous. The natives have their own language. Its
latitude is 17 deg.. In the year 1661, these two provinces rebelled;
they were conquered and pacified with extraordinary valor and skill,
by General Francisco de Esteybar with three hundred soldiers. He
punished thirty persons with death and five hundred with slavery.

8. Cagayan is the last province in this arm of the island, and the most
northern, lying in 18 deg. to 19 deg. latitude. It contains many Indians who
are good soldiers. Here is the city of Nueva Segobia, which has few
Spanish residents. It has a bishop and cathedral; an alcalde-mayor,
and a garrison of Spanish soldiers. This province yields the same
products [as the others], and has a distinct language. Almost opposite
this province, to the northeast (that is, between north and east)
is Xapon, a noted empire. It is distant three hundred leguas, and
this voyage is made in sight of land, that of various islands.

9. This arm of land is almost a hundred leguas long and fifty or
sixty wide; on its eastern coast the province of Baler is conquered
and pacified. The region midland of all these five provinces is
called Ytui, and is peopled by heathen Indians, not yet subdued. On
the south lies Pampanga; northward, Cagayan; to the east, Baler;
to the west, Ylocos and Pangasinan. All these provinces have their
alcaldes-mayor. The ports on the eastern coast are mentioned below
in section 91.

10. In the eastern arm of this island of Luzon there are two provinces;
both abound in rice and other products, and are very populous; and each
one has its own distinct language. The first is Tagalos, which begins
at the city of Manila, and belongs wholly to that archbishopric. It
contains the environs of the city; and the lake of Bay (a freshwater
lake, of many leguas in circumference), and extends along the coasts
of this arm, both northern and southern, more than fifty leguas
in a direct line, southeast and northeast--that is, from Manila to
Silangan, which is an island very near to that of Luzon. There ends
the archbishopric [of Manila]; also the Tagal province (which is
divided into six or eight districts of alcalde-mayor and corregidor)
and the Tagal language.

11. The second and last province of this eastern arm is Camarines,
which has a different language, and belongs to another bishopric. It
begins at the village of Paracali, which is on the northern coast and
has some rich gold mines. It is distant from Manila sixty leguas,
and extends almost forty eastward, as far as the extremity of this
island. Here is the city of Nueva Caceres, where there is a bishopric
and a cathedral, and an alcalde-mayor; the Spanish population
is very small, but there are many Indians, as also in the entire
province. Inland from these two provinces there are some Cimarron
Indians, who are not yet conquered. This arm [of land] is almost a
hundred leguas long, and ten to twenty wide; its northern ports are
mentioned below in section 91.

12. At the center where these two arms of land meet, in the middle
and on the shores of a beautiful bay--closed in from the sea; thirty
leguas in circumference, and eight wide; and everywhere clear,
soundable, and safe--at the mouth and on the banks of the great
river of Bay [i.e., Pasig River] (which, having flowed four leguas
from its own lake, empties into this sea) is built the distinguished
city of Manila, the capital and court of Filipinas. It is, for its
size, the richest in the world; a special account of it will soon
be given. Entrance into this bay is furnished by a passage on its
western side, four leguas in width. In the middle of this passage,
eight leguas from Manila and opposite this city, is an islet called
Maribelez; it is inhabited, and is two leguas in circuit in 14 1/2 deg.
latitude. It serves as a watch-tower to look for foreign ships,
which can be seen fifteen leguas at sea.

13. The "Modern Geographer," which was printed at Amsterdam in four
large volumes in Latin and Castilian, containing the geographical
maps of the world, does not present a map of these islands, although
it gives a special one of the Molucas or Ternate Islands which are
adjacent to the Filipinas. For lack of facilities, I do not insert here
a map of these islands, which I have drawn by hand, with the greatest
exactness, from my personal knowledge. In place thereof, I will write
a description so clear that any geographer can reduce it to a map;
and for greater clearness the above-mentioned island of Maribelez will
be the center of this description--which is divided into four parts
or voyages: to the east, southeast, south, and north, respectively.

14-28. [These paragraphs contain data for the map that Letona would
have made--the location, latitude, size, and names of islands,
with distances and direction by compass. We note a few points of
interest which contain new information. In Mindoro is "El Baradero,
a celebrated bay and a very safe harbor." With the island of Burias
"ends the archbishopric of Manila; the next lands [i.e., Banton]
belong to the bishopric of Zebu." In Catanduanes reside a beneficed
curate and a corregidor. "The interior of Mindanao is still unsubdued;
its natives are heathen in the eastern part, and Mahometan pirates
in the west. They have been reduced to his Majesty's obedience and
to the Church, and among them are four garrisons of Spaniards--one
in the east, at Tandag; two in the north, at Bacilan and Malanao;
and another in the west, at Samboanga. In this island some cinnamon
is collected." "Sanguil, or Calonga, is a small island under a petty
king--who is a Catholic Christian--named Don Juan Buntuan. At his
request, I sent thither in the year 1651 with my credentials and
instructions father Fray Joseph de Truxillo, a deserving son of our
father St. Francis in this convent of La Puebla; ... who, with his
excellent example, preaching, and instruction--aided by his companion
father Fray Mateo Rodriguez, a man of his own spirit--established
and renewed the faith, built a church, and converted and baptized
many infidels, both children and adults." "Macazar is an island
yet to be conquered; its people are Mahometans and heathen, and
are very numerous. It is 180 leguas in circuit; in its eastern part
it has a powerful Mahometan king, who has at his capital factories
from Europa and Assia; and he has the utmost devotion and reverence
for the king our sovereign." The four islands of Bolinao form the
boundary of the archbishopric of Manila; from these extends the
bishopric of Cagayan. The following islands are depopulated (some
of them being mentioned in earlier accounts as having inhabitants):
Ticao, San Bernardino, Maesse de Campo, Cimara, Panaon, and Capones
(fifteen leguas from Maribeles); islets near Luban, Panay, Bantayan,
Mindoro, and Cuyo; and islets between Leyte and Cebu.]




Climate, population, and products

29. The climate of these islands is, for sensible people, for the
most part reasonably healthful and temperate. On the coasts it is
hot; in the mountains it is cool, pleasant, and refreshing. There is
no certain knowledge of the time or source of their settlement. The
nearest mainland is Great China, the eastern end of Assia (one of
the first which were inhabited after the general deluge). On the west
of China is the gulf and kingdom of Bengal, from which (through the
strait of Sincapura) it seems very probable that the first settlers of
these islands came, [38] to judge from the similarity in their color,
customs, and language. They are of average size, light-colored, and
have well-shaped features and much intelligence. They live in high
wooden houses, and support themselves by tilling the soil, fishing,
and other industries. At the time of this writing, there are more
than 600,000 Christians here, vassals of the king our sovereign;
and the Catholic piety of his Majesty maintains them in the holy
faith, although they are 5,000 leguas from his court, at the cost
of immense expenditures from his royal treasury. It appears from
the books of the royal accountancies that his Majesty has, in only
twenty years, expended more than 300,000 ducados in sending religious
to Filipinas--from which it will be seen that incalculable treasure
has been spent for this purpose during only the ninety-eight years
since the islands were discovered.

30. Their products are: Rice in great abundance, which is the
wheat of that country and the usual food of its people, serving
as their bread. Everywhere, whether in mountains or plains, there
is abundant growth of cocoanut palms. These nuts are as large as
average-sized melons, and almost of the same shape; the shell is
hard, and contains a sweet liquid which makes a palatable beverage,
and a meat which is a delicious food. This is the most useful plant
in the world; for not only are food and drink, and wine and oil,
obtained from it, but innumerable other things--comprising all that
is necessary to human life, for the dwellings, food, and clothing
of man. There are plantations of these trees, as in Espana there are
vineyards--although the former are at less cost and labor. In these
islands there is abundance of salt, fowls, and cattle, besides swine,
deer, and buffaloes; there are also several kinds of beans, and other
vegetables. With these foods not only do the people support themselves,
but the fleets and garrisons, and the ships that make long sea-voyages
are furnished with provisions. On all the coasts, and in all the
rivers and lakes, excellent fish are caught in abundance; and in the
mountains the people gather much honey and wax. In the gardens, they
raise a great deal of delicious fruit, and much garden-stuff. Oranges
and bananas not only grow in abundance, but are of the best quality in
the world. In some of the islands nutmeg, pepper, cloves, and cinnamon
are found. The country is everywhere fertile, and green and pleasant
all the year round; and in some places wheat is sown and harvested.

31. In these islands grows much cotton, from which the people make
Ylocan blankets, lampotes, white cloth, medrinaques, material for hose,
and other useful fabrics. In many (indeed in most) islands are found
amber and civet, and gold mines--these especially in the mountain
ranges of Pangasinam and Paracali, and in Pampanga; consequently;
there is hardly an Indian who does not possess chains and other
articles of gold. Besides these products (which are peculiar to
the country), others are brought to Manila from Great China, Xapon,
and numberless other kingdoms and islands of this archipelago--wheat,
iron, copper, some quicksilver, tin, and lead; cinnamon (from Zeilan),
pepper, cloves, nutmeg, musk, and incense; silks (both raw and woven),
and linens; Chinese earthenware, ivory, and ebony; diamonds, rubies,
and other precious stones; valuable woods; and many uncommon and
delicious fruits. In Manila, gunpowder is manufactured, and excellent
artillery and bells are cast; and various articles are exquisitely
wrought in filigree of gold and silver. All things necessary to human
life [are found there] and even articles of superfluity, ostentation,
pomp, and luxury.




The city of Manila

32. This city was conquered and founded by its first governor on May
19, the day of St. Potenciana the virgin, in the year 1571. It was
built on a site naturally strong on the shore of the sea, and at the
mouth of a great river--which flows four leguas from the lake of Bay,
and here loses itself [in the sea]--on a strip of land formed between
the sea and the river. Thus half of the city, that on the north and
west, is surrounded by water; and the other half, toward the east and
south, by land and a ditch. It is entirely surrounded, almost in a
circular form, by a rampart wall of stone; this is high and strong and
so thick that in some parts it is more than three varas wide, and one
can walk on top of it everywhere. It extends three-quarters of a legua,
and is adorned and furnished with battlements and merlons in modern
style; with towers, cavaliers, and Hankers at intervals; and with two
castles and some bulwarks. It is furnished with excellent artillery,
and a force of six hundred (sometimes more) Spanish soldiers--with
their master-of-camp, sargento-mayor, captains, wardens, and other
military officers. There are five gates and several posterns.

33. The streets of the city are beautifully laid out, and level, like
those of Mexico and Puebla. The main plaza is large, rectangular, and
well proportioned. Its eastern side is occupied by the cathedral;
the southern, by the government building, which is a splendid
palace--large, handsome, and very spacious; it was built by a merchant,
the favorite [39] of a governor, for his own use. The northern side
of the plaza (opposite the palace) contains the cabildo's house,
the jail, and other buildings that belong to private persons (which
also occupy the western side).

34. The houses in the city, before the earthquakes of the years 45
and 58, numbered six hundred (many of which must be by this time
rebuilt), most of them of hewn stone with handsome iron balconies and
rows of windows, and built in costly style. In them resided various
gentlemen and nobles, and two hundred citizens who were merchants
(who themselves form a commonwealth); there were also soldiers,
royal officials, prebends, and other citizens. Much of its material
grandeur and beauty was destroyed by the earthquakes above mentioned,
but it lost not the essential greatness which it has and always has
had as a court and an illustrious commonwealth. In the villages of
Bagunbaya and others of its suburbs there are probably six hundred
houses more--not counting those of the Parian, which number many more
than those of the city and suburbs together. Along the river are a
great many country houses for recreation--some very costly, and all
very convenient and pleasant, with gardens, orchards, and baths.

35. It is the capital of all these islands, with its governor, who is
the captain-general, and president of the royal chancilleria, which is
composed of four auditors and one fiscal who have cognizance of cases
both civil and criminal; then there are the other employes of the
royal Audiencia, and the royal officials with their tribunal. The
jurisdiction [of this audiencia] is the most extensive in the
Spanish monarchy; for it extends to all territories that are
discovered and pacified in that great archipelago (the largest in
the world)--extending more than four hundred leguas in a straight
line, and more than a thousand in circumference--and to all yet to
be discovered and pacified, an immense region. The city has twelve
perpetual regidors, who on the first of January in every year elect
two alcaldes-in-ordinary; these have jurisdiction throughout the
district of the municipality, which has a radius of five leguas.

36. On the eastern side of the city, but outside of it and in front
of its walls, at the distance of a musket-shot is a silk-market which
they call Parian. Usually 15,000 Chinese live there; they are Sangleys,
natives of Great China, and all merchants or artisans. They possess,
allotted among themselves by streets and squares, shops containing
all the kinds of merchandise and all the trades that are necessary in
a community. The place is very orderly and well arranged, and a great
convenience to the citizens. It is [an indication of] their greatness
that although they are so few, they have so many workmen and servants
assigned to their service. The Sangleys live in wooden houses; they
have a governor of their own nation, and a Spanish alcalde-mayor and
the other officers of justice, with a notary; also a jail. They have
a parish church, where the sacraments, the divine word, and burial
are administered to the 4,000 Christians among these Sangleys; the
rest of them are heathen.

37. Accordingly the commerce of this city is extensive, rich, and
unusually profitable; for it is carried on by all these Chinese
and their ships, with those of all the islands above mentioned and
of Tunquin, Cochinchina, Camboja, and Sian--four separate kingdoms,
which lie opposite these islands on the continent of Great China--and
of the gulfs and the numberless kingdoms of Eastern India, Persia,
Bengala, and Ceilan, when there are no wars; and of the empire and
kingdoms of Xapon. The diversity of the peoples, therefore, who are
seen in Manila and its environs is the greatest in the world; for
these include men from all kingdoms and nations--Espana, Francia,
Ingalaterra, Italia, Flandes, Alemania, Dinamarca, Suecia, Polonia,
Moscobia; people from all the Indias, both eastern and western; and
Turks, Greeks, Moros, Persians, Tartars, Chinese, Japanese, Africans,
and Asiatics. And hardly is there in the four quarters of the world
a kingdom, province, or nation which has not representatives here, on
account of the voyages that are made hither from all directions--east,
west, north, and south.

38-58. [These sections are devoted to brief biographical notices of
the governors of the islands--information already presented in our
VOL. XVII. Letona says (no. 58) of Diego Fajardo's government:]
In the year 51, the governor withdrew his favor from his petted
favorite, whom, after confiscating his goods (which were many),
he imprisoned in the castle of Santiago--in the same quarters where
(at his own instance, as people say) the five years' captivity of
Governor Corcuera was accomplished. Then Faxardo opened his eyes,
so that he could recognize the serious troubles which result from the
favorite's having great power in the government. "For," Fajardo said,
"he did not regard the vassals of the king with the affection that he
ought; nor did he attend to their welfare, but to his own advantage and
profit." Imitating him, the subordinate officials, he said, "committed
acts of violence in the provinces that they governed, harassing them
with various oppressions, and failing to administer justice to the
poor--levying on them repartimientos of many products that were not
necessary, and at exorbitant prices; and, although the commodity might
be had in another district for half the price, the natives must not
buy it there, but only from the agent of the magistrate, who would
not allow any one else to traffic or trade in all the province. From
these practices," said this gentleman, "arise irreparable injuries
to the poor vassals, and to his Majesty's alcabalas [i.e., excise
taxes]. Nor have those vassals any redress, since the door is closed
to them by the favor shown to the minion." For this same reason,
he gave no office of justice to a relative or servant of his own,
judging that no aggrieved person would dare to utter a complaint on
account of his fear lest the governor would take ill a suit against
his relative or servant. These and other very just opinions were
expressed by this governor during the last year of his rule.

59. [Of Manrique de Lara, Letona says:] "He governed for ten years,
a longer term than that of any predecessor of his. Many of these
he surpassed not only in the period of service, but in his care and
efficiency--personally assisting in the despatch of the armed fleets
(although this had to be done at a distance of twenty leguas from
Manila), and attending to the shipbuilding and the timber-cutting;
crossing seas, rivers, and mountains, and overcoming great dangers and
hardships, in order to serve the commonwealth and his Majesty, and that
the royal revenues might be spent with due faithfulness, and without
oppressing his Majesty's poor vassals. He opened up the commerce of the
kingdoms of Tunquin and Cochinchina, and extended that of Great China;
and he brought to terms the king of Tidore. He repressed the invasions
of the Mindanaos, Xoloans, and Camucones through the instrumentality
of Andres de Zuloeta, a valiant captain--who was sargento-mayor of
Manila, admiral, and commander of the fleet that carries supplies
to Ternate. In the year of 61 there were disturbances in Pampanga,
the finest province in this government, and inhabited by a people who
are valiant and very skilful in the use of arms. This governor with
courage and tact went to Pampanga, and pacified the province without
shedding blood, thus acquiring a great reputation. He subdued also the
provinces of Pangasinan and Ilocos, which had rebelled, he punished
some with death, and others with slavery, bestowing on the rest a
general pardon. This campaign increased the reputation of the Catholic
arms throughout that archipelago, a renown that is still maintained."




The ecclesiastical estate

60. In April of the year 1565, there was founded in Zebu (afterward
being transferred to Manila) the church and ecclesiastical community
of these islands; and its ordinary jurisdiction was allotted to the
superiors of the Order of St. Augustine, who were the founders and
apostles of this kingdom; they held that dignity up to the year of
77, in which it passed to the fathers of the order of our father
St. Francis. It remained in their keeping until the year 82, in
which Don Fray Domingo de Salazar--a Dominican, the first bishop of
all the Filipinas--with a bull from his Holiness Pope Gregory XIII
founded the cathedral of Manila, dedicating it to the most immaculate
Conception of the Virgin. It was established with five dignitaries,
four canonries, and four other prebends; they are appointed by his
Majesty, or ad interim by the governor. The cathedral has a good choir
of singers, also chaplains and many able clerics, and two curas and
two sacristans. It is the only parish church of the city, although
outside in the suburbs there are two others--that of Santiago, and
that of San Antonio--administered by learned and exemplary clergymen.

61. Within the city, on the Plaza de Armas and opposite the castle of
Santiago, is the royal chapel founded by Governor Corcuera. It is a
magnificent church (containing the most holy sacrament), and is richly
adorned with altars, reredos, pulpit, and sacristy ornaments of silver,
with a monstrance of pure gold which is worth 11,000 ducados. It has
a choir, an organ, and a famous chorus of singers; also chaplains,
sacristans, and other ministers, who serve it with much propriety
and pomp. These clergymen are independent of the parish church, and
go through the public streets, wearing their copes and carrying the
cross aloft, to the royal hospital for the bodies of dead soldiers,
which they solemnly convey to the royal chapel for interment.

62. In the midst of the city is the Misericordia's seminary for orphan
girls with its church dedicated to the Presentation of the Virgin,
which was founded in the year 1594. It is of beautiful architecture,
handsomely adorned, and served by clerics with the utmost care
and propriety. Since the year 1653, this church has served for a
cathedral. It is in charge of the brotherhood and congregation of
the holy Misericordia, which is directed by a manager and twelve
deputies with the same rules as that of Lisboa; its mission is to aid
the poor. In the best part of the city is another seminary for the
shelter of girls, with its church of Santa Potenciana, served by a
cleric. There are two hospitals--the royal, for the soldiers; and that
of the Misericordia, for the other poor. There are two others in the
environs--one of San Juan de Dios for the Spaniards; and another for
the Indians in Dilao. There is also a noted sanctuary, that of Nuestra
Senora de Guia, besides the two parish churches above mentioned;
and the convents and colleges, which will be enumerated below.

63. Most of the clerics of this archbishopric are learned men,
excellent preachers and distinguished in all branches of study,
on account of the opportunity which this city affords in two
universities--in which they employ their abilities, emulating and
rivaling one another in letters. They administer many benefices and
curacies in the islands of Luzon, Luban, Mindoro, and others--besides
the above-mentioned curacies and chaplaincies, both within and
without Manila.

64-84. [These sections are occupied with biographical notices of the
archbishops and bishops in the various dioceses, which we here omit,
intending to present data of this sort in a later volume.]




Religious orders in Filipinas

85. The Order of St. Augustine entered the islands in the year 565;
its first superior, and first prelate of all the islands was Fray
Andres de Urdaneta--a Vascongado, [40] and a son of the convent and
province of Mexico; he was the apostle who unfurled the gospel banner,
and he planted the faith in the island of Zebu and others. They have
in Manila a notable convent, with fifty religious--counting novices,
students, and men of mature years; it was founded in the year 71. It
is the head of eighty other parish convents, most of them having
costly buildings; and in all these the sacraments are most watchfully
administered to more than two hundred thousand Christians. They are
located on the river and in the environs of Manila; along the lake of
Bay, and in its mountains; throughout Pampanga, and in Pangasinan and
Ilocos; and in the islands of Pintados, whose vicar-provincial is the
prior of Zebu. In all times this order has possessed illustrious men
of distinguished virtue, and martyrs in Xapon, and zealous ministers
of the gospel. Next followed the order of our father St. Francis,
which is left for the end.

86. The Society of Jesus entered Manila in the year 1582, in which
was founded their college of La Concepcion, which is one of the most
costly and magnificent buildings of this city. Its first superior
was Father Antonio Zedeno. It is a university, where instruction is
given in reading, writing, and accounts; and in grammar, rhetoric, the
arts, theology, and literature--with the earnestness, thoroughness,
and care which is customary in the [colleges of the] Society. Its
rector confers the degrees of bachelor, licentiate, and doctor,
with very rigorous courses of lectures, examinations, and literary
theses, as in Salamanca and Mexico. Near, this great college the
Society has another, that of San Joseph, with lay students; they
wear tawny mantles and red bands. In Cabite, Zebu, and Mindanao the
Society has also colleges, which are most useful for the education of
the youth and of the entire commonwealth. Its fathers are in charge
of many conversions and parish ministries about Manila, and in the
islands of Marinduc, Ybabao, Panay, Negros Island, Bohol, Leyte,
Imaras, and Mindanao--all belonging to the bishopric of Zebu--and in
others; all these are administered with admirable exactness, courage,
thoroughness, and zeal. In all the languages spoken therein, grammars
and vocabularies have been prepared. The Society has, and always
has had, some very learned writers, and other members distinguished
in all branches of knowledge; and it has many martyrs, not only in
Xapon but in Mindanao. This province is one of the most illustrious,
and most worthy of imitation, belonging to the Society, and in it is
evident much austerity and excellence.

87. The Order of St. Dominic entered Manila in the same year of 82;
but its first convent was founded in the year 87, and its first
superior was father Fray Juan de Castro, provincial of Chiapa. That
convent had a magnificent building; but in the earthquake of 645,
and in those of 51 and 52, their church was ruined. It was rebuilt
with greater splendor and thoroughness than the old one; the author
of this work (at that time prior) being the illustrious master Don
Fray Francisco de la Trinidad y Arrieta, most worthy bishop of
Santa Marta in Peru, and the first bishop who was a son of this
convent. Without having any fixed income, this convent supports
more than thirty religious. It is the head of a province, the most
religious one in the entire order. In the environs of Manila these
fathers have the parishes of the Parian and of Binondoc; a hospital,
and a church at San Juan de Letran; and Batan in Pampanga. They have
many Indian missions in the provinces of Pangasinan and Cagayan. In
Xapon and China this order has had many and resplendent martyrs; and
it now has in China some gospel ministers. In Manila it has a notable
college, that of Santo Tomas, which is a university. There with great
ability are taught grammar, the arts, and theology, and both higher
and lower degrees are conferred. It has lay students, who wear green
mantles and red bands. They train many able men there, of whom many
have been martyrs in Xapon. The order has had and has some writers,
who have by their erudition ennobled this new church. The commissary
of the Holy Office in Manila always belongs to this province.

88. The discalced fathers of St. Augustine entered Manila in the
year 606, at which time they built a large convent, that of San
Nicolas. It is the head of a very religious province which contains
eleven other convents. Four are in the archbishopric--San Juan, San
Sebastian, Cabite, and Bolinao; and seven in that of Zebu--Romblon,
Paragua, Zebu, Siargao, Bacilan, Tangda, and Catel. There are three
in the province of Caraga in the island of Mindanao (where they have
had four martyrs). All their convents are of very strict observance,
and devoted to an apostolical administration of the sacraments. They
have had some martyrs in Xapon, and always have members who are well
versed in all branches of learning.  Their first superior was father
Fray Juan de San Geronimo, who directed twelve others, his companions,
the founders and apostles of this province.

89. The order of our father St. Francis entered Filipinas in the
year 1577, when fifteen religious arrived at Manila, all apostolic
men. Of these, six came from the province of San Joseph, two from
that of Santiago, one from La Concepcion, another from Mechoacan,
and five from the province of Santo Evangelio in Mexico. The superior
of all was father Fray Pedro de Alfaro, of the province of Santiago
(incorporated into that of San Joseph). On the second of August in the
same year was founded the convent of Manila, with the title of Santa
Maria de Los Angeles; their first guardian was father Fray Pedro
de Ayera, a man in every respect remarkable. He was provincial of
Mechoacan, and bishop-elect; and he was provisor and ecclesiastical
judge of Filipinas. This convent usually has more than thirty
religious--novices, students, and graduates; and it is the head of a
very religious province of Discalced, who have more than fifty convents
(which will soon be enumerated), in which they religiously administer
the sacraments to one hundred and thirty thousand Christians.

90. This province during the first fourteen years was a custodia,
subject to the province of San Joseph; and it was governed by
four custodians, up to the year 1591. It was then erected into
a province, and its first provincial elected; this was father
Fray de Jesus, a Catalan from the province of San Joseph, a most
accomplished religious. From then until this year of 662 there have
been twenty-three provincials. This province has the following
convents, most of which have very substantial buildings of hewn
stone, and handsome churches well adorned with altars, reredoses,
and ornaments, with much silver--and with singers, organs, and other
musical instruments, and ecclesiastical jewels.

91. Cabite, two leguas from Manila, is the chief port of Filipinas;
it is safe, and very convenient for all the ships of that region. With
soldiers, pilots, and mariners, it numbers one hundred and fifty
Spanish citizens; there are also many Indians, and it has a ward
of Mahometan Lascars, and another of Chinese. It has a parochial
church, with secular priests, a hospital, and convents; that of San
Francisco is the second of this [Franciscan] province, the third
being that of Ternate. The rest of the convents are in mission
parishes, each one with a religious or two teachers. There are six
in the environs of Manila--Dilao, Santa Ana, Sampaloc, Polo, Bocaui,
and Meycahuayan. There are ten [sic] along the lake of Bay--Moron,
Tanay, Pililla, Mabitac, Siniloan, Pangil, Paete, Lumban, Santa
Cruz, Pila, and Banos. There are seven in the mountains or tingues
of that lake--Nacarlan, Lilio, Mahayhai, Cabinti, Luchan, Tayabas,
and Sadiaya. On the seacoast between east and north are six--Baler,
Casiguran, Binangonan, Mauban (or Lampon), Atimonan, and Silanga
(an island), where end the archbishopric and the use of the Tagalog
language. The same coast extends through the province and bishopric of
Camarines; and journeying by way of the eastern point to the southern
coast, there are twenty convents--Paracali, Indan, Daet, Ligmanan,
Quipayo, Naga (which is Caceres), Bula, Iriga, Libon, Polanguin, Oas,
Camarines, Albay, Tabaco, Malinao, Bacon, Casiguran, Nabua, Quipia,
and Bolosan. For just reasons, I omit the administration of Ilocos,
Panay, and other districts. In Great China the order now has father
Fray Antonio de Santa Maria, a man who is great in learning and
in the religious life; with another companion, a learned preacher,
he aids in the propagation of the gospel in that great empire.

92. This province is the only one of these Indias that has six of its
sons as holy canonized protomartyrs in Xapon--besides twenty-seven
other martyrs here and in other islands. This province has also gained
great distinction by having in Manila the convent of Santa Clara,
and in it Mother Geronima with many others who have inherited much
of her spirit.

93-94. [In these sections Letona enumerates some of the holy
Franciscans who have been canonized from the Indias.]






EVENTS IN MANILA, 1662-63


Relation of the events in the city of Manila from the embassy sent
by Cotsen, [41] captain-general of the coasts of China and king of
Hermosa Island, with father Fray Victorio Ricio his ambassador, in
the year 1662, until the second embassy, which his son sent with the
same father, and which was despatched on July 11, 1663.

On the fifth of May the ambassador of Cot-sen made his entry; this
was father Fray Victorio Riccio, [42] a Florentine, a religious of
the Order of Preachers. He was attired in the garb of a mandarin's
rank, which the barbarian had conferred on him to equip him for this
embassy. Little pomp was displayed in his reception, for the unfriendly
nature of his errand was already known. Don Sabiniano Manrrique de
Lara received the letter which he brought; it was full of arrogance,
ostentatiously boasting of Cot-sen's power, and declaring that his
champans were many thousands in number and his perfect soldiers
hundreds of thousands; (it is a fact that those champans, counting
large and small, amount to 15,000, as is known by eyewitnesses);
and, in virtue of this pompous and noisy declaration, he demanded
that these islands should pay him tribute, threatening us with the
example of the Dutch. [43]

The insolence of this demand angered all the Spaniards, and our
resolute attitude filled the Sangleys with anxiety; for, as it
could not be imagined that a less generous one [would be taken],
they feared the injuries that would be caused by the war, and that
they would be the first to suffer from these. The governor, as pious
as prudent, commanded that in the church of the Society of Jesus the
blessed sacrament should remain exposed, in order that the archbishop,
the three auditors, the superiors of the religious orders, and the
military chiefs might assemble in a devout public supplication; and
ordered that, at about the same time, a council should be summoned
(in order to give the Sangleys less cause for blame), where Cot-sen's
letter should be read and such decision made as in the opinion of
the council ought to be adopted.

In regard to the principal point in the letter, there was little
discussion; for, as the Spanish blood was coursing impetuously in the
heart of every man there, all gave angry reply to Cot-sen's demand,
showing the courage and resolution that was to be expected from
their noble blood, and feeling shame that [even in] imagination [he]
could dare to cast so black a stigma on the Spanish name. Resolved
to die a thousand times rather than consent to such humiliation,
and regarding war as certain, as being our honorable decision,
the members of the council discussed the question of drawing off
beforehand the unwholesome humor from the body of this commonwealth
by expelling the Sangleys--who in an emergency would dangerously
divide our attention and our forces. Most of the speakers were in
favor of driving away all the infidels, leaving only the Christians,
who would in part render to the community the many services in which
the men of that nation are employed for its benefit; and, since the
Christian Sangleys were few, it would be easy to secure ourselves
from them. Moreover, we could, profiting by our experience of their
procedure, easily get rid of them if that should be expedient for our
defense in such an emergency. The council came to the conclusion that
the merchants should be allowed to carry their property with them, and
return [to China] in peace with their merchandise--not only because
they had come here in confidence and on the security afforded by the
peace, but because this generous conduct of ours would pacify their
resolute attitude, and Cot-sen would feel more anxiety at seeing how
little importance we attached to increasing his forces with the men
whom we were sending away, and at our contempt for his resources in
not appropriating the property of his people.

As this sudden change might cause some disturbances when it should
be put into execution, the publication of the council's decision
was delayed until as many of the cavalry horses as possible could be
conveyed to the stock-farms; for, after the military authorities had
seized the roads promptly with their troops, they could check any
rash attempt, and the infidels could be peaceably sent to the ships
as had been decreed. It was resolved by unanimous vote to withdraw
the garrisons from Ternate, Zamboangan, Calamianes, and Yligan,
since everything was at risk in the principal fort [i.e., Manila],
which had not more than six hundred soldiers--and of these hardly
two hundred were in condition to endure the hardships of a campaign
or of service on the walls. [44]

These conferences, and the activities that necessarily followed from
them were perfectly known by the Sangleys (whose fear kept them very
attentive to everything), and the lack of secrecy in the members
of the council gave them exact knowledge [of its proceedings];
consequently, they were fully assured of a war and of their own
danger. This fear was increased by the haste with which the citizens
who had wealth in their possession undertook to hide it away. Their
desperation was completed by the interpretation which the common
people gave to everything--irresponsible soldiers, with mestizos,
mulattoes, and blacks, telling the Sangleys that they were to
have their heads cut off, as if they were men already sentenced to
death; and inflicting on them many injuries and uttering a thousand
insults. Such circumstances as these concurring in the insurrection
of the year 1603 necessarily caused it, as Doctor Morga observes;
and on this occasion their fear of the like proceedings led them
to a similar desperation. They heard that the twenty-fifth day of
May was to be that of their destruction, because the cavalry troops
were to arrive on the day before. Some of them--the most worthless
class, as butchers and vegetable-sellers--began to talk of extricating
themselves from he danger; but those in the Parian displayed no courage
for any measures, for, as their interests are so involved in peace,
they never have incurred the hazard of war except under compulsion.

On the night of the twenty-fourth, the governor received information
from the castellan of Cavite that the Parian was to revolt on the
next day; but on that very night it was quite evident that their
determination was not to revolt, but to flee as best they could from
the death which they regarded as certain. For on that night all the
talisays [45] (which are the fishermen's boats) departed in flight;
and although General Don Francisco de Figueroa talked to the Sangleys,
endeavoring to calm their minds, it was not possible to remove their
fear. They excused themselves by saying that they knew that on the
next day all their heads would be cut off. They said that in planning
the insurrection it had been agreed that they would not separate;
but they had formed an organization to be prepared, their shops made
secure, and such weapons provided as they could find for this purpose.

On the next day, May 25, his Lordship being anxious at this went out
with only four captains to stroll through the Parian, to learn their
intentions by observing what arrangements they had made. He found
them all very peaceable, and their shops open; they were furnishing
supplies therein, and most of them were eating breakfast. In various
places they entreated him very submissively to protect them, because
the blacks threatened them, saying that they were to be slain. His
Lordship reassured them, and offered to send a force of soldiers
who should protect and defend them from the insolent acts of the
blacks. In order to obtain further security, his Lordship ordered
that the [Sangley] ship-captains be summoned and that a bell be rung
to assemble them, in order to provide for the guard and defense of
the Parian. When they saw the captains enter the city, they regarded
the arguments of their fear as confirmed; and the entire Parian
turned out to watch what was done, all being doubtful of their
own courage. Finally, thirty Sangleys from those who were uneasy,
seeing the last captain enter, ran toward the gate to detain him
and laid hands upon him when he was near the portcullis--either to
obtain by this service means to ingratiate themselves with Cot-sen,
or to secure a person who at all events could direct them. The men
stationed at the gate, who saw the haste with which they approached,
seized their arms and shot down some of the Sangleys. The guard on
the walls suspected them of greater designs; and from the bulwark of
San Gabriel Sargento-mayor Martin Sanchez, without the order that he
should have had for this, fired two cannon. At the noise of the shots
the people in the Parian, who were in suspense waiting to see how this
tragedy would end, without further delay raised an outcry; and having
heard that all Manila was coming to attack them flung themselves into
the river--those who could, in bancas; most of them held up by some
piece of bamboo. Others, more alarmed, took to swimming, and as they
were confused by fear, went down the current, and many of them were
drowned. The multitude of bancas hurried to a champan which was about
to depart, which lay outside the bar with only two soldiers to guard
it; and the Sangleys going aboard it hoisted sail. The [rest of the]
crowd crossed to Santa Cruz where they halted; they talked with the
father minister of that village (who was minister to the Chinese),
Father Francisco Mesina, and gave him an account of their flight,
saying that they feared that our people intended to cut off their
heads. The father calmed them and offered to obtain for them pardon
from his Lordship, for which purpose he immediately set out. The
merchants and peaceable people in the Parian, some 1,500 in number,
remained in their houses--in hiding, so that it seemed as if there was
not a soul in the Parian--awaiting their doom. Considering that in
the hills they would not better their condition, but that this with
excessive hardships would only delay their end, many fore-stalled
death by inflicting it upon themselves--some by hanging, and others
by plunging into the river.

Without delay his Lordship went to the gate, most fortunately for
the Sangleys and with great benefit to the community, as the result
showed; for if he had not been present at the gate, the fear of being
besieged which all felt, would have led them to engage in hostilities
with the Parian and use their arms, compelling the governor to
give them his entire attention. But his Lordship in so difficult a
crisis which demanded prompt and resolute action, took counsel with
past experiences and present necessities, his keen and quick mind
attentive to everything. Knowing well that this disturbance was caused
by fear, he was unwilling to make it greater in the outcome without
dissuading [the Sangleys from revolt] by acts of clemency--since an
encounter with the Parian must of necessity make both [parties among
the Sangleys] declared enemies, and desperation would render them
terrible as had been experienced in former insurrections. Moreover,
our people would be obliged to use time and people when both were
scanty for the emergency that we were expecting of further conflict;
since the guards necessary for fortifying the city were inadequate,
on account of our pursuing the rest of the fugitives. Accordingly, the
governor prudently preferred to leave them uncertain and in expectancy
rather than in declared and resolute attitude, since in the former
condition they were easy to subdue, which in the other case would
involve a great expenditure of military supplies--which would of
necessity be greatly impaired when, for a long siege, all abundance
is moderation. [For economy is needed:] of provisions, when there are
no funds in the treasury, and no harvest in the villages with which
to supply the city with food; and of men, when there are not enough
to man the walls--to say nothing of the severity of fighting and of
the inclemencies of the weather with their exposure to the rains.

His Lordship left the Sangleys reassured, and the rage of the Spaniards
checked; he retired to the storehouses from which he immediately
despatched a champan with a strong force of men in pursuit of the one
that the Sangleys had stolen, and furnished all the military posts
with abundance of supplies. It was past one o'clock when he returned
to the palace; and before he took any rest or sat down at his table,
he appointed General Francisco de Esteibar as chief master-of-camp,
to act if occasion should arise for a military campaign, and that
there might be, either for that purpose or for affairs in the city,
an officer to take his own place when absent.

While the governor was at the warehouses the first embassy sent by
the Sangleys found him; it came by Father Francisco Mesina, who said
that those who had crossed over to Santa Cruz were in the greatest
uncertainty, and would return to their obedience if he would pardon
them. During the time which the father spent in this mission the
scoundrels who had approached the gate, and in the first onslaught
had killed two Spaniards, finished crossing the river; these fled
in confusion by way of the Parian, and completed the terrorization
of the other Sangleys, most of whom therefore went out to Sagar and
others to Meysilo.

Father Mesina returned with pardon for them and found it necessary
to pursue them. He continued his endeavors by means of the father
mandarin, [46] giving him a paper written in the Chinese language [to
assure them] of entire safety. Although the latter set out with it,
he did not reach the Sangleys, and Father Francisco Mesina sent his
despatch by a messenger whom he encountered, placing it in the hands
of a boy who carried it; for lack of a horse, he himself remained
at Meyhaligue.

Fathers Nicolas Cani and Bartolome Vesco, who mounted on good horses
had been pushing ahead since noon, went as far as San Francisco
del Monte where they encountered some troops. They fell in with
the soldiers and talked with them about bringing in the Sangleys;
it was finally decided that Father Francisco Mesina should go ahead,
and that the matter should be settled with him.

While the religious were making these efforts, his Lordship took
all suitable measures by way of preparation for any event. He sent
for Master-of-camp Don Juan Macapapal, who in the disturbances in
Pampanga had proved his constancy and devotion in his Majesty's
service, and ordered him to bring three hundred picked bowmen,
the best in his villages; and he commanded that two hundred veteran
soldiers be selected from the villages of Pampanga. From two o'clock
were continually arriving the cavalry which the governor had ordered
to be brought from the ranches [47] in order to relieve the Sangleys
of the Parian from their fears; for the coming of these horsemen would
guide the fugitives from the mountains in their decision. His Lordship
charged the religious orders to send some fathers in order that they
might assist the Spaniards, and by their authority check the insolent
acts of those who might try to harm the Sangleys, in order that the
latter might not be further upset by their misfortunes. This was a
prudent decision; for, even with all this foresight, it was almost
impossible to defend the Sangleys from the robberies which were
attempted by negroes and base fellows at the risk of frustrating his
Lordship's pious efforts. Among these were not lacking some persons
from whom more might be expected, who--some in person, and some by
means of their servants--furnished their own houses very well [from
the spoils of the Sangleys].

That afternoon, his Lordship walked through the Parian; the Sangleys
came to their doors, and kneeling before him with faces like those
of dead men entreated mercy from him. His Lordship consoled them,
telling them that they had no cause to fear; that his anger was not
directed against them, and that he was their father; that only the
foolish ones who would not submit would find him severe, while those
who were discreet and peaceable would experience his great clemency.

From the time when the disturbance began until it was entirely quieted,
his Lordship had much to do in defending his prudent decision against
the many Spaniards who desired to break entirely with the Sangleys
and make an end of them--not considering that such proceedings would
ruin the colony, all the more as, since we had to prepare for the war
that we regarded as certain, we needed more of the Sangleys' industry
for the many labors required for defending and fortifying the walls,
erecting temporary defenses, and harnessing so many horses; for it
is they who bear the burdens of the community in all its crafts,
notably in those that are most necessary.

The debate became hotter when, at nightfall, our people found the body
of Fray Jose de Madrid, [48] a Dominican whom the seditious Sangleys
had slain in that morning's outbreak in order to crush the rest by
the horror of that crime--making the other Sangleys think that after
so atrocious a deed there remained for them no hope of pardon, and
no other means of saving their lives than to follow [the dictates of]
their desperation. There is no doubt that if this murder had been known
in the morning, it would have injured the interests of the Sangleys;
and that between the scruples of prudence and justice [on the one
hand], and the boldness of the counsels given by all the rest of the
military men [on the other], the piety of so just a vengeance would
have strongly prevailed. But the corpse was quickly buried--either
by the father's assailants, repentant; or by the peaceable Sangleys,
in fear--and, detected either by the odor or by the signs made by
some servants who, hidden in the convent of the Parian, witnessed the
occurrence, the body was found that night. The news, which quickly
ran through the Parian, filled all with horror and caused some of the
Sangleys to flee from that quarter. Accordingly, by morning affairs
assumed a worse aspect, and the more influential personages and the
military leaders became less friendly to the Sangleys. All directed
their efforts to persuading his Lordship to have the heads of all the
Sangleys cut off, commencing at the Parian and conducting a campaign in
pursuit of the rest of the fugitives. His Lordship, seeing that they
had allotted the Sangleys but a short respite, that they had the day
before left the settlement of matters with Father Francisco Mesina
and that more time than this was necessary for securing the proper
degree of order, resolved to hasten the negotiations for peace and
to go to see the father with the Sangleys in company with a Sangley
named Raimundo, an agent of Cot-sen in this city.

At this time so many lies were current against the behavior of the
Sangleys, and these were so well received by those who desired to
destroy them--persons who were actuated more by avarice and selfishness
than by interest in the welfare of the community--that they caused
hesitation among even the most cautious and prudent. On one hand they
said that a battalion of Sangleys had entered the village of Tondo
(which is distant a cannon-shot from the city) and had already set
fire to the church. Again, the fugitives had retreated upon Sagar, and
had fitted up many forges in order to make weapons, and were working
these eagerly day and night. But his Lordship--who was well informed
regarding the available forces, and knew that he could send hardly
one hundred strong men into the field out of the six hundred whom
he had in the city, and how important it was to reserve his entire
strength for the greater danger; and who very correctly judged that
inconsiderate desires for an assault [on the Parian] had fabricated
these inventions, and that the more discreet gave credit to these tales
in order to oppose his own steadfast determination--instantly went in
person to satisfy himself regarding this story about Tondo. Finding
that it was imaginary, he realized how little credence should be given
to novelties brought from afar when some one had dared to concoct
such things under his very eyes; and he therefore allowed the peace
negotiations to proceed by the agencies which had commenced them.

There is no doubt that the successful outcome of this affair is due
solely to the prudent management of the governor; and that, if he had
allowed himself to be dragged along by the opinions which prevailed
in popular estimation, an insurrection would have been contrived
that would have fatigued the soldiery in a campaign of many months,
and caused much destruction in the villages; for the insurrections
that we keep in mind in these islands included no more [favoring]
circumstances [than did this one], nor did this lack anything except
the actual assault. But his Lordship knew how evil advisers are the
individuals concerned in this matter, in which one seldom finds a
person who is not interested in the ruin of the Sangley--some on
account of the loot [that they may obtain]; the rest, because there
are few persons who do not hold property of the Sangleys in trust, or
else owe for much merchandise which they have bought on credit. Many
have become depositaries for their acquaintances, who, fearing the
removal of their property to other hands, give it to their intimate
friends to keep; and by slaying the Sangleys all render account with
payment. Accordingly, in the insurrection of 1639 it was found by
experience that those in whom the Sangleys placed most confidence were
the first and most importunate voters for their ruin. In this decision
it is only the king who hazards his treasure, and his governor who
risks a point of honor; for finally the very persons who, through
either self-interest or greed, advised the assault [on the Sangleys]
cast on the governor the blame of the insurrection, as happened to
Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera. The very persons who, censuring
him as a coward and representing to him instances of boldness forced
[by desperation] on the part of the Sangleys as causes for employing
armed force against them, afterward, when at their importunities
he had kindled the fire, declared that by this act he had caused
the revolt, compelling the innocent and peaceable to become enemies
against their own will. Here this class of persons was protected,
and the way left open for [the return of] the others; for with the
burning of the Parian these would have been enemies, and all would
have despaired of reconciliation. This was seen by the response made
to Father Francisco Mesina the first time when he went to confer with
them about their submission; they said, "To whom shall we turn if the
Parian is burned now?" But when he assured them that the affair had
not reached that stage, they were astonished and readily discussed
submission--as those who had gone away, fleeing from our arms which
they supposed to be declared against them; and the haste of their
flight had not given them leisure to ascertain our decision, as they
regarded their own imaginations as facts.

In their mode of action they plainly showed their intentions--that
they were not rebels, but terrified fugitives; nor did they injure
either life or property, whether of Spaniards or of natives. Nor
did they avail themselves of the privilege which the necessity of
supporting life gave them, to use the rice, for they used what they
needed of the food which the Sangley farm-hands had in their houses;
while in the insurrections attested as such they did not leave a
village without burning it, or property that was not pillaged in all
this province of Tondo--sparing not even what was holy, profaning
the churches and the sacred images.

In consequence of his agreement with the Sangley fugitives, Father
Francisco Mesina set out again on the twenty-sixth of the month in
company with the Sangley Raimundo; and at night he reached Sagar in
the fields of which the Sangleys were encamped. Many of them (mostly
Christians) hastened toward the father bewailing their misery and
asking permission to go down to the Parian. So great was their anxiety
that, on that very night, they undertook to carry out this plan. How
important was the preservation of the dove-cote, in order that these
doves might not complete their flight to the mountains and might
easily recover their domesticated tranquillity! The father delayed
their journey until morning, and on the next day, the twenty-seventh,
sent to Manila four hundred of them whom he found most inclined to go
and who showed least distrust in the company of Father Nicolas Cani,
so that he could assure their safety from any misfortune. On the same
day he went with Father Bartolome Besco and the Sangley Raimundo to
the place where the fugitives were encamped. On the way he encountered
some companies of seamen from the champans and other riff-raff, who
were ignorant of the agreement for the submission of their fellows;
and these would not allow the fathers to pass. But when this was known
at their camp two of their leading men went down to the father and told
him that they all would follow his advice; but that Raimundo was not
a suitable person for settling the matter with them, because many of
the Sangleys were suspicious of him on account of his long residence
among us. They told the father to bring two of their ship-captains,
so that this business might be concluded with them. The father retired
to San Juan del Monte, in order to say mass there the next day, the
twenty-eighth (which was the feast of Pentecost), and sent word to
his Lordship of what the Sangleys demanded.

In accordance with this his Lordship on the twenty-eighth summoned
the ship-captains, and after he had conferred with them they went
back to the father and told him that it was not necessary that he
should fatigue himself by going to the [Sangley] camp, since all
the fugitives had already agreed to come down. They only asked that
the ships might go to Nabotas, from which place all the Sangleys who
had to embark for China would sail; and that the father would, for
this purpose, go there in company with the regimental master-of-camp,
Domingo de Ugarte, who was very acceptable to them and well known for
his kindness to them. On the thirtieth they came down with this reply;
and on the thirty-first the father went back with it to confer with his
Lordship. The latter was ill pleased with the stipulation of embarking
at Navotas on account of the lack of confidence that they displayed;
but the father set out to bring them over to whatever his Lordship
should ordain, as he finally decided it--departing on the first
of June accompanied by Master-of-camp Domingo de Ugarte and three
ship-captains. They arrived that night at the village of Taytay, the
nearest village to the place that the Sangleys had occupied; and that
very night they despatched the ship-captains fully instructed. On the
next day, June 2, the captains came down with the reply and decision
of all the Sangleys--that they would come down to the Parian from
which they would embark in the champans which were ready to depart;
while the Christians would come down to the villages of Santa Cruz
and Binondo, or as his Lordship should command. This they carried
out in the time which they asked, which was two days.

Their resolution was much aided by the one which his Lordship had
taken ever since May 26, when he ordered that one of the champans
should be made ready for the voyage, promising its captain beforehand a
thousand Sangleys, whom he must without fail transport. He commanded
one of the three champans that were at Cavite to come to Manila;
this was to open the door wide in the face of their mistrust, and it
showed that his intention was only to make the country safe and not
to avenge on them (as they had believed) the insolence of Cot-sen.

The fugitives thereupon came down in all haste and especially on the
day that had been set, June 4; yet notwithstanding this, so great
was the anxiety to feed on the wretched Sangleys that [some people
attempted to] persuade his Lordship that the whole arrangement was a
sham; that all the Sangleys were still in the field, and that they only
came down from their camp on this pretext, in order to search for what
they needed and to carry away the few who remained in the Parian. His
Lordship, giving another day of vigilance, apparently yielded to
the importunate outcries of the many who clamored for the punishment
of the Sangleys--who had committed no crime except their terrified
flight; and ordered the soldiers to be made ready in order that he
might freely select the troops who were to go out for the campaign.

The bowmen of Master-of-camp Don Juan Macapagal had already arrived,
also the 200 Pampango veteran soldiers in charge of Master-of-camp
Don Francisco Lacsamana. He [i.e., his Lordship] commanded them to
be mustered on June 6; and when all were expecting [that he would
select] a strong battalion of Spaniards, Pampangos, Mardicas, [49]
Japanese, and creoles, he left them all mocked and humiliated who had
attributed to cowardice the forbearance dictated by his prudence. He
set aside only the regiment of Pampangos, arquebusiers and bowmen;
and committed the exploit to the Pampango master-of-camp, Don Francisco
Lacsamana--leaving in the lurch those who attached so much importance
to the enterprise, and who attributed his delay to fear. Unaffected
by considerations of mere policy, his Lordship moved in accordance
with right and the light of truth which belongs to those free from
prejudice; he had carefully considered the enterprise and saw that but
little [poisonous] humor remained to be corrected. He therefore chose
to make it evident that his delay was not for the sake of temporizing
but to show clemency; and that, able to resist no longer, he was using
rigor against those who in so many days had not availed themselves of
his clemency. And, to show how great was his courage and how superior
he regarded his forces, he did not vouchsafe to send out Spaniards
but entrusted the issue to the Pampangos.

This was information which by one act, his discretion gained with
great results. He made trial of the fidelity of the Pampangos, whose
commotions and recent punishments had left their fidelity uncertain;
and he put them on their honor with this so honorable commission, to
act then with valor and afterward with constancy. It would make them
hated by the Sangleys, to oblige them to become enemies; and would give
Cot-sen to understand how little importance the governor attached to
the latter's men, since he was attacking them with natives alone. He
could ascertain thus what was the disposition of the Pampangos, and
how much courage they had for resisting that pirate; for himself,
the injury which the islands had experienced in so many disturbances
of the natives gave him some confidence.

He gave them their orders--that they should march to the camp of
the Sangleys without doing harm to any peaceable Sangleys whom they
might encounter on the way, who should be going to the city; and when
they should arrive there, giving the troops a rest, they should make
the assault on the next day cutting off the heads of all [whom they
should find there]. At the same time his Lordship despatched orders
to the alcaldes-mayor of Bay and Bulacan--through whose provinces
the Sangleys would necessarily have to disperse after they were
routed--to go out with three hundred bowmen from each province to
occupy the roads against them; so that wherever they should seek
a route to safety they should meet destruction. The Pampangos left
the city before noon; his Lordship anticipating all possible events
three hours later commanded two companies of horsemen to make ready,
who should set out at daybreak for the [Sangley] camp--in order that
if the Pampangos met bad luck they might have sufficient protection,
and could thus recover their courage and renew the attack in full
assurance of victory.

The Pampangos encountered on the way many bands of Sangleys, who
were coming to the Parian, and allowed these to pass them without any
harm. About five o'clock in the afternoon they came in sight of the
camp; and, in order not to divide the merit of the exploit with the
Spaniards--who, as they knew, were to go thither at daylight--they
would not wait until the daylight watch as they had planned. Without
taking any rest and unarmed they closed with the Sangleys who numbered
some 1,500 men; and in two assaults they routed the enemy without any
loss save a captain of their nation who fell dead, and some soldiers
who were wounded. The Sangleys left in their camp more than sixty dead
men, and all their provisions and baggage remained in the possession
of the Pampangos; the latter did not follow in pursuit, partly as the
hour was now very late, partly that they might satiate themselves
with the booty. But on the morning of June 7 the cavalry appeared,
who, learning of the defeat, pursued the fugitives until they entered
a region that was rocky and overgrown with thickets, where most of
them perished--some from hunger, and many from the cruelty of the
Negrillos of the mountains. Then, as the alcaldes-mayor of Bay and
Bulacan attacked them with their troops, hardly a Sangley could escape
who did not perish either at their hands or those of the Negrillos.

Up to the twenty-fourth of June the troops, both cavalry and infantry,
remained in active service--partly to put an end to the remaining
fugitives, partly to keep the retirade occupied in case of any
disturbance in Manila, since it was a place near that point to which
the Sangleys resorted on such occasions. After that date the troops
gradually withdrew, his Lordship showing great kindness and many
favors to the Pampangos. To those who had shared in this exploit he
granted exemption from paying tributes; and, honoring them by the
confidence which he had in their fidelity, he gave up to them on
the twenty-sixth the guard-room in the palace--with which they left
service well content and full of courage for greater enterprises.

Afterward, the regiments from Pangasinan and Ylocos entered Manila,
brought by General Don Felipe de Ugalde. After they had been mustered
in Manila, so that the Sangleys could see the force that had been
provided against Cot-sen, they were ordered to return to their
own country so that they could attend to the cultivation of their
grainfields; for, as they were nearest to us, they could easily be
summoned for an emergency. The same orders were given to the Pampangos
and to the men from the provinces of Bay and Bulacan; also that they
should keep the picked and trained men separate, so that these might
be found ready without confusion or disturbance at the first warning.

The cavalry, a suitable number for 600 horses, were finally assembled
by General Don Francisco de Figueroa whom his Lordship had honored with
this command. They were divided into six companies each containing
twenty-five Spaniards, the remainder being cowherds, negroes, and
mulattoes--men very suitable for this service as being dextrous and
inured to hardship. They were mustered in the city and along the
beach in sight of the champans; and were at once divided among the
posts that were most suitable--two companies in Cavite, and the rest
in the environs of Tondo.

All the Sangleys in the provinces of this mainland [of Luzon] who had
not taken refuge in the Parian in time were decapitated. Those who
thus took refuge were confined to the point of Cavite or to the Parian
of the city, so that we might keep them within range of our guns,
and where they would be of advantage for whatever had to be done for
the fortification of both posts and the protection of the shore. His
Lordship commanded that lists be made of [the Sangleys engaged in the
different] crafts, reserving as many of these as were deemed sufficient
for the needs of the city and service; and he ordered that of all the
rest as many as space could be found for should be shipped [to China],
compelling the captains to transport them. There was one champan which
took aboard 1,300 of them; they were so crowded together that they
could hardly sit down; but in this the captain had no small profit,
for they exacted from each one ten pesos as passage-money.

When the champans were ready to weigh anchor, his Lordship was
informed that the two chief leaders of the people who had fled to the
mountains had come down in the last bands. These two were infidels;
one was the contractor for the slaughterhouses, named Barba, and the
other a shopkeeper named [blank space in MS.]; and by the help of
some of their followers they had been hidden, so that they could go
away in the first champans. We had certain information that these
men were among the people on shipboard, but all the efforts of
the officials were frustrated by the dissimulation of the Sangleys
until his Lordship resorted to direct measures, and, summoning the
ship-captains, commanded them to find and surrender those two men,
saying that if they did not he would order their heads to be cut
off. All were terrified and within a few hours they dragged out the two
culprits by the neck--one from the champan on which he had embarked;
the other from a hut in which he had hidden himself. On the following
day they were executed between the Parian and the city in sight of the
Sangleys. They had ruled tyrannically, and with their deaths our fear
passed away, having inflicted due punishment with so little bloodshed.

The champans departed one after another; and on the day when the last
three--those of the ambassador and two others which he carried in his
convoy--were to set sail, which was June 10, his Lordship ordered that
the chimes should be rung as a token of rejoicing over false news
of the ships from Nueva Espana (which he caused to be published),
artfully brought in by an advice-boat. This was done in order that
the ambassador and the Sangleys, persuaded that we had received
succor of men and money, might with this belief aid in repressing the
fierceness of the barbarian, artfully supplying what was lacking in our
reputation for strength. But God, who directs the hearts of rulers,
made the bells ring for true news, bringing to port on that very day
the patache which came from Nueva Espana, July 13, when people were
becoming discouraged by the delay of the second advice-boat.

His Lordship gave orders to collect in the Parian all the remaining
Sangleys under penalty of death to any who should leave it;
and although in a few days he gave them more space, it did not
extend beyond the range of the artillery. With the same severity he
compelled them to sleep within the Parian; and as the regiment from
Cagayan came unexpectedly--a warlike people, who, as they belong
to a province so remote, cannot wait for news of the necessity,
but can only forestall it--he lodged these near the Parian in full
readiness for any disturbance. The regiments of Caragas, Cebuans, and
Boholans arrived; the Caragas were sent to the point of Cavite, and
the rest were quartered in La Estacada, [50] the Cagayans proceeding
to Santa Cruz. With these forces the river was thoroughly occupied
from the bar to the upper reaches, and its passage was closed to
the Sangleys. The same plan was observed with the cavalry, the two
companies at Cavite being quartered in the fields there and the rest
in Binondo and Meyhaligue. The Sangleys were thus more thoroughly
imprisoned than if they were in the jail.

From the first day [of the commotion] his Lordship directed all
his efforts to supplying the city with provisions, and succeeded in
bringing in 120,000 cabans of rice with meat, fish, and vegetables. Now
with greater energy he attended to its fortification, personally
overcoming the difficulties: in [procuring] the lime--which were great,
for the rains had begun and the lime was brought so far (from Bulacan
and Bacolor)--and in the construction itself, for eleven defenses
were begun in different places. His Lordship gave personal attention
to those which were most important--eating his meals and despatching
business on the beach in a straw hut that was built for him, so light
that it was carried on men's shoulders from one place to another as
the importance of the work required; and was watchful on every side,
not only on account of the ardor which caused him to give his aid,
but also for the sake of his example. He was the first and most
steadfast in the work of conveying earth and stones for earth-works
and masonry; and his example was followed by the citizens with the
men in their service. Besides this fatigue he was overburdened with
the minor cares of the work, sending in all directions for the lime,
and himself allotting it as if he had no other matters to attend
to. In order that the dissensions among the military leaders might not
delay the execution of his plans, he suppressed the office of chief
master-of-camp and sargento-mayor--which had been created to divide his
cares, and when necessary, to supply his place when absent, since he
must render aid in all quarters--and took upon himself all those cares,
in order that those who were working should find no obstacle that
would delay them. Thus he finished in a short time and with less than
6,000 pesos of expense, works which would have consumed half a million
[pesos] and caused ten years of hardships to the provinces--availing
himself of the opportunity to attain his endeavor, and arranging that
the Sangleys should be exchanged in shifts, 300 together in these. The
[various native] peoples [were exchanged] by companies in the same
manner as were the Spaniards; and the people of the neighboring
villages with longer time for resting their relays, so that they might
not be hindered from attending to their grain-fields. And in this
there was much latitude in the execution of orders, the neglects and
omissions which are so usual to the sloth of those peoples being
overlooked--although the way in which the people were treated,
their willingness, and their consideration of its importance, all
facilitated so difficult an enterprise as the repair of the castle,
which toward the river was threatening to fall. A fausse-braye [51]
was applied to it, which commenced at a cupola and ended at the bar,
with a very handsome platform; and five redoubts were erected which
ran from that point toward the sea as far as the bulwark at the foundry
(which defends the gate on the land side), as the wall was there very
weak and its defenses were far apart and not very convenient. From
this bulwark to the gate was built a covert-way, and in front of it a
ravelin, from which again ran the covert-way until it connected with
the bulwark of Dilao, and met the estuary which crosses from Malosa
the land as far as the moat. At the gate of Santo Domingo another
redoubt was erected, and another at the postern of the Almacenes
[i.e., magazines], so that these shook hands with the cupola at the
river. At the gate of the Parian a spacious ravelin was made with its
covert-way toward the bridge over the river, cutting the land between
the inner and outer ditches, and leaving a passage sunken around the
ditches for a movable bridge. The wall was strengthened toward the
river and Bagumbayan by its fausse-braye. A fine bridge was built
on the estuary of Santa Cruz, so that the cavalry and troops could
reconnoiter unhindered the other side of the river, as well as Sagar
and Antipolo. [52]

At the same time, public prayers were offered. The Augustinian
religious began this with the opportunity afforded by the fiesta of
the canonization of St. Thomas of Villanova. They were followed by the
fathers of the Society of Jesus with the triumphal reception of the
bodies of Sts. Martial and Jucundus and the relics of other martyrs,
which were deposited in the cathedral, and were carried in a grand
procession to the church of the Society; the governor, the Audiencia,
the cabildos, and the citizens, with the regiment of soldiers (who
fired a salute) took part in this. The governor paid the expenses of an
octave festival in the cathedral in honor of the archangel St. Michael
on the fourteenth of January; it began with a procession which marched
through the Calle de Palacio, past the house of the Misericordia,
the convent of San Agustin, and the college of the Society; thence it
turned toward the Recollects by way of the convent of San Francisco
to that of Santo Domingo; and by the college of Santo Tomas returned
to the cathedral. The said prayers were continued until Lent.

In the midst of these pious exercises the ambassador from China found
us: this was the same religious as before, Fray Victorio Riccio. To
the salute which he fired his Lordship commanded answer to be made
with ball, as one who, having been challenged, awaited the envoy on
a war footing; and despatched to the shore the sargento-mayor of the
garrison to tell him that, on account of the hostilities which he
had announced in the name of Cot-sen, we had expected him to come as
an enemy and were prepared to receive him with the sternness that is
customary in war, and that he must inform the governor of the nature
of the despatches that he carried. The ambassador answered that he
came in peace; and by the news which he at once related it was learned
that, only a few days after his Lordship had placed his forces under
the powerful protection of the holy archangel, Cot-sen had died.

That ruler was ready in all the strength given by ships, men, and
provisions to deliberate according to the news that he should receive
from here upon the measures that would have to be taken, when the first
Sangleys [from Manila] arrived. They, driven by fear and urged on by
desperation, scorning the cannon-shots that were fired from the castle,
seized a royal champan which was ready to sail; and those Sangleys who
had left [the Pasig River] in the talisays, for whom there was no room,
seized other champans in the channels of Mariveles. These fugitives
regarded as already executed that of which their fear persuaded them;
and they told the corsair that the governor had commanded that all
the Sangleys should be slain, not only the traders but those who were
living in this city. At this he was kindled to such anger that he
immediately undertook to sally forth for vengeance without heeding the
obstacles that he would now meet in the expedition from unfavorable
weather. It seemed to the Chinese that with only half of their fleet,
even though the other half should perish, they could carry abundant
force for the enterprise. Upon this disturbance of his mind came the
rebellion of his son whom he had commanded to be slain; [53] and the
mandarins of his city, Vi-cheo, [Fuh-chau, or Foo-chow] protected the
son, having resolved to defend him. With these anxieties Cot-sen was
walking one afternoon through the fort on Hermosa Island which he had
gained from the Dutch. His mind began to be disturbed by visions, which
he said appeared to him, of thousands of men who placed themselves
before him, all headless and clamoring for vengeance on the cruelty
and injustice which had been wreaked on them; accordingly, terrified
at this vision (or else a lifelike presentation by his imagination)
he took refuge in his house and flung himself on his bed, consumed
by a fierce and burning fever. This caused him to die on the fifth
day, fiercely scratching his face and biting his hands--without any
further last will than to charge his intimate friends with the death
of his son, or more repentance for his cruelty than to continue it
by the orders that he gave for them to kill various persons; thus
God interrupted by his death many cruel punishments.

Moreover, some mandarins were pacified who were resentful because
the alcaldes of Pangasinan and Cagayan had seized some goods from
their agents; and the father ambassador made satisfactory answers
to the complaints made on account of the incorrect reports of the
fugitives. The Chinese therefore solicited peace, and the continuance
of the trade. This was a piece of good-fortune so timely that it
enabled us to send this year a ship to Nueva Espana for the usual aid,
the building of this ship having been stopped for lack of iron; for,
since the iron which came in three ships from China had been bought
on his Majesty's account, it became necessary to beg iron from the
religious orders and the citizens and to tear out the few iron gratings
which such emergencies as these had left in the city. This necessarily
made evident to that [Chinese] nation how greatly we depend on them
for our means of support.

The ambassador, Fray Victorio Riccio, finally came hither on April 8
with news of the peace; it had been concluded so much to our favor
that no further conditions were imposed beyond the restitution of
the property which had remained here placed in the hands of private
citizens, and that which the alcaldes-mayor had withheld in Cagayan
and Pangasinan. Thus the country was quieted, and all its people
were freed from the affliction which the haughty and cruel kingdom
of China had caused us by its threats.

The people who followed this corsair amounted to over a million
of men of war alone. The champans (which are their ships), large
and small, numbered 15,000 and many of them carried forty pieces
of artillery. So arrogant was the corsair with his power, that he
aspired to gain the kingdom from the Tartar king (who is also ruler
of Great China) and be crowned at Nanquin, assured that, as Fortune
showed herself friendly to him, the entire empire would follow him as
the man who maintained the authority of it all--not only as he was
captain-general for the dead king but because he had been confirmed
in this office by the king now living, who is called Ens-lec. [54] He
also intended to maintain the superstitions, dress, rites, and customs
of his ancestors--especially the garments and [mode of wearing] the
hair, to which the Chinese are excessively attached. This purpose
had caused them to endure his cruelty, which had been so great
that more than three millions of men had died for his satisfaction
alone. This fierce captain would have succeeded in that enterprise,
if he had not been drawn off from it to gain the neighboring cities,
nine in number (the smallest one containing 200,000 souls), thus
giving the Tartar king time for better preparation. Nevertheless,
he had the courage to invest Nanquin, the court city of Great China,
which is defended by three walls two leguas distant from one another,
the circuit of the first being thirty leguas. [55] He gained the first
wall and brought affairs to such a crisis that the king, fearing his
fierce determination, talked of fleeing from his court of Pequin. The
mandarins warned him that by such a course he would lose the entire
kingdom; for the inhabitants of the city, dispirited by such tokens
of weakness, would instantly surrender in order not to experience
the corsair's ferocity. They said that this victory would give him so
much reputation that he would easily subdue the entire kingdom; that
it was most important to make all the rest of their power effective,
withdrawing all the troops from other strongholds to increase the
royal forces with a multitude of veterans and well-disciplined
soldiers. The king did so and attacked the enemy with 400,000
horsemen; and as Cot-sen on account of having left his islands had
no cavalry worth mention, he was compelled to yield to a power so
formidable. With the loss of 80,000 men and most of his champans,
he left the river on which the court city stands, and returned to his
own town, Vi-chen. But this blow left him so little inclined to profit
by experience and his strength so little diminished that, when the
entire Chinese force pursued him in a fleet of many ships, he went
out to meet them at a legua's distance from his principal island,
[56] and fought with them the greatest battle that those seas have
ever seen. Cot-sen sent most of their champans to the bottom, and
captured many; few escaped, and those were damaged. This filled that
country with such fear that their precautions [against him] wrought
more destruction than his cruelty could have accomplished; for these
obliged the king of China to depopulate the extensive coasts of his
entire kingdom, a strip of land six leguas wide embracing cities of
100,000 or 200,000 inhabitants, in order that they might not be the
prey of the conqueror. [57] This was a measure tending to the latter's
prosperity; for all those many people, finding themselves without
land or settled mode of life, crowded into the corsair's service to
spend their lives and to maintain themselves on the abundant booty
offered to them by his power as absolute master of the seas.

The intention of this barbarian [Cot-sen] was to become the master
of China, profiting by the hatred of the Chinese to the Tartars,
and on the present occasion by the fact of the king's death. But
as Cot-sen needed land whereon to maintain so many people, he was
minded to conquer Hermosa and these islands. Accordingly, he landed
[on Hermosa] first in April, 1660, with 100,000 men, a hundred cannon
for batteries, and a still larger number of field-pieces; the cannons
carried balls of forty to fifty libras. At first the Dutch scoffed
at their forces, calling them "men of the paypay"--that is, "of the
fan," which all of that nation use, as if they were women. Confident
in the impregnable nature of their fortress (into which they gathered
the feeble garrison of the island), and in the large and splendid
force of men which defended it, more than two thousand in number,
although they had nineteen ships, they did not take these out of
the river when they could; and the Sangleys attacked them on the
sea to great advantage overcoming the Dutch with their champans, and
inflicting much injury on them--for these champans are lighter vessels
[than those of the Dutch], and their people are very skilful in the
management of artillery. The Dutch at once sallied out with 300 men
to prevent them from occupying the islet in the Mosamboy entrance,
[58] on which the Chinese expected to plant their battery; but the
multitude charged upon the Dutch and cut off the heads of all, except
one or two who escaped by swimming. This humbled the pride of the
Dutch and dispirited their men. As soon as the Chinese landed their
men they attacked the eminence, where the Dutch had a fort called
Chiacam garrisoned with sixty soldiers; but it surrendered on the third
day, and the Chinese used the Dutchmen for handling the artillery,
assigning them to various stations. In the harbor they burned three
ships and boarded one; and such was the fear that filled the hearts
of the timid of falling into the hands of so bloody and savage an
enemy, that twelve Dutch fugitives with other people went to him
[as those who surrendered] with five brigantines which the [Dutch]
fort had employed for many purposes.

The Chinese began their enterprise with as much fury as if they
had lacked time for the attacks of their batteries; but in their
assurance and the manner of their encampment they acted as if
time were of no importance, since it was the chief enemy of the
besieged. Palmo by palmo they steadily gained the [surrounding]
country, carrying with them branches, and baskets [of earth], until
they established themselves near the fortifications of the Dutch;
and during the ten months while the siege lasted they did not cease
firing all their artillery, night or day. In another direction an
innumerable throng of laborers were continually at work cultivating
the soil, as if they were already its owners; and before the fort
surrendered, the Chinese were already enjoying the produce of their
farming. For the proud corsair went [to Hermosa] so confident in his
strength that among the 500 champans which he took with him for this
enterprise many went loaded with plows, seeds, and the other things
used in cultivating land with innumerable workmen who were set aside
for this service alone. Consequently, while he fought he peopled and
cultivated the island without any one being able to prevent him; and,
as he is so rich, he carried a great quantity of cloth, in order to
attract the poor natives and bring them over to his side, in which
he has succeeded.

Only one other engagement was a success for the Dutch, who undertook,
when the Chinese first encamped, to bombard them with all their cannon
at once; and, having thus demolished their huts and fortifications,
the Dutch made a bold sortie, spiked six of the enemy's cannon,
cut to pieces the garrison, 3,000 in number, and were carrying away
nineteen pieces of artillery to the fort. But another Sangley officer
hurried up with his regiment and attacked the Dutch with such fury
that they were obliged to leave the captured cannon behind, and in
disorder, take refuge within the fort. With the twelve Dutchmen they
put the fortifications in better shape, and their bombardment began
to be more effective. Finally they demolished the redoubt with all
the fortifications outside, and approached the fort so closely that
the men on the walls talked with those in the enemy's camp. They
demolished the second height of the wall, which had no terreplein;
the governor of the place was killed by a cannon-ball; and every day
the enemy came up to the walls to drink the health of the Dutchmen
and display other soldierly civilities.

They had now demolished all of the wall that rose above the
terreplein, and talked of making a general assault. The Dutch began
to be disheartened by the death of the governor and the loss of so
many soldiers; and when they saw the preparations for the assault
they talked of negotiating fur surrender, in order that they might
not be left exposed to the enemy's cruelty--since for that arrogant
tyrant it was the same to slay five or six thousand men as one. He
therefore at once replaced twice the number in a post [which had
lost its defenders], as he was so near to his island of Vicheu
where he kept the main body of his followers, from which they were
continually coming and going; and for every one who died a thousand
fresh men came to his camp. They now set out to engage the Dutch with
six hundred scaling-ladders, fourteen of their men being allotted to
each ladder; but the besieged hung out a white flag, and came out
to propose terms of surrender. This was granted with the condition
that only the property of private persons should be removed, and
that they must surrender intact the property of the [East India]
Company, which was done. It is computed according to the Company's
books, that with the military supplies and the artillery of the fort,
[this capture] had a value of five millions--an amount which will
not cause surprise to any one who knows that this place was the
magazine for the two richest traffics in the Orient, those of China
and Japon. The artillery found there [by the Chinese] included 150
pieces; the firearms, 4,000; and there were provisions and military
supplies for years. The slain in this war, for the entire period,
were: of the Dutch, 630; of the Chinese, 10,000 men. The vanquished
left the fort on the day of the Purification of our Lady, six hundred
in number, and embarked in nine ships which had remained in the harbor.

In short, this [i.e., the Chinese] people is the most ingenious in
the world; and when they see any contrivance in practice they employ
it with more facility than do the Europeans. Accordingly, they are
not now inferior in the military art, and in their method of warfare
they excel the entire world. No soldier is hindered by providing his
food; every five men have their own cook. All are divided into tens,
and every ten have their own flag, and on it are written the names
of its soldiers. These tens are gathered into companies and regiments
with such concert and such ease in governing them that Europeans who
have seen it are astonished.

Consider the anxiety that must be caused by a nation so ingenious, so
hardy, so practiced in the military art, so numerous, so haughty and
cruel, in a city where all the forts together could not call to arms
2,000 Spaniards--and these of so many colors that not two hundred pure
Spaniards could be picked out from them--and occupying so much space
that for its suitable garrison it needs 6,000 soldiers. From this may
be inferred the joy that was felt throughout the city [at his death]
and the so special kindness of God in putting an end to this tyrant
in the prime of his life--for he was only thirty-nine years old, and
had spent his time in continued military practice from the year 1644
until that of 1662, when he conquered Hermosa Island. He was always
favored by fortune, and there was no undertaking in which he did not
succeed except the siege of Nanquin--which would be considered foolish
temerity by any one who will consider the strength and greatness
of that city--an enterprise in which he had to entomb or submerge
in blood his fortune and his acquired glories; yet it weakened him
so little that he quickly restored the losses, victorious over the
entire naval force of China.

At the beginning of June his Lordship gave permission to all the
[native] tribes to return home; they went away well satisfied and
loaded with praises. He gave the Chinese more freedom, permitting
them to remove to the villages adjoining the city, and releasing
them from serving on the ships [de las faginas] on account of the
great labors which they had performed before his Lordship's eyes in
completing, with so much readiness and with so little expenditure
of time and money, [public] works which [otherwise] could not have
been finished in ten years of hard labor, with half a million pesos,
and the exhaustion of the weak natives of the neighboring provinces.

His Lordship summoned a council, in which by his command were read
the letters from the mandarins who were directors and guardians of
Cot-sen's estate, written by order of his son, in which was discussed
the stipulation which they made a condition of peace--the restitution
of the property which their agents had left here in trust, and
other merchandise which the alcaldes-mayor of Ylocos and Cagayan had
withheld. In accordance with the [decision of the] first council, this
one ordered that such restitution be made. Therein was also discussed
the question whether the Sangleys should be permitted to live in the
islands; this was done by a few ecclesiastics (only three in number),
who opposed such permission; they had attempted, both in the pulpit and
in private conversation, to persuade the rest to their opinion. All of
the council agreed with only one dissenting voice, that the Sangleys
ought to be allowed to remain here up to the number which the decrees
of his Majesty regarding this matter have prescribed--that is, 6,000
men--provided that they be not allowed to spread into other provinces,
nor go beyond the villages included in the jurisdiction of Tondo
(which is in the territory of this city) conformably to the royal
ordinances which have fixed these limits. All recognized our need of
that [Chinese] nation, in the lack and scarcity of all things to which
we see ourselves now reduced--all because the number of the Sangleys
has been diminished, since the natives have neither energy nor strength
to support the burdens that the Chinese carry; and much more on account
of our dependence upon their trade, for everything. For not only does
everything necessary for life come to us from China--as wheat, cloth,
and earthenware--but it is the Sangleys who carry on all the crafts,
and who with their traffic maintain the fortunes of the citizens
(without those other products of vineyards and olive-groves that
are furnished in the industries carried on in Nueva Espana) from
the merchandise of China, having secured in their hands the entire
commerce of these islands, since that of Yndia and Japon failed. His
Lordship, having handsomely entertained the ambassador, dismissed him,
with letters for the prince and the mandarins; and we here remain in
peace, affairs settled as they were before, and the fear [removed]
that an enemy so powerful and at our very gates must occasion us.






LETTER FROM GOVERNOR SALCEDO TO FRANCISCO YZQUIERDO

Summary of this letter, written from Manila, dated July 16, 1664,
giving information regarding the condition of the islands at his
arrival, and the measures that he had taken.


He states therein that he set sail from the port of Acapulco on
March 25, 1663; and after a prosperous voyage they sighted the
cape of Espiritusanto. There a vendaval storm came against them, so
violent that it carried them to Cape Engano; and on July 8 he landed,
made the ship secure, unladed all the money sent for the situado,
and made arrangements for its transportation to Manila. The governor
was gladly received there, and took possession of the government and
the authority of captain-general, on September 8, 1663.

He found the islands in most wretched condition--the Spaniards as
yet hardly reassured after the insurrections of the years 61 and 62,
and the natives irritated by cruel punishments. The royal treasury
was so exhausted that it contained no more than 35,000 pesos; the
magazines were destitute of provisions, ammunition, and other supplies
for the relief of the fortified posts and the soldiers. A few months
before, the soldiers had received part of their pay--each one who
had eight pesos of wages being paid one peso, and others receiving
only a ration of rice and meat. But the governor found the officials
of all classes still unpaid; and he had no ship to send to Nueva
Espana, because the vessel sent thither by his predecessor had put
back to port. The commerce [of the islands] with all the neighboring
countries was paralyzed, and the said commerce must again be revived,
for without it Manila could not exist.

He states that he had ordered timber to be cut for repairing the ship
that would go to Nueva Espana, and for the construction of the forty
galleys that were needed for the defense of the islands from the
Moro pirates that infested them--who were still more daring since
the abandonment of our forts on account of our fear of the Chinese
Cotseng. The governor ordered that wheat shall be sowed, since this is
so necessary to the manufacture of sea-biscuit for the ships, and in
order not to depend upon foreigners for the supply of this article. For
the same reasons, he caused an engineer (whom he had carried to the
islands at his own expense) to make examination of the iron mines;
this reconnaissance had given satisfactory results, for the engineer
had begun to work the mines with so good success that he had taken out
nearly 600 arrobas [of iron], and was continuing to operate the mines.

In another (but undated) letter on the same subject, he mentions the
improvements that he had had to make in the walls of Manila; and says
that he had ordered four forts to be built in the interior of Luzon,
in order to push forward the conquest of the infidel peoples. He also
repeats much of what he had said in the preceding letter. [59]






WHY THE FRIARS ARE NOT SUBJECTED TO EPISCOPAL VISITATION


The reasons that the governor and the royal Audiencia of the Filipinas
Islands apparently might have had for suspending the execution of the
royal decrees, which were repeatedly ordered to be observed in favor
of the right of the royal patronage, from the year 1624 to that of 1656
[sic] have been as follows. [60]

First, the consideration of the zealous observance of [their rules
by] all the orders in those islands; the zeal with which they busy
themselves in their ministries; the new conversions that are made daily
in certain portions of the islands; and because if the religious are
forced to that subjection [to the diocesan authorities] they will
surely fall into laxity, and consequently, will lose the zeal that
they today exercise, as experience shows in the orders throughout
America that have entered that subjection.

Second, because of the few seculars that there have always been in the
islands to take charge of those missions; for when these were most
numerous here was in the years 24, 28, and 34, for then the city of
Manila had 400 citizens, and Cebu, Oton, Nueva Segovia, and Arevalo had
nearly 200 more. Now the representative citizens throughout the islands
do not number 60. Then if in that time, when the islands contained most
Spaniards, there were no secular priests, how can there be any today
when there are not 60 citizens in all the islands, while the number
of priests is steadily growing less in America, where the Spanish
settlements are large and populous and are continually increasing?

So great is the lack of the secular clergy that they cannot even
take care of the missions in their charge. For there is no district
belonging to the seculars, especially outside of the island of Manila,
that does not need two or three priests; for most of the villages
of their jurisdiction are 10, 20, or 30 leguas distant from the
chief mission station--from which, as they find themselves alone,
they do not go out to visit their districts as a rule, except once a
year. Consequently many must necessarily die without the sacraments,
and even the children without baptism, because of the laziness of the
Indians and the little esteem in which they hold the faith because of
the lack of instruction. Even the ministers themselves run the risk
of dying without confession, and there are not few examples of that
in those islands. That occurs because they can do no more, and have
no priests who can aid them in their ministries. In order to have
these, they must maintain them at their own cost, in order to meet
the obligations of their consciences. But the regulars in all their
districts which consist of many villages (they have three or four
priests in each district), are ever traveling unceasingly by sea and
land, visiting their villages. Consequently the villages instructed
by the religious are frequent in their use of the holy sacraments,
because of their good opinion of our holy Catholic faith, and their
stricter observance of it.

The ministries of those islands need at least 400 priests who are
religious; for I assume that there must not be only one to a district,
as are the seculars in regions so extensive as these, but three or
four, and sometimes more, and that is a matter involving a question of
conscience, because of their ministries and their own souls; for there
is a district belonging to the seculars where a priest does not arrive
for a whole year, and if one reaches some parts, it is only by chance.

For the above reasons I believe that the governor and the royal
Audiencia of Manila, as those who have the matter in hand, in the past
year of 1665 suspended the execution of the said decrees, giving a
time-limit of four years to the Order of St. Dominic to present the
said reasons to his Majesty and his royal Council of the Yndias. For
it is to be believed that if they found it advisable for the royal
service (as they are so attentive to it) to carry out the exact royal
orders in the matter, they would not have delayed the execution of
the orders for four years, nor have allowed any more replies.

The reasons that the regulars have for petitioning his Majesty to
be pleased not to change the method that they have followed for the
space of one hundred years in their administration of the Indians in
the islands, are as follows:

First, because the Indians are not yet well rooted in the faith,
and there are still a great number of heathen and Moros to be newly
converted--for the sacred Order of St. Dominic has many heathen
in the provinces of Cagayan, Pangasinan, and Ytui. The Order of
St. Augustine has still many heathen among the Yglotes (who belong
to the province of Ylocos) and in the island of Panay. The Society of
Jesus has all the island of Mindanao, those of Jolo, and the islands
adjacent to them, which are for the most part inhabited by Moros and
to a less extent by Christians and heathens. They have abandoned the
Maluccas, where they have labored for so many years; and at present
they administer only the island of Siao which is all Christian. The
Recollect Augustinians administer the Negrillos of Masinlo and many
of the Caragas bordering upon the Mindanaos. The Order of St. Francis
is not lacking in Aetas (who are still heathen) in their districts
of La Laguna and the mountains there to be converted.

Second, because the missions of the Filipinas are suitable for
him who is looking for hardship and not ease. How is it possible
for missions in the islands of old infested by infidel pirates, and
[now] having new conversions of Moros and heathen, not to be full of
hardship? For as a rule, those missions outside the island of Manila
are visited by sea by their ministers; and that brings them no little
trouble besides the constant danger of being killed by the Moros.

Third, because the regulars in those islands now and those who have
always been there have almost all come from Espana, and have gone
to them, not for the purpose of any temporal advantage, but with
the design of reducing infidels to the bosom of the Church. Most of
them are desirous of going thence to Japon, as the reduction of that
empire as well as a portion of that of China belongs to the crown of
Castilla. Since, then, the missions and doctrinas of those islands are
so apostolic, and the zeal of the regulars in going there is expended
only in the direction of promulgating the gospel among heathen, one can
easily infer how necessary it is that the regulars be maintained there
in the strict observance and spirit with which they left Espana. They
fear, and with great reason, that if that subjection be accepted the
regulars in those islands will relax, as has been experienced in the
provinces where the orders have bowed to that subjection, paying heed
perchance rather to not leaving the comforts of the fatherland than
to the observance of their rules. But since the religious in the
Filipinas Islands are not rooted in their fatherlands, but on the
contrary regard themselves as exiled therefrom, it is impossible for
them to return thither. Subject there to hardships and sickness (for
the climate of Filipinas is less favorable and healthful to Europeans),
they will not have the difficulty in quitting their ministries that
has been experienced in America--where, in order not to leave their
ministries, they have become subject, thus losing their positions;
and they will not be willing that the most religious and those most
zealous for their rules should at least keep away from the missions and
ministries of the Indians through the imposition of that burden, and
that no others should be found. Consequently, with that subjection they
desire again to journey to parts so remote; so that in such case, in
those provinces which are today so religious, their courage would grow
less and that not without danger to those ministries, which by their
very nature demand zealous persons and those of a very superior virtue.

For it is sufficient to consider that, if serious men of learning
and virtue subject themselves to the ordinary in order to minister
in a doctrina, it may happen that they will be punished for a slight
omission or neglect, perhaps one that they could not avoid--such as not
being able to arrive in time to hear the confession of a dying person
or to give him the holy oil; or to baptize a new-born infant. It is
possible that this fear alone would make some refuse the ministries
of the islands with such a risk. For although the ordinary cannot
punish them as religious, he can punish them as curas; and in such
a case it is difficult to proceed between cura and religious.

In the first place the religious's definitorio may assign him also to
a house with a vote, all of which have ministries in the Filipinas;
and an ambitious man may by the exercise of skill, and by influence,
intercessions, and presents deprive him of the place, and perhaps
may impute to him faults and defects that he does not possess in
order to attain his purpose better and to justify his action. That
can not fail to be a cause for sorrow, and more so to one who has
no foundation in the islands, but who is rather disgusted at being
there; and it will be a sufficient cause for him to retire from his
ministries and even to attempt to return to Espana.

And even though the superiors may order the religious to live in
their missions with that subjection, it may be that they cannot
obtain it by entreaty from them, and that the religious will excuse
themselves by saying with St. Paul: Unusquisque enim in ea vocatione
qua vocatus est permanet. [61] They may also say that they wish to
persevere in the vocation to which they were called by God, and that
they did not enter religion to recognize two superiors, one a regular
and the other a secular, but rather one of their own profession--by
whom they would willingly allow themselves to be visited, censured,
and punished; but not by two distinct in profession. For if there
are two superiors who are unequal in profession, it is quite possible
that they will be at variance in the matters of orders and obedience;
and that such subordinate may be in doubt without the power to help
it lest obedience to one be an offense to the other. Consequently,
placed between two extremes, he will come to obey the more powerful
and to disobey his regular superior, who is the one from whom he can
fear less.

And one might doubt whether the superior could impose on those
who should be thus firm in their purpose the precept of obedience,
so that they should subject themselves as curas to an ordinary and
to tho choice of a governor. And if for the above reasons those who
are zealous for their rules should be lacking in the provinces and
ministries, the men who are less religious would become the mainstay
of the provinces and would administer the missions--men whom neither
ambition nor their slight attachment to the observance calls away [from
the order]. Consequently, such men coming in time to rule the provinces
and to possess the ministries in those islands, the end will be that
there will be no religion, observance, or examples in them to invite
the Indians, but only scandals by which they will stumble; for, as a
foolish people, they embrace what they see rather than what they hear.

Besides the above, the orders fear lest the governors and the
ordinaries will make use of that subjection to harass them, especially
if by any accident some collision should occur between them and the
authorities. For if the governor had the selection of the [religious
of the] villages in his control, who could prevent him from removing
or appointing whomever he wished, or choosing those whom he considered
better for his own purposes and even molesting the good? For since all
the houses with votes in those islands except the convents of Manila
are doctrinas, he could place in them the men satisfactory to himself;
and these would not fail him in the following provincial chapters in
accepting from his hand a provincial who would be most advantageous
to him, or most inclined to agree with him. Consequently, he would
become absolute master of the monastic government of the orders. If the
ordinaries wished to molest those religious whom they did not like,
who could prevent them from fulminating penalties for the slightest
causes? and this especially where the witnesses are Indians who would
swear against their missionaries at any threat or for any profit,
whatever the ministers or the visitors of the bishops wished.

It is well seen that all those troubles, so possible, would cease
if the governors would govern according to the pious zeal and most
Christian intention of his Majesty, and the ordinaries according
to the obligation of their estate. But, nevertheless, in parts so
distant and remote from the heart of the monarchy, not all the
governors and ordinaries work in harmony. For even the good and
those regarded as such in Espana are wont to become changed in
the Yndias, and to act very differently from what was expected
of them; for power and opportunity generally change the purposes
and disorder the expectations of those who are by nature covetous,
revengeful, or subject to other passions. What may not [therefore]
be feared? On account of all those things the fears of the orders are
not ill founded. Would that experience did not testify to all these
possibilities. Since even without that subjection the governors and
ordinaries are wont to give the regulars causes for merit for very
slight causes, what would it be if they held the regulars as subjects
and had absolute power to be able to punish them as criminals and to
depose them as guilty?

If the regular superior should decide that he ought in conscience
to remove any occasion for scandal, or one who was a discredit to
his profession, in the case of any of his subjects; and it should be
necessary for that reason to remove him from his mission: in such case,
if he went to the governor to impart his purpose as he is obliged to
do by the right of the royal patronage, the governor having heard the
reasons would have a copy of the charges given to the party; and the
suit having been brought to trial the defense might even manage with
crafty pleas to frustrate the zeal of the superior. In such cases
(which are quite ordinary where the said subjection to bishops and
viceroys is allowed) the superior will come out disaccredited and
justly angry, and the accused triumphant; for his evil conscience
and the zeal of his prelate will put him on his guard, and he will
be forewarned of each attack.

How many scandals will follow from this, and how many discords,
edicts, and enmities! how many expenses in money, and how much
bribing of witnesses and intercessors! both of servants and friends
of the governors, who are usually benefited by religious of that
sort. They are generally aided as much by cunning as by what they
spend in order to succeed in their designs, without considering that
they are trampling upon all the three essential vows of the estate
which they profess--namely, poverty, obedience, and chastity.

Therefore, if the desires of his Majesty are that the regulars shall
live in accordance with their own laws; that the natives of the Indias
be well instructed; and that they be not molested by the officials
of the two estates: the remedy for that is to leave the regulars to
their observance without obliging them to become more subject than
they have been hitherto. If this is either not advisable or cannot
be done, it would be better for the orders that the secular clergy
should administer those missions.

For how is it possible that such missionaries should not be covetous
if they are inclined to that vice as an efficacious means to maintain
themselves in their posts, to attain others that are larger and more
wealthy, to defend themselves from the zeal of their prelates? Such
will have the power of loading the Indians with pecuniary fines and
of doubling the fees; and even perhaps there will not lack some who
will avail themselves of trade and commerce to attain that end.

The subjection will result only in advantage to the governors and
ordinaries, in trouble to the Indians (for the latter furnish the
wealth of such ministers) and disservice to his Majesty; since it means
the ruin of religious discipline. The Indians being harassed and the
governors and ordinaries being interested parties, all contrary to his
Majesty's holy intent, the Indians will come to have disinclination
instead of love to affairs of the faith and religion. And I dare
affirm that Christians thus instructed will be Christians rather by
force than in their hearts.

In no part of the Yndias can one more intelligently expect that the
regulars will be strict of observance than in the Filipinas Islands;
for all their missions, even those in the suburbs of Manila, are
surrounded by heathen and Moros--Chinese, Japanese, Mindanaos,
Joloans, and Borneans, and people of almost all the other kingdoms
of the Orient whose conversion is so anxiously desired. For if those
heathen and Moro nations, who have before their eyes the conduct of
the Christians, come to observe it as not at all in accord with right,
not only among the secular clergy but among the regulars--who are by
their profession teachers of the law and are bound to furnish a good
example as the rule of their observance--what would they think, or
what notion would they form of it? It is learned from some mandarins
of Great China who were converted to our holy faith because they saw
in all the ministers of it for many years a conformity of morals that
was regulated to natural law, that they prudently conclude therefrom
that the law which taught such actions could not be other than
true. If the Chinese and Japanese who live in those islands should
see the evangelical ministers acting against all natural dictates,
they would come to a contrary conclusion, for they have no greater
arguments for belief than those which come through their eyes.

The regulars of the Filipinas Islands have well understood how just it
is that the right of his Majesty's royal patronage be observed therein
according to his orders. Therefore, they do not petition for exemption
from the choice by the governors and the collations by the ordinaries
under any other title than that of a favor from the greatness of his
Majesty, if perchance their merits have deserved it. For, as is well
known, there are no missions more distant throughout the monarchy
nor more seas to pass nor seas so endangered by the enemies of the
faith--which can be affirmed by those who administer outside the
suburbs of Manila and their environs, who continually bear death or
captivity before their eyes.

If his Majesty has been pleased to give privileges to the citizens of
those islands with the honorable title of hidalgos and nobles--the
munificence of his Majesty supplying what birth denied to many, a
privilege not conceded to any others of the Yndias--as a reward for
having been willing to become citizens in regions so remote from their
fatherland without any other service, in order that by such kindness
others might be encouraged to do the same, not less do the regulars
merit some special privilege and reward from your Majesty, and the
welfare of the souls of the natives. This is the chief object of your
Majesty in conserving the Filipinas Islands and all that conduces
to this is only a means--namely, that it is inhabited by Spaniards
and garrisoned with soldiers, and the expenses which are incurred in
all this. Therefore if his Majesty exercises so great munificence in
order that the means may not fail so that the end may be attained,
in order that it may be more completely and perfectly executed, the
regulars may hope for greater favor from the piety of their king. And
if laymen are rewarded for the services that they have rendered in
those islands with military honors and with great encomiendas of
Indians, one can trust that the services rendered to his Majesty by
all the orders during a hundred years in the islands will merit some
recompense in immunity (even though it be not due for their services)
from his gratitude and liberal hand, as they hope from the grandeur
of their king and sovereign.






APPENDIX: JUDICIAL CONDITION OF THE PHILIPPINES IN 1842


Source: This is from Sinibaldo de Mas's Informe de las Islas Filipinas,
ii, no. 12.

Translation: This is by James Alexander Robertson.






APPENDIX: JUDICIAL CONDITION OF THE PHILIPPINES IN 1842


[In addition to the following account by Mas, the student desirous
of pursuing the subject will find much data in the various Guias
de Filipinas. Some statistics are also presented by Montero y Vidal
(Archipielago Filipino, pp. 194-203) for the years 1883-1884. Much
of value and interest will also be found in the various reports of
the Philippine Commission, and in the numerous pamphlets issued by
the United States Government.]

Justice is administered by means of an Audiencia, which has the
title of royal, and resides in Manila, being composed of one regent,
and five judges; by means of alcaldes-mayor who govern the provinces;
and by the gobernadorcillo whom each village has and who is equivalent
to our alcalde de monterilla. [62] The latter proceeds in criminal
cases to the formation of a verbal process, and tries civil causes
up to the value of two tailes of gold or 44 pesos fuertes.

The royal Audiencia is a court without appeal in Filipinas. The
alcaldes-mayor cannot terminate by their own action civil questions
that have to do with a sum of greater value than 100 pesos fuertes, or
impose any corporal punishment without the approval of the Audiencia,
and then only imprisonment for one week. But they are judges of the
first instance for every kind of litigious or criminal cases.

In order that one may obtain the post of alcalde-mayor, it is not
necessary that he should have studied law. Hence, the greater part
of the heads of the provinces are laymen in that respect. Generally
those posts are given to military men. Consequently, this is the
origin that for every process which is prosecuted in a lawsuit or
cause, the alcalde has to have recourse to an assessor, in order to
obtain the opinion of that one on which to base his action. But since
the advocates reside in Manila, the records have to make at times
many trips from the province to the capital. From this results the
inconvenience of delay, the liability of theft, or the destruction
of the mail. For, in the many rivers that must be crossed, the papers
become so wet that they are useless (as happened with several letters
of a post which was received in the chief city of a province when
I was there, the envelopes of which it was impossible for us to
read), and the malicious extraction in order to obscure the course
of justice. The defect of this system can only be understood if one
reflect that the various provinces of the colony are not situated
on a continent, but in various islands, and that by reason of the
periodic winds and the hurricanes which prevail in this region, the
capital very often finds itself without news of some provinces for
two or three months, and of that of Marianas for whole years.

It appears that what we have said ought to be sufficient to show the
necessity of radical reforms in this department, but, unfortunately,
there are other more grave reasons for such reform. The alcaldes-mayor
are permitted to engage in business. [63] The author of Les Estrits
des Lois [64] said many years ago that the worst of governments is
the commercial government; and surely, for those who have studied the
science of government, all comment on this point is superfluous. The
alcalde who is permitted to engage in business naturally tries, if
possible, to monopolize it by all means in his power. This vice of
the system leads some greedy men to the greatest excesses, which later
are attributed to all alcaldes in general. Upon my arrival at Manila,
I asked a very respectable Spaniard who had been in the country for
many years about what happens in the provinces. He replied to me:
"You know that the alcaldeships are reported to be worth 40,000 or
50,000 duros, and he who seeks one of those posts very earnestly has
no other object or hope than to acquire a capital in the six years
for which the government confers them. Before going to his province,
he borrows 8,000 or 10,000 duros from one of the charitable funds
at such and such a per cent. Besides, he has to pay an interest to
those who act as bondsmen for him, both to the government for the royal
treasury, and to the charitable funds which supply him with money. When
he arrives at his province he acts according to conditions ruling in
that province, for not all provinces are alike in their productions
and circumstances. He generally establishes a supply store, and,
consequently, from that moment, any other storekeeper is his rival and
enemy. If such storekeeper has a creditor whom he tries to hurry up
and goes to the alcalde, he gets no protection. If any theft happens
to him the same thing more or less occurs; for, although the alcalde
orders efforts made to ascertain the thief, far from taking those
measures earnestly, he is secretly glad of the losses of his rivals,
and it has even been asserted that there are cases in which the alcalde
himself has been the instigator of the crime. Who is your enemy? That
of your trade. But does the alcalde himself sell the goods? Sometimes
he sells and measures them, at other times he keeps an agent in the
store; the most usual thing is, if he is married, for his wife to take
charge of the expense, especially of those goods of any value. But
his greatest gain consists in making advances of money at the time
of the sowing, the period when the Indians need it and try to get it
at any cost, for their negligence and their vices do not allow them
to foresee such a case and be prepared for it. For example: a farmer
signs a paper for the alcalde which obliges him to deliver at harvest
time ten measures of sugar, which are worth at least two and one-half
duros, and he himself receives only one and one-half, consequently, by
that operation alone of advancing money, the alcalde-mayor sometimes
gains 40 per cent. But what generally happens is that the Indian is
so short sighted and is so indifferent to the future that he signs
any burdensome obligation provided he gets some money, and he only
takes account of what they give him without thinking of what they are
going to get from him. For example, the alcalde gives him 60 duros
as an advance for forty measures of sugar at the harvest time. The
harvest is bad and he can only give 20. In such case the reckoning is
after the following fashion: 'The sugar has been sold for 4 duros, and
hence 20 measures will amount to 80 duros. You cannot pay them to me,
consequently they can just as well remain as an advance for the coming
year at one and one-half.' In consequence of that the farmer signs a
paper by which he enters under obligation to deliver 53 measures at the
next harvest. Harvest time comes, and if it is bad, he only presents,
say, 13. Therefore, 40 measures at 4 duros amount to 160 duros of debt,
and at one and one-half make 108 measures for the following year. In
this way the man keeps on adding more and more until all his goods
are at the disposal of the alcalde. Besides, there are innumerable
other vexations to which he must subject himself. For instance: he has
to deliver to the alcalde 100 cabans of rice; when he presents them
the alcalde measures them out with a larger measure than that used
in the market. Hence, in reality, the alcalde exacts from him more
than he is bound to pay. The same thing happens with indigo. For, a
discussion arises as to whether the indigo is, or is not, very damp,
and some libras must be taken off for waste; or, whether it is of
poorer quality than the Indian promised, and so on." "But surely it
must needs be that it is fitting to take money advanced, since there
is one who seeks it, and it is worth more for a farmer to cultivate
his land in this way than that he leave it without cultivation for
lack of the necessary capital. In regard to the tyrannies which the
alcalde tries to commit, it seems to me that they might be avoided by
the countryman borrowing the money from a private person who is not
in position to annoy him." "That is all very well thought out, but
I will tell you what happens. The Indian borrows money very easily,
but it is very difficult to get him to pay it, and he generally avoids
doing so, if possible. If a private person lends him money and does
not collect it when due, he has to go to the alcalde in order that
the latter may force payment. The latter either does so coldly, or
pays no attention to the whole matter, since his intention is that
such private persons take warning and never again lend to anyone;
for, it is evident, that if many come to speculate in this kind of
business, the alcalde will soon be shut out, or at least will have
to submit himself to the general rules. Consequently, the result is
that capitalists draw back from him, saying, and very rightly, that
it is only fitting for the alcaldes who possess the means to cause
themselves to be paid when a debt is due. The alcalde, then, remains
master of the field, and monopolizes this department at his pleasure,
for he who needs funds has to go to him, for there are very few who
enjoy enough credit to get them elsewhere. Many other advantages also
favor the alcalde. The parish priests aid him, and many times take
charge of the division of the money of the alcalde in their villages,
for they know that that is the sure means of keeping on good terms with
him, and obtaining the measures which depend on his will in the matters
of their villages. The gobernadorcillos and officials of justice are
other instruments of which the alcalde makes use to apportion and
collect his funds." "Why is it that these do not occupy themselves
rather in their affairs than in those of the alcalde?" "The alcalde can
always, whenever he wishes, make trouble for the gobernadorcillo by
making him go to the chief village with innumerable pretexts, and by
various other methods which it would take a long time to enumerate,
and which it is very easy to conceive. Besides, it is important
for the alcalde to keep the gobernadorcillo satisfied. Suppose now,
that a road has to be built, or a bamboo bridge, or any other work
for which the people of the village who have to do it, according to
their obligation called polos and services, are summoned. As some
of them are busy in their fields or other business, they wish to be
free from such a burden, and they give the gobernadorcillo two or
three reals and he excuses them on the ground of sickness. A party
of troops or a Spaniard passes by and asks for some beast of burden,
or an aid in food. That is also an occasion for the gobernadorcillo to
get even with those whom he dislikes and obtain part of his demands;
for some give him presents in order that he may not give the beasts
of burden, while others do not receive the pay for that food. During
the days of tiangui or village fairs, such and such a sum is exacted
for each post in the market place. In general there are some men of
service called bantayanes who are a kind of sentinel placed at the
entrances of villages. Many of them also pay to be excused from
that burden when their turn comes or when they are told that it
comes. In general he has ten or twelve men called honos, manbaras,
etc., given to him, who are exempt from polos and services, and they
serve the ayuntamiento to send papers, conduct prisoners, etc., and
the gobernadorcillo gives them permission so that they may cultivate
their lands, by collecting from them a contribution." "But it seems
to me that the gobernadorcillo will have to give account, if not for
all, at least for many of the taxes that you have mentioned." "It
ought to be so, and in fact, some enter into the communal treasury,
but they are the fewest and those connected with the legal matters,
for of the others there is nothing to be said. For example: I have seen
an order enclosing a fine as a punishment on the gobernadorcillo for
some fault or misdeed that he had committed. He assembles the cabezas
de barangai; the whole sum is apportioned among the people of the
village. The amount of the fine is collected and the gobernadorcillo
has still something left for his maintenance and revelling." "Why
do they not complain to the alcalde?" "Because, sir, of just what I
told you. The alcalde needs the gobernadorcillo so that he may use
him in his business, and for all such things he is a very far-sighted
man. Besides, the alcalde who tries to investigate those snares of
the tribunals (ayuntamientos) will lose his senses without deriving
any benefit from it. He does not know the language. As interpreter
he has the clerk, who is an Indian, and the entangler-in-chief, and
almost always in accord with the Indian magnates." "If the clerk is a
bad man, will he not be hated?" "I do not say that he is beloved, but
some fear him, and others are his accomplices. Since the alcalde is,
in reality, a business man, he naturally takes more interest in his
business than in that of other people, and leaves all court matters
in charge of the clerk, who comes to be the arbiter in that matter,
and here is where the latter reaps his harvest. One of the members
of the tribunal (ayuntamiento) steals, or causes to be stolen from
some man his buffalo. The man finds out where it is; he complains
to the gobernadorcillo; they begin to take measures; at last the
animal is returned to him, but if it is worth five duros, they make
him pay ten duros in expenses so that the man either considers his
beast as lost and the thieves keep it, or the latter get from him
twice as much as it is worth. Hence, if I were to tell all that
passes in this wise, my story would be very long. One of the things
which they are accustomed to do is to let the prisoners go out of
the prison for several days without the government knowing it. I
have seen that done this very year of 1841 in the province of---,
in regard to some prisoners whom the alcalde-mayor believed to be in
prison; but they were working on the estate of the clerk, and one of
those prisoners had committed very serious crimes." "But why do not
the curas remedy all that? I have heard it said that they are really
the ones who govern the villages." "In reality, when the curas take
that matter upon themselves, those abuses are remedied, at least
in great measure, for they know the language well, and every one
in their village knows the truth, if the cura wishes to ascertain
it. That is what happened in former times. And also at that time
the communal funds were deposited in the convent, and [thus] many
tricks and tyrannies were avoided. But for some years the governors
who have come from Espana have desired that the parish priests should
keep to their houses and say mass and preach and not meddle with the
temporal government; without taking heed that in a whole province
there is no other Spaniard who governs than the alcalde-mayor himself,
who generally comes from Europa and goes without reflection to take
his charge without any knowledge whatever of the country or knowing
even a single word of its language. Consequently, many religious,
in order to avoid trouble, see and keep still, and allow everything
to take what course God wills. This is one of the chief causes of the
disorders of the villages, and of the increase of crime." "Now tell me,
do the alcaldes make all the wealth that they are accustomed to acquire
with the kind of trade which you have explained to me?" "They have many
means of hunting [buscar] for that is the technical expression used in
this country, but those means vary according to circumstances. In some
provinces great efforts are made to obtain posts as gobernadorcillos
and officials of justice, and that department generally is worth a good
sum annually. Those are things which the clerk or secretary manages. In
the province of--- while Don--- was alcalde-mayor, that gentleman was
in collusion with the manager of the wine monopoly and they practiced
the following. The harvesters came with their wine, but they were
told that it was impossible to receive it. There was a conflict
within themselves, for they had to return to their village. Then
they were told that if they wished to deposit the wine they would
put it in certain jars which had been provided in the storehouse, by
paying such and such a rent until the administration could introduce
it. The harvesters, who needed the money, thereupon sold the wine to
the agents of the alcalde, at any price at all in order to return to
their homes. Finally, as he who had come to be an alcalde, has had
no other object than to acquire wealth, every matter which does not
contribute to that object, such as the making of a bridge, or a road,
the prosecution of evil doers, or any occupation purely of government
or justice, distracts and troubles him. On the contrary every means
of attaining his end appears to him fitting and good. This method of
thought is a little more or less in the minds of all; and thus you
observe that no one says here, not even excluding the religious, who
are those who know the country best, 'I have such or such reasons for
gaining this suit,' but, 'I have so many thousand pesos to gain the
suit.' But to tell the truth, it is not to be wondered at that the
alcaldes-mayor work without much scruple. In the space of six years
they have to pay their passage from and to Espana; to satisfy the high
interest on the money which they have borrowed; to acquit themselves
of the amount which their alcaldeship has often cost them; and besides
they make their fortunes. Not more or less is done in Turquia."

In the same way as this good man talked, the majority talk. The faults
and vices of some are attributed and laid to all. It is certain that
this system is fatal, for governors of such sort must be essentially
interested in turning down the attempt of private speculators,
and to frighten away instead the attraction of capital. That has,
as a natural consequence, the increased interest on money which
so endangers production, and, consequently, exportation and the
encouragement of the islands. But not less fatal is the opinion that
the authorities of Manila themselves are fed on such abuses. Complaints
are continually presented against the alcalde, at times very captious
and filled with falsehood and absurdity. The Audiencia and office of
the captain-general receive those complaints kindly and very easily
dictate measures humiliating for the alcalde, and impose fines on him,
of which a copy is given to the complaining parties. Rarely is it
that one leaves his alcaldeship without having paid many fines. The
Filipinos make the greatest ado, as is natural, over those triumphs
against authority, but authority loses decorum and moral force. All
this comes from the bad system established, for, since the governor
from the moment that he becomes a merchant, must be a bad governor and
a usurer and tyrant, the government of Manila is predisposed against
his acts, and declares itself the protector of the Filipinos. In this
way one evil is remedied by a worse. The supreme authority instead
of supporting and sustaining the subordinate government punishes and
degrades it. Illusion, respect, and fear vanish. It is believed that
that severity against those who rule is advantageous in making our
yoke loved, and that the natives will say, "The government is kind for
it punishes the alcaldes," while it would be better for them to say,
"The government is kind because it gives us good alcaldes."

Shortly after my arrival in the islands, being at the feast of
Cavite, distant four hours from the capital, I wished to go thither
on horseback, but all who heard of it dissuaded me from the idea,
asserting that I was about to commit a rash act. Another time when
I was coming from Laguna, on passing through Montinlupa, the manager
of the estate of that name was so greatly alarmed that he wished to
accompany me with his servants until we came near the city, and in
fact I learned soon that I was running a great danger on that road,
and that shortly before a Spanish sergeant had been murdered on
it. Then I was very much surprised to find that it was dangerous to
go near the capital without an escort, but later I have been much
more surprised to see that in provinces distant from the capital a
complete security is enjoyed. In order to show the condition of the
criminality of the island we shall present the following data drawn
from the clerk's office of the Audiencia.


Criminal causes sentenced in the Audiencia of Filipinas between the
years 1831-1837

[not inclusive]


                    Years         Causes

                    1832            75
                    1833            83
                    1834            43
                    1835           102
                    1836           108

                                   411


Report of the criminal causes sentenced between the years 1836-1842
[not inclusive]


                              Crimes
=====+=======+======+========+=======+=====+=======+=======+======+======
     |Rebell-|      |Robbery |       |Mobs |False- |Immor- |Wounds|Total
Years|ion or |Murder|Theft   |Incen- |and  | hood  | ality | and  |no. of
     |  Con- |      |and Im- |diarism|Lam- |  and  |  and  |rough |Causes
     |spiracy|      |position|       |poons|Perjury|Scandal|usage |
-----+-------+------+--------+-------+-----+-------+-------+------+------
1837 |       |   43 |    54  |   2   |     |   2   |    8  |   5  |  114
1838 |       |  108 |   145  |   6   |   4 |   7   |   52  |  60  |  382
1839 |       |   74 |   149  |   1   |   5 |   2   |   45  |  41  |  317
1840 |    2  |   83 |   106  |   5   |   1 |   3   |   41  |  54  |  295
1841 |       |  131 |   216  |  12   |   6 |   5   |   66  |  67  |  499
-----+-------+------+--------+-------+-----+-------+-------+------+------
     |    2  |  439 |   670  |  26   |  16 |  19   |  212  | 227  | 1609
=====+=======+======+========+=======+=====+=======+=======+======+======


                               Penalties
    ==========+=======+==============+================+===========
              |       |              | Deprivation of |
     [Years]  | Death | Imprisonment |   Office and   | Total no.
              |       |              |     other      |    of
              |       |              |  correctives   | Sentences
    ----------+-------+--------------+----------------+-----------
    [1837]    |   6   |       99     |        17      |    122
     1838]    |   6   |      140     |       169      |    313
     1839]    |   6   |      192     |        46      |    244
     1840]    |   7   |      131     |        19      |    157
    [1841]    |   3   |      173     |        77      |    253
    ----------+-------+--------------+----------------+-----------
              |  28   |      735     |       328      |   1089
    ==========+=======+==============+================+===========


    Total number of causes sentenced in the first five years      411
    Idem                                                         1607
    Increasing the latter                                        1196


[Here follows a report in tabular form showing the number of causes
in each province for the years 1840 and 1841. This table is compiled
at least in part from the guide of Manila for the year 1840; the
population of each province being taken therefrom. Thirty-three
provinces are enumerated. The total number of causes for 1840 was 295,
and for 1841, 499.]

The first thing which arrests the attention in these reports is the
increase of crime. The fiscal, whom I questioned in regard to this
matter, told me that now many causes are elevated to process which
were before finished in the interior courts, and that during these
latter years many old causes had been sentenced. This may be true, but
in regard to the accumulation of back cases that have been sentenced,
I believe that that can only be understood from the year 1838, or even
from that of 1839, because of the lack of judges in which the court
found itself in 1837. No matter how it is considered, the increase is
palpable, for the causes alone for murder of last year amount to more
than all those of any of the years of the first five years, and it is
incredible that at that time they neglected to try people for homicide,
although they did dissimulate in regard to lesser crimes. The second
thing which arrests the attention is the tendency to theft, since
the greater part of the homicides have been committed by robbers,
and further one sees a great multitude of causes for theft. For
among those two kinds of crime are found two-thirds of all kinds of
criminality. This is a matter well worthy of reflection in a country
where the means of existence can be procured so readily. The third
[thing that arrests the attention] is the mildness of the sentences. In
the last five years, when there were 439 homicides, only 28 have
ascended the scaffold, one-third of those tried have been set at
liberty, and 328 condemned to light punishment. One would not believe
that those treated with so great mercy are (at least always) criminals
for insignificant faults. A man of the village of Narbakan was tried
in the year 1840 for having begotten children twice by his daughter,
the second time that having been done by means of assaulting her with
a dagger. The attorney asked for ten years of imprisonment, but the
Audiencia did not impose any penalty and did not even condemn him to
the costs, nor did it take the measure in honor of public morality of
causing them to separate, but allowed them to live together as they
are still doing. At the beginning of the same year, 1840, Mariano
San Geronimo, a servant from youth to a Spanish tailor called Garcia,
stole one hundred pesos fuertes from his master, and another hundred
from Captain Castejon, adjutant of the captain-general of the islands,
who was living in his house; by extracting them from the trunks of
each one. That of the captain-general he opened with the key which
the latter's own assistant gave him. The greater part of the money
was delivered to that assistant, his accomplice; the rest was lost
at play. This deed served the defender of San Geronimo, Don Agustin
Ruiz de Santayana, to petition his acquittal, alleging in his favor
the incapacity and irreflection which that individual had shown with
the said thief. Both the criminal and his accomplice confessed, and no
obstacle was presented to substantiate this verbal process. However,
it lasted for more than one year. They troubled the master Garcia
so much with notifications and accounts of the maintenance of the
prisoner that at last he refused to have anything more to do with the
matter, and abandoned the charge. The alcalde-in-ordinary sentenced San
Geronimo to six months' imprisonment. When the Audiencia examined that
clause, March 31, 1841, it ordered the prisoner to be liberated. In
Inglaterra, that violator of his own daughter, and the domestic thief
would have been given the death sentence on the gallows.

This impunity for crimes is, to my understanding, very fatal, not
only because of the encouragement which it gives on that account to
criminality, but also because of the fear which gobernadorcillos and
alcaldes have in arresting the guilty, for they know that they will be
soon liberated and will soon take vengeance on them by robbing them,
cutting down their trees, and burning their places of business. An
employe of estimable qualities in the department of taxes told me that
once grown tired in a certain province of seeing that no one dared
to arrest a thief who had terrified the entire village, he himself
took the trouble to waylay and seize him in the very operation of
committing a theft. He had him bound, and sent him to the alcalde with
the general complaint. In a few weeks he saw him again in the village
and had to reckon with him. I have been in the estate of Buena-Vista
in the outskirts of which live very many robbers. However, they do not
steal there, but they go to do that in other places, bringing there
afterward horses, buffaloes, and whatever they can lay their hands
on. The manager does not dare to wage war against them or to denounce
their thefts, although he knows them. One night when I was there at
twelve o'clock, appeared a cavalry troop sent from the neighboring
province of Pampanga by Alcalde Urbina and commanded by Lieutenant
Lao. With them they brought several persons who had been robbed, and
took them before the official. He had a list of many whom he was to
arrest. It had already been given to the justice of the village. We
amounted to four or five Spaniards in that place. One of those who
live there came within a few minutes to tell us secretly that those
who were to do the arresting had already advised those who were to be
arrested so that they might get out of the way, and so that no one
could be caught. That person and the manager were silent in order
not to compromise themselves, and I did the same, because the evil
was already done, and in order not to abuse the confidence which
they had in me. In fact, the officer and his men, and the guides,
went away without having arrested a single one. A fortnight after
another official, named Dayot, who knows the language of the country
well, returned. Warned by what had happened the first time, he went
directly to the houses where his guides took him; and, consequently,
he seized some of them. Later he came to the estate and asked us for
a very notorious fellow who was said to be absent. We assured him that
we had seen that man less than an hour before. I advised Dayot to have
the soldiers put aside their arms and uniforms, and send them dressed
like the natives together with the guides, and if they surprised anyone
to take him to the barracks; since, to imagine that the justice would
aid him to arrest the criminals was to imagine something that could
not be. In fact, he did that, and within three days he marched away
taking five or six prisoners with him. A great state of consternation
reigned throughout that district, which was good evidence of the moral
condition of the inhabitants. In a few months I asked and learned that
they were back already and in quiet possession of their homes. One day
I was talking in Manila to the regent of the Audiencia, Don Matias
de Mier, about that system of impunity which I had observed in the
islands. That gentleman remarked to me: "It is not possible to take
severe measures here, Senor Mas, for it is necessary to govern here
with mildness." I praise and esteem most sincerely the benevolent
ideas and the good heart of Senor Mier, but it seems to me that his
words might be answered somewhat by those of Jeremias Bentham: [65]
"How many praises are wasted on mercy! It has been repeated, time
and time again, that that is the first virtue of a sovereign. Surely
if crime consists only in an offense to one's self-love, if it is no
more than a satire which is directed against him or his favorites, the
moderation of the prince is meritorious. The pardon which he grants is
a triumph obtained over himself! But when one treats of a crime against
society, the pardon is not an act of clemency, it is a downright
prevarication.... Every criminal who escapes justice threatens the
public safety and innocence is not protected by being exposed to
become the victim of a new crime. When a criminal is absolved all
the crimes that he can perpetuate are committed by his hands." In no
army are there so many executions as in that in which slight faults
are disregarded. How many charges can be laid to the door of the one
who carried away by a poorly understood charity, contributes to the
increase, in any society, of assault, theft, assassination, tears,
and executions. "Every pardon granted to a criminal," says Filangieri,
[66] "is a crime committed against humanity." I cannot conceive how
there is anyone who can imagine that the exercise of kindness to evil
doers is useful or agreeable to the good. I believe, on the contrary,
that those are lamented by the people who are unsafe in their houses
while they are paying contributions to the government which is obliged
to protect them. [Other reflections of a similar nature follow.]

The tribunal might declare that it works in accordance with the spirit
of the Leyes de Indias, but be that as it may, it is, in my opinion,
certain that with this system of tolerating everything from the
natives, and of punishing and degrading the subordinate authorities,
the Audiencia of Manila is losing the islands.

So far am I removed from being a bloodthirsty individual that I would
like to see the death sentence removed from our criminal code. It would
be useless to repeat in support of my opinion the ideas expressed
by many celebrated socialists in regard to the abolition of capital
punishment, but I will make one observation only, which I have read
in no author. The criminal ought always to inspire public scorn and
horror, but from the instant in which he is seen on the scaffold,
the aversion of people becomes calm, and he is converted into an
unfortunate fellow and an object of compassion. This impression does
not seem proper to me. Further, restricting myself to Filipinas I
shall say that since the penalties are imposed so that fear of them
may keep others from committing the crimes, the death penalty does not
cause in that country the same effect as in others, for its natives
have a distinct physical organization from us, and their instinct of
life is much less strong than that of the Europeans. Consequently,
outside of cases in which one treats of questions vital for the colony,
I believe that the death penalty is a useless cruelty. To mark those
criminals well, and to use them in public works, or in agriculture,
would be much more advantageous, and would better conserve the real
object to which laws should tend, namely, the common good.

One of the things which contributes to the increase of crime is the
prohibition in which the chiefs of the provinces find themselves
from applying corporal punishment, without the approval of the
Audiencia. For if a cause were to be made for the theft of buffaloes,
horses, etc., it would be an interminable matter. To put the Filipino
in jail is to move him to a better dwelling than his own. Then
he is given his food there, which, however little and poor it be,
will never be less than that to which he is accustomed daily. He
does not work; on the contrary he lies stretched out all day, and
that is his happiness. Besides, he finds in the same dwelling other
fellow-countrymen with whom to converse and to chew buyo. Consequently,
in the country, the idea of going to prison is very far from the
impression that it gives in Espana where men are always animated by
the spirit of activity and love to society. It has happened many
times and I have seen it, that prisoners escape to attend a feast
or go on a pilgrimage, and as soon as that is over they return to
present themselves. I am of the opinion that the prison ought alone
to be used as a means of detention, and that for light punishments,
the lash should be applied. The idea of beating a man is repugnant to
many philanthropic persons, for they say that such punishment is for
beasts. However, for certain people who do not know what self esteem
and honor mean, material punishments are necessary. How can one infuse
fear and aversion to crime in one who despises that powerful stimulus
for well doing? Who will tell us? This question is still disputed in
cultured Europa and the civilized English have not dared to banish
the rod from their military code. The first thing which is seen in
the hut of any Filipino is the rattan for bringing up their children,
and whoever has been in the country for some years thinks that all
the provinces would be most tranquil and free from highwaymen if less
papers were written and more beatings given.

There are over 80 advocates in Filipinas. The majority have
studied in Manila in the same manner as they did a century ago in
Espana. It might be said that they belong to the casuist school. The
preparation for any lawsuit is consequential and the superfluous
writs innumerable, as our system has always been to open all the
doors to the innocence of the natives; and many of the advocates
are of that same class or are Chinese mestizos. The language which
they use is often indecorous, bold, lacking in purity and idiom,
and even in grammatical construction. The Audiencia endures it as it
is the old style custom, for in times past there were few advocates
capable of explaining themselves better. The Filipinos believe that
composed and moderate writs can have no effect at court, and they
are only contented with those which are full of invective, reticence,
interrogation, and exclamation.

Since the alcaldes of the first instance are laymen, they have to
appoint an assessor and very often when one party sees that his suit
is badly prepared, he challenges the assessor even three times. It is
an abusive matter, and to the prejudice of justice, for in case of
challenge of the assessor, that ought to be done at the moment that
he is notified of his appointment, and not after seeing that which
is not favorable to him, and that judgment is near.

The Leyes de Indias, compiled in 1754, and all the previous decrees
and royal orders before that time still rule in Filipinas, in addition
to the decrees and edicts of the governor-general. Of all this there
is nothing, or very little, printed. The advocates generally know
the laws in force by tradition and hear-say, but when they need any
of the laws they have to look for it in the house of some friend,
or, if not that, in the secretary's office of the government, whence
very frequently it has disappeared, or in the office of the fiscal, or
that of the intendant; because some orders are communicated by grace
and justice, and others by the treasury or by other ministries. He
who has no relatives or is new in the country is ignorant of the
rules in force, or has not the means of acquiring them. Besides so
far as they are not overthrown by the Leyes de Indias the laws of the
Siete Partidas have as much force as do the latest Recopilacion, [67]
Roman law, royal and old law, and, in fact, all the confused mass of
the Spanish codes. Consequently, it is a vast sea in which are found
abundantly the resources necessary to mix up matters and stultify
the course of justice. In English India, a book is printed annually
of all the orders which have been communicated to the tribunals and
governors. This forms a collection which is entitled The Regulations,
which is now being translated into the language of the natives by
order of the government.

There are orders and even articles of the ordinances of good
government to specify the price of food. These schedules are very
often, as is evident, the cause of the disappearance of things, and,
as they are not found in the market it is necessary to petition the
gobernadorcillo to provide food which he is obliged to furnish at
the price named in this schedule; and at times where there are many
Spaniards and soldiers, that amounts to hundreds of fowls, eggs,
etc., which the village must supply monthly and even daily. This is
not only an odious task, but also the reason for infamous vexations
on the part of the cabezas de barangai, for the unhappy cailianes are
those who have to furnish it all without even collecting a thing. It
must be well known that cheapness in articles proceeds only from
collecting those articles and this proceeds only from abundance,
and abundance only from freedom in the market; and the assigning of
a low price to any article by schedule is the most direct method of
restricting its production and heightening its price.

After all that we have set forth, one can well say that the department
of the administration of justice is what needs the most prompt
and speedy reform. From that, then, it is obvious that all the
alcaldes-mayor ought to be jurisconsults. The custom of allowing
governors to trade is not suitable for the age in which we live,
surely, although there are some who do not abuse their position,
and today there are some who can be presented as models of honor and
nobility, especially Don Juan Castilla who governs in Samar, and Don
Francisco Gutierrez de los Rios in Laguna. Not only is the latter
free from the avarice and other faults which are so common to other
alcaldes, and does not make use of the permission to trade, but also
recognizes the defects of the present administration, and declaims
in the bosom of his friends against them, since he is imbued with the
sane principles of justice and political economy. But in such matters
one must not reckon on virtue but always with human nature. One day
happening to question one of the most judicious and kind persons whom
I have known in the islands, how Alcalde Penaranda had happened to
lose his money, he answered me: "He gave it to an agent to use, he to
share in the profits, and then paid no attention to it for three years
after. He gave up his time very greatly to the building of bridges
and roads, and while he was busy in such bits of foolishness, the
other made the most of his time and consumed it all." Another person,
of whose philanthropy and gentlemanliness I have positive proofs, told
me that if he obtained the government of a province, he would assemble
all the influential men and make them an offer to renounce all trade
provided that they gave him a certain annual sum. I replied to him
that that was an impracticable project and stated my reasons. "Then,"
replied he, "I would harass everyone who engaged in trade until he
ceased it, or left the province, and it would be all the worse for
him." Such are the evils of a bad system. One becomes accustomed
to the idea that a government post offers the opportunity of making
money and nothing else. The moment that one has obtained office, he
believes that he has a right to make money, without considering the
means to any extent; while he who is careless of his own interests and
busies himself in the progress of the province, like Senor Penaranda,
is ridiculed and called a fool.

Many believe that to prohibit the alcaldes from trading would be
useless, because they would do it by all means through a second
person. There might be some fraud, but there is no doubt but that the
evil would be remedied, if not wholly, in great measure, especially if
any contract in regard to business interests signed by the alcaldes
in Filipinas be declared null and void; for it is very difficult to
find in the country persons to whom to hand over a capital and be sure
of their good faith, and it is not easy to take them with him from
Espana. And even leaving aside these disadvantages, it will always
result from the prohibition that the agent of the alcalde will have
to manage his money with great secrecy and as if it were his own, in
which case there would be no trouble. The government of India was a few
years ago entirely commercial, but since the commerce was prohibited,
none of its dependents engage in it. Those who have savings deposit
them in one of the banks or in one of the good commercial houses there
at four or five per cent, or indeed they buy public stock or speculate
with them. Alcaldeships in my opinion ought to be divided into three
classes and given to individuals, all of them advocates, who would
form a body of civil employes. When an alcaldeship of the first class
fell vacant, it would be given to the senior advocate in charge of
those of the second class, and so on. The regulation that alcaldes
were to remain in the country only six years was founded certainly
on the fear that they might acquire a dangerous influence over the
country. To the degree that the precaution is not unfounded, the term
is very short for so long a distance, for among other obstacles it
contains the one that when a chief is beginning to know the country he
has to leave it. Fifteen or twenty years would be a more fitting time.

In English India all the civil and military employes know the language
of the country. That extreme, however advantageous it be, and is, in
fact could be brought about here only with difficulty. It would have
been easy if one of the dialects of the islands had been established
from the beginning as the language of the government and of the courts;
for a Visayan learns Tagalog very quickly, and any other idiom of
the country, and the same thing is true of the other natives.

[If that had been done] all would at this moment show well or poorly
the dominant language, just as in Cataluna, Valencia, the Baleares
Islands, and the Basque provinces, Castilian is known. But this is
not a matter which can be remedied in a brief time. Consequently, if
an alcalde who is beginning to administer justice in Cagayan has to
go immediately to Cebu, he will surely arrive there without knowing
the language, although he had given himself to the study of it from
the very beginning. But if this is an evil, this evil is now being
endured, for the alcaldes arrive from Espana, and since they know that
they have to return in six years, they do not take the least trouble
to learn the language, and they leave the government in this regard
just as when they entered it.

In the capital and its suburbs, justice is administered by means of
two lay alcaldes, who are appointed annually by the ayuntamiento from
the citizens of the city. When the appointees are men of wealth, they
resign, for this charge alone occasions them ill-humor and serious
occupations which distract them from their business. Those who accept
or desire it, can have no other stimulus than that of vile interest,
tolerating prohibited games, etc. It is, then, necessary to appoint
two lawyers with suitable pay to be judges of first instance.

Everyone knows what the Leyes de Indias are, the epoch in which they
were made, and the distinct regions for which they were dictated. It
is, then, indispensable and peremptory to make the civil codes of
legal processes, of criminal instruction, and of commerce especially
for the country.

In India there is a commission of the government composed of four
votes and a president, charged with making and revising the laws of
India. For the same purpose, in my opinion, three persons who had
studied or should study the country would be sufficient here. In
such case I would be of the opinion that they be not allowed to
do their work together, but that each one work alone and present
his results. Another commission ought to be appointed immediately
(there would be no harm in those same men forming it) to examine
the codes and present a resume of the points in which they differed
essentially. These would be few and in regard to them the government
could take the best resolution.






BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA


The following document is obtained from a MS. in the Archivo general
de Indias, Sevilla:

1. Letter from the archbishop of Manila.--"Simancas--Eclesiastico;
Audiencia de Filipinas; cartas y espedientes de arzobispo de Manila;
anos 1579 a 1697; est. 68, caj. 1, leg. 32."

The following document is obtained from a MS. in the Real Academia
de la Historia, Madrid:

2. Jesuit protest.--"Papeles de los Jesuitas, to. 4o., no. 259."

The following document is obtained from a MS. in the Archivo general,
Simancas:

3. Paz's Description of Philipinas.--"Consejo de Inquisicion,
libro 786." (We present such part of this document as relates to
the Philippines.)

The following are taken from the Ventura del Arco MSS. (Ayer library):

4. Condition of Philippines, 1652.--Tomo  ii, pp. 385-390.

5. Jesuit missions, 1655.--Tomo ii, pp. 391-399.

6. Events in Manila, 1662-63.--Tomo ii, pp. 421-480.

7. Letter from Salcedo.--Tomo ii, pp. 481-483.

8. Friars and episcopal visitation.--Tomo ii, pp. 401-419.

The following is obtained from Retana's Archivo:

9. Royal funeral rites.--Tomo ii, pp. 105-158.

The following are taken from Pastells's edition of Colin's Labor
evangelica:

10. Aid asked for Jesuits.--Tomo iii, pp. 786, 787.

11. Two Jesuit memorials.--Tomo iii, pp. 804, 805.

The following is taken from Historia general de los religiosos
descalzos ... de San Agustin:

12. Recollect missions, 1646-60.--Part ii, by Luis de Jesus (Madrid,
1681), pp. 371-373, from a copy in the possession of Edward E. Ayer,
Chicago; and part iii, by Diego de Santa Theresa (Barcelona, 1743)
pp. 134-558, from a copy in the Library of Congress--using only such
matter as relates to the Philippines.

The following is obtained from an old pamphlet not usually included
in Philippine bibliographies:

13. Description of Filipinas, 1662.--From a pamphlet published at
Puebla, Mexico, in 1662; it is bound in with Letona's Perfecta
religiosa (Puebla, 1662, a rare work), in the copy possessed by
Antonio Graino y Martinez, Madrid.

The following is obtained from Sinibaldo de Mas's Informe de las
Islas Filipinas:

14. Administracion de Justicia (1842).--Vol. ii, no. 12.






NOTES


[1] Evidently a reference to the "Relation" of Father Fayol, q.v.,
Vol. XXXV, pp. 212-275.

[2] This was the mother of the dead prince Baltasar Carlos--Isabel (or
Elizabeth) of France, daughter of Henri IV; she died October 6, 1644.

[3] i.e., "The crown of our head has fallen."

[4] Spanish, una media naranja, literally, "a half orange."

[5] The original verses are given for this and following stanzas,
because of the plays on words which cannot be perfectly rendered
in English.

[6] Codal: A short thick wax candle, one cubit in length.

[7] Upon the occasion of the death of the late pope Leo XIII, a rich
catafalque was erected in the great cathedral of Sevilla, between
the choir and the high altar, and services were conducted somewhat
in the same manner as here described.

[8] Diego Patino was born June 1, 1598, at Tarancon, in the diocese
of Cuenca, and entered his novitiate March 22, 1613. After teaching
grammar he went to the Philippines in 1622. He had charge of missions
in Catubig, Malanao, Iligan, and Dapitan; was afterwards associate
to the provincial, rector of Catbologan and Manila, and provincial
of the Philippines; and was finally sent to Rome as procurator. He
was versed in the various dialects of the Bisayan Islands. See
Sommervogel's Bibliotheque, and post, note 9.

[9] The archbishop of Manila, Miguel Poblete, wrote to the king in
like terms under date of July 8, 1654, as did also the bishop of
Nueva Caceres, under date of December 15, 1654. When Father Diego
Patino reached Mexico, he obtained permission from the viceroy there
(June 26, 1656) to go to Madrid and Rome. Patino died of suffocation
from hernia, in Tenerife at the convent of the Dominicans, July 26,
1657, and was succeeded in his office by Brother Francisco Bello, who
presented his licenses, authorizations, and memoranda to the Council,
September 30, 1659 [sic. in Pastells, but probably 1658.] Recruits
finally reached the Jesuits in 1662. The above document is only one
of many written by various persons, detailing the need of the Jesuit
missions and petitioning aid. See Pastells's Colin, iii, pp. 787-790,
where some of these letters are given with press-marks.

[10] Magino Sola was born at Girona, April 22, 1605, and was admitted
into the Society of Jesus, August 15, 1624. He went to the Philippines,
where he labored among the natives for three years, was procurator
of his province for four years, minister at Manila for three years,
rector of Silang, and after 1659 procurator for the Philippines in
Spain. He died at Cadiz, October 31, 1664. Sommervogel mentions two
letters written by him.

[11] A note of Ventura del Arco, the transcriber and synopsizer of
this document, says: "It is not exact to say that this was the cause
of the insurrection of the Sangleys either in 1639 or in 1603."

[12] Miguel Solana was born in Castilla, June 1, 1594; at the age
of eighteen he entered the Jesuit order, and ten years later (1622)
came to the Philippines. During twenty years he ministered to both
the Spaniards and the natives, and later was (twice) provincial, and
procurator-general at Madrid. He died at San Miguel, December 21, 1669.

Cf. this document with "Jesuit missions in 1656" (Vol. XXVIII of this
series, pp. 78-103), both being written by royal command.

[13] This information is obtained by Montero y Vidal from a report
made in 1654 by the Jesuits, at the order of the colonial government;
it is probably one of the local reports used by Solana in compiling
the preceding account.

[14] Murillo Velarde says of the Lutaos (Hist. de Philipinas,
fol. 73b): "They are capable and alert, and remind me of the gypsies
in Espana."

[15] Montero y Vidal adds: "It is seen, then, that the Christian
population in charge of the Jesuits in Mindanao and adjacent regions
was at that time 50,000 souls. The discalced Augustinians, who had
gone to aid the Jesuits in 1621 in extending their jurisdictions of
Butuan and Caraga, had 20,000 more or so in charge. As the entire
population of the island was, according to Father Colin, calculated
at that time at 150,000, it follows that more than two-fifths had
embraced Christianity and were obedient to Spanish authority."

[16] Before embracing a religious life, Brother Francisco Bello (or
Vello) had been a fine business man and merchant, and had a thorough
knowledge of the Orient. See Pastells's Colin, iii, p. 806.

[17] Considerable legislation took place in regard to these two
memorials. They were submitted to Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera,
who indited his reply from Santander, November 22, 1658, in which he
corroborated the statements of Vello, and advises that the suggestions
in both be followed. They were also submitted to one Licentiate
Antonio de Leon Pinedo, because of his knowledge of such matters,
who answered under date of Madrid, January 10, 1659, advising that
the forts of Terrenate be annexed to the spiritual jurisdiction
of the Philippines. The fiscal, reporting on the matter at Madrid,
February 11, 1659, also favors the establishment of a tribunal of the
Inquisition at Manila and the merging of the Terrenate forts in the
archbishopric of Manila. On March 11, 1659, the council resolved that
the viceroy and Audiencia of Nueva Espana report pro and con on the
founding of a tribunal of the Inquisition in Manila, after conferring
with the inquisitor of Mexico; also that the governor and archbishop
of the Philippines report on the means of supporting a tribunal of the
Inquisition without royal expense. A royal decree of April 24, 1659,
directed to the governor and Audiencia of the Philippines, orders them
to report pro and con on the separation of the Terrenate forts from
the bishopric of Malacca and their addition to the archbishopric
of Manila. Another decree of like date addressed to the viceroy
and Audiencia of Nueva Espana orders a report on the establishment
of a tribunal in Manila. Although the memorials are without date,
it is probable that they were presented to the royal Council in the
latter part of 1658; for Bello succeeded Patino as procurator-general
at Tenerife, July 26, 1657. See the original documents presented by
Pastells (Colin, iii, pp. 806-810).

[18] Mateo Bermudez was one of the Dominican mission that arrived
in the islands in 1626. He ministered in Formosa, and in the Parian
of Manila; and was afterward procurator at Madrid and Rome, and
visitador to the American provinces. In 1658 he returned to Mexico,
remaining there until his death (1673), at the age of eighty.

[19] In the MS. this latter clause is separated from the preceding one,
but obviously refers to it. The argument of Solana is: The Dominican
school requires the teachings of St. Thomas, "the Angelical Doctor,"
to be maintained. But St. Thomas opposed the belief and doctrine of
the immaculate conception of the blessed Virgin Mary. In Solana's day
the dogma of the immaculate conception had not yet been defined by the
Church; it then was a moot question. But in that day the belief in and
teaching of the immaculate conception was common, though not (as said)
of duty--Dominicans only, one may say, holding to the contrary. The
pupils, then, of Santo Tomas had to swear to uphold what was not common
belief, although it was not then heretical.--Rev. T. C. Middleton,
O.S.A.

[20] Many passages in this document are very involved and elliptical,
and in some places the sense is not at all clear. The translation
is necessarily somewhat free, at times, in wording; but it is
believed that the author's meaning is, as a rule, accurately
rendered.--Rev. T. C. Middleton, O. S. A.

[21] This description of the Philippines appears in a manuscript
book of an itinerary of the district of the Inquisition of Mexico,
made by the order of the bishop of Plasencia, Diego de Arce Reynoso, a
member of his Majesty's Council and inquisitor-general of his kingdoms
and seigniories, and given to Pedro de Medina Rico, visitor of the
Inquisition of the City of Mexico and its districts. The Philippines
have place in this itinerary, as they were under the Inquisition
of Mexico. This general visit or itinerary was to include a general
review of all things affecting the Inquisition, its establishments
and employees.

[22] That is, along the bay shore in the other direction--northward
from the city of Manila.

[23] This is a misstatement, for the three islands of Samar, Negros,
and Panay are larger than Paragua, the areas of the four islands in
square miles being respectively, 5,031, 4,881, 4,611, and 4,027. See
Census of Philippine Islands, ii, p. 30.

[24] The island of Cebu has an area of 1,762 square miles; Bohol,
1,441; 2,722; 5,031; Samar, 5,031; Negros, 4,881; Bantayan (the
Bantallan of the text), 47; Panai, 4,611; Mindanao, 36,292. See Census
of Philippine Islands, ii, p. 30.

[25] Bachian, not Ternate, is the largest of the Moluccas, its area
being 800 square geographical miles, while that of Ternate is only
11.5. See Crawfurd's Dictionary.

[26] The following two sections are taken from the Historia de los
religiosos descalzos (Madrid, 1681) of Luis de Jesus, pp. 371-373.

[27] The title-page of this book, translated, reads as follows:
"General history of the discalced religious of the Order of the
hermits of the great father and doctor of the Church, St. Augustine,
of the congregation of Espana and of the Indias. Volume third:
which was written by the very reverend father Fray Diego de Santa
Theresa, pensioned lecturer, ex-definitor, and chronicler-general
of the said congregation; arranged and enlarged by Father Fray
Pedro de San Francisco de Assis, pensioned lecturer, calificador
of the Holy Office, definitor of the holy province of Aragon, and
chronicler-general. Dedicated to Nuestra Senora del Pilar [i.e., "our
Lady of the Pillar"] of Zaragoza. Containing apologetic additions
to the first volume in defense of the discalced Augustinians, in
answer to what was written against them by the father master Fray
Alonso de Villerino; and one decade, namely, from the year 1651 to
that of 1660. With license. In Barcelona; at the press of the heirs
of Juan Pablo and Maria Marti, under the management of Mauro Marti,
in the year 1743." The heading of the dedication is as follows:
"To the sovereign queen of heaven and earth, on her throne of
the pillar in Zaragoza" and it is followed by a long and curious
letter of dedication. We translate and condense from a copy owned
by the Library of Congress, which bears the following inscription:
[This book] belongs to the Library of the convent of the discalced
Augustinian fathers of Valladolid. Fray Tomas de San Jose, Librarian."

[28] Manobos: This name is applied to several pagan Malay tribes in
northern and eastern Mindanao, the word meaning "man"--just as many
other savage tubes in all parts of the world designate themselves as
"men" ("the men," par excellence); but Santa Theresa's description
of them does not accord with that of Dr. Barrows. (See Census of
Philippine Islands, i, pp. 461, 462.)

[29] The same name as Davao, that of the province occupying the
southeastern part of Mindanao.

[30] i.e. "Black vomit;" a reference to the yellow fever, which is
still prevalent today in that region.

[31] i.e., "within two days' journey."

[32] i.e., "When officiating in his duties, and as far as it relates
to the care of souls."

[33] The Negritos (who have been frequently mentioned in previous
volumes of this series), or Aetas, form part of the Eastern division
of the pygmy race of blacks. In the Philippines, the Negritos are
tound mainly in Luzon and Panay, and in northeastern Mindanao; in
smaller numbers they also inhabit districts in Palawan and Negros,
and in some small islands besides. As in our text, they are, in
Luzon, often mentioned in connection with the Zambals--who "were
the most indolent and backward of the Malayan peoples," and "who,
in the days before the arrival of the Europeans, were in such close
contact with the Negritos as to impose on them their language, and
they have done it so thoroughly that no trace of an original Negrito
dialect remains." See W. A. Reed's study of the "Negritos of Zambales,"
vol. ii, part i of Ethnological Survey Publications (Manila, 1904);
it contains valuable information, based on actual field-work among
those people, regarding their habitat, physical features, dress,
industrial and social life, amusements, superstitions, etc., with
numerous illustrations.

[34] Apparently this comparison of financial statements was inserted
by Fray Pedro de San Francisco de Assis, the editor of Santa Theresa's
work.

[35] Agutaya is the principal island of the northern Cuyos group,
and contains a town of the same name.

[36] There are several places of this name in the islands; the
reference in the text is probably Taytay, the chief town of northern
Palawan.

[37] Baler is capital of the subprovince of Principe, in Luzon;
its latitude is 15 deg. 40' 6" North.

[38] The following statement by Dr. David P. Barrows--who is chief of
the Bureau of Non-Christian Tribes, Manila, and is probably our best
authority on this subject--presents the latest view regarding the
origin of the Filipinos, adopted after much patient and enthusiastic
research in that field by him and other American ethnologists. It may
be found in the recently-published Census of the Philippine Islands,
i, pp. 411-417.

"Ethnologically, no less than geographically, the Philippines belong
to the Malay archipelago. With the exception of the aboriginal dwarf
blacks, the Negritos, who are still found inhabiting the forests in
a great number of localities, all the tribes of the islands, whether
Christian, Mohammedan, or Pagan, are, in my belief, derived from
the Malayan race. We probably have in these tribes two types which
represent an earlier and a later wave of immigration; but all came
from the south, all speak languages belonging to one common stock,
and all are closely related in physical type and qualities of mind. As
representative of the first migratory movement may be named the Igorot,
the mountain head-hunter of Northern Luzon; and of the latter almost
any of the present Christian or Mohammedan tribes. The migratory
period of this latter type, which constitutes the great bulk of the
present population of the islands, is almost covered by the early
historical accounts of the exploration and settlement of the Far East.

"Four hundred years ago, when the Portuguese discoverers and
conquerors reached southeastern Asia, they found the long peninsula
in which the continent ends, and the islands stretching south and
east in this greatest and most famous of archipelagoes, inhabited by
a race which called itself Malayu. On the island of Java this race
had some ten centuries before been conquered by Brahmin Hindus from
India, whose great monuments and temples still exist in the ruins
of Boro Budor. Through the influence and power of the Hindus the
Malay culture made a considerable advance, and a Sanskrit element,
amounting in some cases to twenty per cent of the words, entered the
Malayan languages. How far the Hindu actually extended his conquests
and settlements is a most interesting study, but can hardly yet be
settled. He may have colonized the shores of Manila Bay and the coast
of Luzon, where the names of numerous ancient places show a Sanskrit
origin. The Sanskrit element is most pronounced in the Tagalog and
Moro tongues. (Pardo de Tavera, El Sanscrito en la lengua Tagala.)

"Following the Hindus into the Malay archipelago came the Arabs. They
came first as voyagers and merchants, and here as always the Arab
was a proselyter, and his faith spread rapidly. Long before the
Portuguese arrival Islamism had succeeded Brahminism and the Arab had
supplanted the Hindu.... Mohammedanism gradually made its way until,
on the arrival of the Europeans, its frontiers were almost the same
as those of the Malay race itself.

"The people who carried this faith, and who still rank as the type
of the race, were the seafaring population, living in boats as well
us on the shore, who control the islands of the straits between
Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, and Borneo. These people received from
the Portuguese the name of Cellates, a corruption of Orang Salat
(Sea Folk). Under the influence of Mohammedanism this race, which
seems to have originated in Sumatra, improved in culture, formed
many settlements and principalities, and because of their seagoing
habits, their enjoyment of trade, and their lust for piracy, carried
their name (Malayu), their language, and their adopted Mohammedan
religion throughout the Malay archipelago. Probably as early as
1300 these adventurers established a colony on northwest Borneo,
opposite the island of Labuan, which colony received the name of
Brunei, from which has been derived the name of the whole island,
Borneo. The island was already inhabited by Malayan tribes of more
primitive culture, of which the Dyak is the best known. From this
settlement of Borneo the Mohammedanized Malay extended his influence
and his settlements to the Sulu archipelago, to Mindanao, to Mindoro,
and to Manila Bay." The people of Suluan, whom Magellan encountered
near Samar, "were almost certainly of the same stock from which the
present great Visayan people are in the main descended. Many things
incline me to believe that these natives had come, in successively
extending settlements, up the west coast of Mindanao from the Sulu
archipelago.... To the present day the physical type and the language,
persisting unchanged in spite of changes of culture, closely relate the
Visayan to the Moro. In addition to these arrivals from the archipelago
of Sulu there was probably a more primitive Malayan population, whom
the later arrivals already had more or less in subjection, as the Moros
even now control the pagans on the mainland of Mindanao.... Thus we may
infer that at the time of the discovery there were on these central
islands of the archipelago, a primitive, tattooed Malayan people,
related on the one hand to the still primitive and pagan tribes of the
Philippines, and on the other hand to the wild head-hunting tribes
of Borneo; and in addition intruding and dominating later arrivals,
who were the seafaring Malays."

Interesting in this connection is the following remark on the Negritos
by Taw Sein Ko, in his "Origin of the Burmese Race," published in the
magazine Buddhism, (Rangoon, Burma), in March, 1904: "There remains
the question as to the autochthonous races which were displaced by
the Burmese, Talaings, Shans, Chins, and Karens in Burma. Before the
advent of these nations, the Negrito race appears to have occupied
southeastern Asia, including Burma. Remnants of it are still found
in the Andaman Islands, Philippines, Borneo, and Malaya."

[39] Apparently a reference to Manuel Estacio Venegas, a favorite of
Fajardo's, whose downfall Letona relates in sect. 59.

[40] Vascongado: a term applied to the people or products of the
Spanish provinces of Alava, Guipuzcoa, and Vizcaya (or Biscay).

[41] A phonetic rendering of one of the numerous names of a noted
Chinese corsair--generally known as Kue-sing or Ko-xinga; La Concepcion
also gives, as his original Chinese name, Tching-tching-cong,
and Coseng and Punpuan (in Diaz, Cogsin and Pompoan) as other
appellations. He also says that Kue-sing (the name meaning "adopted
son of a king") was adopted by the emperor Congun, who had no sons. The
accounts of various writers do not agree regarding the early history of
this adventurer; but that given by our text is apparently corroborated
by other accounts of Kue-sing's achievements and exploits during his
later years. Detailed relations of his career, and of his attempt
upon the Philippines, may be found in Diaz's Conquistas, pp. 461,
551-555, 616-637; Santa Cruz's Hist. de Filipinas, pp. 271-278, etc.;
Murillo Velarde's Hist. de Philipinas, fol. 270b-275; La Concepcion's
Hist. de Philipinas, vi, pp. 345 (sc. 355)-359, and vii, pp. 38-56;
Ferrando's Hist. PP. Dominicos, iii, pp. 12-17, 29-41, 47-67, 78-98;
Montero y Vidal's Hist. de Filipinas, i, pp. 313-322, 329. Ferrando
calls Kue-sing the "Attila of the East."

[42] Vittorio Ricci (Spanish Riccio) was a relative of the noted
Jesuit, Mateo Ricci. He made profession as a Dominican in 1635,
and was a student and afterward a teacher in the Dominican college
at Rome. Meeting there (1643) the noted Fray J. B. Morales, Ricci
decided to return with him to the East, and arrived at Manila in
1648. There he ministered to the Chinese for seven years, when he was
sent to the China mission. He was much favored by the noted Kue-sing
(or Ko-xinga), who obliged him to become his ambassador to Manila
(1662). Returning to China, Ricci found that Kue-sing was dead,
and persuaded the latter's officers that it was to their interest
to maintain peace and commerce with the Spaniards--for which purpose
they sent him again to Manila, as here narrated. In 1664 a persecution
arose in China, and the missionaries were summoned to Peking. Fearing
to obey, as he had been on Kue-sing's side, Ricci fled to Formosa, and
afterward (March, 1666) returned to Manila--where he was imprisoned
for some time. Afterward he held various important offices in his
order, and aided in the compilation of Santa Cruz's continuation
of Aduarte's history. He died at the Parian, February 17, 1685. See
Resena biografica, ii, pp. 461-464.

[43] The letter of Kue-sing, and the governor's reply, may be found
in Diaz's Conquistas, pp. 625, 626, 629-631; and Murillo Velarde's
Hist. de Philipinas, fol. 271, 274.

[44] The order to abandon Zamboanga arrived there on June 19, 1662;
but this was not accomplished until April, 1663. The commandant of
this fort at that time was Fernando de Bobadilla. Paquian Bactial,
king of Jolo, as soon as he heard of the proposed abandonment, plotted
to kill all the Spaniards in Zamboanga, and make it his own capital;
he asked Corralat to aid in this enterprise, but the latter refused
to break his peace with the Spaniards. Royal decrees at various times
ordered that fort to be again occupied; but this was not done until
1718, under the rule of Governor Bustamente. (See Murillo Velarde's
Hist. de Philipinas, fol. 275, 276.)

[45] Probably thus named from the tree called talisay (Terminalia
catappa), as perhaps constructed from its wood. Its bark is used for
dyeing; and its seeds are edible, resembling almonds. See Blanco's
Flora (ed. 1845), p. 264; and Official Handbook of Philippines,
pp. 309, 356.

[46] Referring to the Dominican Riccio, who with the title of mandarin
had brought Kue-sing's message.

[47] "From the cattle-herds on the ranches, and other men who were
skilful in managing horses, he formed a cavalry troop of 400 men,
in command of Don Francisco de Figueroa" (Murillo Velarde, Hist. de
Philipinas, fol. 273).

[48] Jose de Madrid, a native of Cebu, was a student and later a
teacher, in the college of Santo Tomas at Manila, having entered the
Dominican order in 1646. He went to China, but, fearing to lose his
life, returned to Manila, only to die, as here related, at the hands
of the Chinese (May 25, 1662).

[49] These were Malays who had accompanied the Spaniards from Ternate,
where they formed a village, their name meaning "free people"
(Pastells's ed. of Colin's Labor evangelica, iii, pp. 266, 812). La
Concepcion (Hist. de Philipinas, vii, p. 102) says: "Under this name
[i.e., Mardicas, or Merdicas] are included natives of Ternate, Tidore,
and Siao; of Manados, Cauripa, Celebes, and Macasar. They were allotted
a dwelling-place at Marigondon, on the great bay of Manila ... and
theirs is the island of Corregidor, from which they give warning
of the ships that they descry, by signal-fires." He says that they
speak three languages--Spanish, Tagalog, and their own dialect; and
"regard themselves as the spiritual sons of St. Francis Xavier, to whom
they are singularly devoted--a feeling inspired by their forefathers,
who had known him and witnessed his marvelous works." Ferrando says
(Hist. PP. Dominicos, iii, p. 94) that these people have preserved
their own dialect, usages, and customs; and up to recent times had
not intermarried with the Filipinos of neighboring villages.

[50] La Estacada (literally "the stockade") was on the same side of
the Pasig River as Binondoc, but separated from that village by the
little estuary which leads to the village of Tondo. See Munoz's map
of Manila and its suburbs (1671) in Pastells's edition of Colin's
Labor evangelica, iii, p. 824; this map will be reproduced in the
present series.

[51] Spanish falsabraga: "a parapet constructed at a lower elevation
than the main parapet, and between the parapet and the edge of the
ditch. It was used only in permanent fortification, and has long been
obsolete;" see Wilhelm's Military Dictionary (Phila., 1881), p. 158.

[52] Cf. with this description the fortifications indicated on Munoz's
map, mentioned ante, p. 243, note 50.

In order to prevent the enemy from fortifying large buildings outside
the walls, "orders were issued to demolish the churches of Santiago,
Bagumbaya, Hermita, Malate, Paranaque, Dilao, San Lazaro, the Parian,
and Santa Cruz--besides various country houses which the Spaniards own
in those environs." (Murillo Velarde's Hist. de Philipinas, fol. 272.)

[53] This son was called Kin-sie, also known as Tching King-may and
Sipuan; La Concepcion says (vii, p. 55) that he, "who had been reared
in the study, among books, did nothing to cultivate the country
which his father had acquired with so many dangers and fatigues,
and the troops therefore became, in his service, lax and cowardly."

[54] The references in this document to the rulers of China can
hardly be satisfactorily identified; the various names given to the
same person, the conflicting claims of various usurpers or temporary
rulers, and the struggle between the dying Ming dynasty and the Manchu
conquerors, cause great confusion and uncertainty in the history of
that period. The actual ruler of China was then the Manchu Chuntche
(1646-61); he was succeeded by his second son, Kanghi.

[55] Nanking was, under some early Chinese dynasties, the capital
of the empire. This name signifies merely "Southern Court;" the
proper appellation of the city is Kianningfu. Odoric of Pordenone,
who visited it near the year 1325, says that its walls had a circuit
of forty miles, and in it were three hundred and sixty stone bridges,
the finest in the world (Yule's Cathay, i, pp. 120, 121).

[56] This was Hia-mun, or Emuy (known by the English as Amoy); it lies
off the province of Fuh-kien, at the mouth of the Lung-kiang ("Dragon")
River. On it lies the city of Amoy, a large and important commercial
port; it has one of the best harbors on the coast. (Williams's Middle
Kingdom, i, pp. 114, 115.)

[57] Diaz relates this (Conquistas, p. 619) in greater detail. "The
Tartar [i.e., Chuntche], seeing himself reduced to so great straits
... resolved to command that all the [inhabited places on the] maritime
coasts should be laid waste and dismantled, for a distance of three
or four leguas inland, throughout the more than eight hundred leguas
of coasts which that empire possesses. This, to the great injury
of the empire, left demolished and razed to the ground innumerable
settlements and cities, enough to compose several kingdoms. This was
the greatest conflagration and havoc that the world has seen, ... and
only populous China could be the fit theater for such a tragedy,
and only the cruel barbarity of the Tartars [could make them the]
inventors and executors of such destruction. The upheaval which the
execution of this so unexampled cruelty caused cannot be described; the
loss of property is incalculable; and human thought cannot conceive the
horror produced by the sight of so many thousands of towns and cities
burning. At last this general conflagration was completed, the fire
lasting many days--the clouds of smoke reaching as far as Hia-muen,
more than twenty leguas, and the sun not being visible in all that
broad expanse. Stations were established at suitable distances for
easily rendering aid, well garrisoned with soldiers; and watch-towers
were erected a legua apart, to keep a lookout over the sea-coasts. A
public proclamation forbade any person to pass the bounds assigned,
four leguas distant from the seashore. With these precautions, if
Kue-sing's ships landed there, a great number of soldiers were quickly
assembled to dispute his entrance into the country--thus keeping
within bounds Kue-sing, who now did not encounter sleeping men."

[58] Referring to the bay whereon was situated the chief settlement
and fort of the Dutch in Formosa, that of Tai-wan, in the southwestern
part of the island.

[59] Apparently referring to the usual despatch of several copies of
a letter, to ensure its safe receipt. The form of this summary would
indicate that it is made by Ventura del Arco; and it is followed by
a tracing of Salcedo's autograph.

[60] Either this date or the date 1665 (see post, p. 266) is doubtless
a transcriber's error.

[61] I Corinthians, vii, 20.

[62] Alcalde de monterilla: An ironical and descriptive qualification
of petty judges (Dominguez's Diccionario).

[63] As appears from a note by Mas, the alcaldes paid a certain sum
for the privilege of trading. Their salaries in 1840 were variously
for the sums of 300, 600, and 1,000 (one instance) pesos. The trading
privilege cost from 40 to 300 pesos.

[64] This is the famous philosophical treatise on political science,
which was published by Charles de Secondat, baron de la Brede de
Montesquieu, in 1748, and was the product of twenty years' work.

[65] Jeremy  Bentham,  the  English  jurist  and  philosopher  who
lived in the years 1748-1832.

[66] Probably referring to La scienza della legislazione of Gaetano
Filangieri, the Italian jurist, who lived 1752-88. He was influenced
somewhat by Montesquieu.

[67] i.e., Of the Leyes de Indias.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898,
Volume XXXVI, 1649-1666, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS ***

***** This file should be named 30350.txt or 30350.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/5/30350/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
