Project Gutenberg's Traditional Nursery Songs of England, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Traditional Nursery Songs of England
       With Pictures by Eminent Modern Artists

Author: Various

Editor: Felix Summerly

Release Date: November 7, 2009 [EBook #30418]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NURSERY SONGS ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









[Illustration:
  THE KING WAS IN THE PARLOR, COUNTING OUT HIS MONEY;
  THE QUEEN WAS IN THE KITCHEN, EATING BREAD & HONEY.
  THE MAID WAS IN THE GARDEN, HANGING OUT THE CLOTHES;
  THERE CAME A LITTLE BLACKBIRD & PECKED OFF HER NOSE.]




The Home Treasury.

TRADITIONAL NURSERY SONGS

of

ENGLAND.

with

PICTURES BY EMINENT MODERN ARTISTS.

EDITED BY

FELIX SUMMERLY.

LONDON: JOSEPH CUNDALL, 12, OLD BOND STREET.

1843.

_The Copyright of these Works is registered pursuant to Statute 5 and 6
Vic. c. 45._




PREFACE.


So my dear Madam, you think Nursery Songs mere trash, not worth
utterance or remembrance, and beneath the dignity of the "march of mind"
of our days! I would bow to your judgment, but you always talk so loud
in the midst of a song; look grave at a joke--and the leaves of that
copy of Wordsworth's Poems, presented to you on your birthday--I will
not say how many years ago, still remain uncut. Facts like these, and
others constantly occurring, prove that your ear cannot relish melody;
and that poetry does not touch your feelings. Besides, you are still
unmarried, and you say, I record it with regret, "you hate children."
Doubtless you were never born a child yourself.

It is to mothers, sisters, kind-hearted aunts, and even fathers, who are
summoned to become unwilling vocalists at break of day by young
gentlemen and ladies of two years old; and to all having the charge of
children, who are alive to the importance of cultivating their natural
keenness for rhyme, rhythm, melody, and instinctive love for fun, that I
offer this first part of a collection of Traditional Nursery Songs. This
Collection has been in progress for more than ten years, and it is now
published, after a revision, with all the editions by Ritson, and
others, that I have been able to meet with.

The Pictures, though made especially for the benefit of my young
audience, will not, I feel pretty sure, be uninteresting to more
advanced connoisseurs. I am not at liberty to mention the names of the
artists who in their kind sympathies for children have obliged me with
them. It is a mystery to be unravelled by the little people themselves,
who, as they advance in a knowledge and love of beauty, will not fail to
recognize in the works of some of the best of our painters of familiar
life, the pencils of those who gave them early lessons in genuine art.

TRADITIONAL NURSERY SONGS.


  A diller, a dollar,
  A ten o'clock scholar,
  What makes you come so soon?
  You used to come at ten o'clock,
  And now you come at noon.


  A long tailed pig, or a short tailed pig,
  Or a pig without a tail,
  A sow pig, or a boar pig,
  Or a pig with a curly tail.


  As I was going up Pippen hill,
    Pippen hill was dirty;
  There I met a pretty Miss,
    And she dropt me a curtsey.


  Little Miss, pretty Miss,
    Blessings light upon you,
  If I had half a crown a day,
    I'd spend it all upon you.


  Baa, baa, black sheep, have you any wool?
  Yes, marry, have I, three bags full;
  One for my master, and one for my dame,
  And one for the little boy that lives in the lane.


  Bless you, bless you, bonnie bee:
  Say, when will your wedding be?
  If it be to-morrow day,
  Take your wings and fly away.


  Bonnie lass! bonnie lass! wilt thou be mine?
  Thou shalt neither wash dishes nor serve the swine,
  But sit on a cushion and sow up a seam,
  And thou shalt have strawberries, sugar, and cream.

[Illustration: BYE. O MY BABY.]


  Bye baby bunting,
  Father's gone a hunting,
  To get a little rabbit-skin,
  To lap his little baby in.


    Bye, O my baby,
    When I was a lady,
  Oh then my poor babe didn't cry;
    But my baby is weeping,
    For want of good keeping,
  Oh! I fear my poor baby will die.


  Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  My dame has lost her shoe,
  Master's broke his fiddle-stick,
  And don't know what to do.


  Cold and raw the north wind doth blow,
    Bleak in the morning early;
  All the hills are covered with snow,
    And winter's now come fairly.


  "Come, let's to bed," says Sleepy-head,
    "Let's stay awhile," says Slow,
  "Put on the pot," says Greedy-gut,
    "We'll sup before we go."


  Cross Patch, draw the latch,
    Sit by the fire and spin;
  Take a cup, and drink it up,
    And call your neighbours in.


  Cushy Cow bonny, let down thy milk,
  And I will give thee a gown of silk!
  A gown of silk and a silver tee,
  If thou will let down thy milk to me.


  Daffy-down-dilly has come up to town,
    In a yellow petticoat, and a green gown.


[Illustration:
  "COME, LET'S GO TO BED," SAYS SLEEPY-HEAD,
  "LET'S STAY AWHILE," SAYS SLOW,
  "PUT ON THE POT," SAYS GREEDY-GUT,
  "WE'LL SUP BEFORE WE GO."]


  Danty baby diddy,
    What can mammy do wid'e?
    Sit in a lap
    And give ye some pap,
  Danty baby diddy.


  Did you not hear of Betty Pringle's pig!
  It was not very little nor yet very big;
  The pig sat down upon a dunghill,
  And there poor piggy he made his will.

  Betty Pringle came to see this pretty pig,
  That was not very little nor yet very big;
  This little piggy it lay down and died,
  And Betty Pringle sat down and cried.

  Then Johnny Pringle buried this very pretty pig,
  That was not very little nor yet very big,
  So here's an end of the song of all three,
  Johnny Pringle, Betty Pringle, and little Piggy.


  Ding, dong, bell,
  Pussy-cat's in the well.
  Who put her in?
  Little Johnny Green.
    Who pull'd her out?
    Little Johnny Stout.
  What a naughty boy was that,
  To drown his poor grand-mammy's cat;
  Which never did him any harm,
  But killed the mice in his father's barn.


  Dingty, diddledy, my mammy's maid,
    She stole oranges, I am afraid,
  Some in her pocket, some in her sleeve,
    She stole oranges, I do believe.


  Four and twenty tailors
    Went to kill a snail,
  The best man among them
    Durst not touch her tail.

  She put out her horns
    Like a little Kyloe cow:
  Run, tailors, run,
    Or she'll kill you all e'en now.


  Girls and boys, come out to play,
  The moon is shining bright as day;
  Leave your supper and leave your sleep,
  And come with your play-fellows into the street;
  Come with a whoop, and come with a call,
  Come with a good will, or come not at all.
  Up the ladder and down the wall,
  A half-penny roll will serve us all:
  You find milk and I'll find flour,
  And we'll have a pudding in half-an-hour.


  Great A, little a, bouncing B,
  The cat's in the cupboard, and she can't see.


  Handy-spandy, Jack-a-Dandy
  Loves plum-cake and sugar-candy,
  He bought some at a grocer's shop,
  And pleas'd, away went, hop, hop, hop!


  Hark! hark! the dogs do bark,
    Beggars are coming to town,
  Some in jags, and some in rags,
    And some in velvet gown.


  Here we go up, up, up,
    And here we go down, down, downy,
  And here we go backwards and forwards,
    And here we go round, round, roundy.


  Here stands a fist,
    Who set it there?
  A better man than you,
    Touch him if you dare.


  Hey diddle diddle,
    The cat and the fiddle,
  The cow jumped over the moon;
    The little dog laughed
    To see such craft,
  And the dish ran away with the spoon.


[Illustration:
  HARK, HARK, THE DOGS DO BARK!
  BEGGARS ARE COMING TO TOWN.]


  Hey my kitten, my kitten,
    And hey my kitten, my deary,
  Such a sweet pet as this
    Was neither far nor neary.


  Hiccory, diccory, dock,
  The mouse ran up the clock;
  The clock struck one,
  The mouse ran down,
  Hiccory, diccory, dock.


  How many days has my baby to play?
    Saturday, Sunday, Monday,
  Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday.
    Saturday, Sunday, Monday.


  Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
  Humpty Dumpty had a great fall,
  Threescore men, and threescore more,
  Cannot place Humpty Dumpty as he was before.


  How many miles is it to Babylon?
  Threescore miles and ten.
  Can I get there by candle-light?
  Yes, and back again.


  Hush-a-bye, baby,
    Daddy is near,
  Mammy's a lady,
    And that's very clear.


  "Hush-a-bye, babby, lie still with thy daddy,
    Thy mammy is gone to the mill,
  To get some wheat, to make some meat,
    So pray, my dear babby, lie still.


  "Hush-a-bye, baby, on the tree top,
  When the wind blows, the cradle will rock,
  When the bough breaks, the cradle will fall,
  Down will come baby, bough, cradle and all.


  I had a little husband, no bigger than my thumb,
  I put him in a pint pot, and there I bid him drum,
  I bought him a little handkerchief to wipe his little nose,
  And a pair of little garters to tie his little hose.


  I had a little pony,
    His name was Dapple Gray,
  I lent him to a lady,
    To ride a mile away.

  She whipped him, she lashed him,
    She drove him through the mire;
  I would not lend my pony now,
    For all the lady's hire.


  I had a little wife, the prettiest ever seen,
  She washed all the dishes and kept the house clean;
  She went to the mill to fetch me some flour,
  She brought it home safe in less than an hour,
  She baked me my bread, she brewed me my ale,
  She sat by the fire and told a fine tale.


  I'll sing you a song,
  It's not very long:
  The woodcock and the sparrow,
  The little dog has burnt his tail,
  And he shall he hanged to-morrow.


  I'll tell you a story,
    About Jack a Nory,
    And now my story's begun;
  I'll tell you another,
  About Jack and his brother;
    And now my story's done.


  Is John Smith within?
    Yes that he is.
  Can he set a shoe?
    Ay, marry, two.
  Here a nail, there a nail,
    Tick, tack, too.


  I see the moon, and the moon sees me,
  God bless the moon, and God bless me.


  Jack and Jill
    Went up the hill
  To fetch a pail of water;
    Jack fell down,
  And cracked his crown,
    And Jill came tumbling after.


  Jacky, come give me thy fiddle,
    If ever thou mean to thrive.
  Nay; I'll not give my fiddle
    To any man alive.

  If I should give my fiddle,
    They'll think that I'm gone mad;
  For many a joyful day
    My fiddle and I have had.


  Jack Sprat would eat no fat,
    His wife would eat no lean,
  Now was not this a pretty trick
    To make the platter clean?


  Lady-Bird, Lady-Bird,
  Fly away home,
  Your house is on fire,
  Your children will burn.


  1. Let us go to the wood, says this pig;
  2. What to do there? says that pig;
  3. To look for my mother, says this pig;
  4. What to do with her? says that pig;
  5. To kiss her to death, says this pig.

   _Note._ This is said to each finger.


  Little Bo-peep has lost her sheep,
    And cannot tell where to find 'em;
  Let them alone, and they'll come home,
    And bring their tails behind 'em.

  Little Bo-peep fell fast asleep,
    And dreamt she heard them bleating,
  When she awoke she found it a joke,
    For they were still all fleeting.

  Then up she took her little crook,
    Determined for to find them,
  She found them indeed, but it made her heart bleed,
    For they'd left their tails behind them.

  It happened one day as Bo-peep did stray
    Unto a meadow hard by;
  There she espied their tails side by side,
    All hung on a tree to dry.


  Little boy blue, come blow me your horn,
  The sheep's in the meadow, the cow's in the corn.
  Where is the little boy tending the sheep?
  Under the haycock fast asleep!


  Little Jack Horner
    Sat in a corner
  Eating a Christmas pie;
    He put in his thumb,
    And pull'd out a plum,
  And said "What a good boy am I!"


    Little Jack Jingle,
    He used to live single:
  But when he got tired of this kind of life,
  He left off being single and lived with his wife.


  Little Jenny Wren fell sick upon a time,
  When in came Robin Redbreast and brought her sops and wine,
  "Eat, Jenny, drink, Jenny, all shall be thine!"
  "Thank you, Robin, kindly, you shall be mine."
  Then Jenny Wren got better, and stood upon her feet,
  And said to Robin Redbreast, "I love thee not a bit."
  Then Robin he was angry, and flew upon a pole,
  "Hoot upon thee! fie upon thee! ungrateful soul."


  Little Miss Muffet
    She sat on a tuffet,
  Eating of curds and whey;
    There came a little spider,
    Who sat down beside her,
  And frightened Miss Muffet away.


  Little Nan Etticoat
  In a white petticoat
  And a red nose,
  The longer she stands,
  The shorter she grows.


  Little Robin Red-breast sat upon a tree,
  Up went Pussy-cat, and down went he;
  Down came Pussy-cat, and away Robin ran:
  Says little Robin Red-breast, "Catch me if you can."
  Little Robin Red-breast jumped upon a wall,
  Pussy-cat jumped after him, and almost got a fall.
  Little Robin chirped and sang, and what did Pussy say?
  Pussy-cat said "Mew," and Robin hopp'd away.


  Little Robin Red-breast
    Sat upon a rail,
  Niddle noddle went his head,
    Wiggle waggle went his tail.

  Little Tom Tucker,
  Sings for his supper:
  What shall he eat?
  White bread and butter.
  How shall he cut it,
  Without e'er a knife?
  How will he be married
  Without e'er a wife?


    Mary, Mary,
    Quite contrary,
  How does your garden grow!
    Silver bells,
    And cockle-shells,
  And pretty maids all of a row.


  Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
  Guard the bed that I lay on!
  Four corners to my bed,
  Four angels round my head!
  One to watch, one to pray,
  And two to bear my soul away!


[Illustration:
  AND WHEN SHE CAME BACK
  HE WAS READING THE NEWS.]


  Old mother Hubbard
  Went to the cupboard,
    To give her poor dog a bone,
  But when she came there,
  The cupboard was bare,
    And so the poor dog had none.

  She went to the baker's
    To buy him some bread,
  And when she came back
    The poor dog was dead.

  She went to the joiner's
    To buy him a coffin,
  And when she came back
    The poor dog was laughing.

  She took a clean dish
    To get him some tripe,
  And when she came back
    He was smoking his pipe.

  She went to the alehouse
    To get him some beer,
  And when she came back
    The dog sat in a chair.

  She went to the tavern
    For white wine and red,
  And when she came back
    The dog stood on his head.

  She went to the hatter's
    To buy him a hat,
  And when she came back
    He was feeding the cat.

  She went to the barber's
    To buy him a wig,
  And when she came back
    He was dancing a jig.

  She went to the fruiterer's
    To buy him some fruit,
  And when she came back
    He was playing the flute.

  She went to the tailor's
    To buy him a coat,
  And when she came back
    He was riding a goat.

  She went to the cobbler's
    To buy him some shoes,
  And when she came back
    He was reading the news.

  She went to the sempstress
   To buy him some linen,
  And when she came back
    The dog was spinning.

  She went to the hosier's
    To buy some hose,
  And when she came back
    He was dressed in his clothes.

  The dame made a curtsey,
    The dog made a bow,
  The dame said, "Your servant,"
    The dog said, "Bow, wow."


  One, two, buckle my shoe;
  Three, four, shut the door;
  Five, six, pick up sticks;
  Seven, eight, lay them straight;
  Nine, ten, a good fat hen;
  Eleven, twelve, who will delve?
  Thirteen, fourteen, maids a courting;
  Fifteen, sixteen, maids in the kitchen;
  Seventeen, eighteen, maids a waiting;
  Nineteen, twenty, I'm very empty;
  Please, Mamma, give me some dinner.


  One, two, three, four, five,
   1,   2,   3,     4,    5,
  I caught a hare alive,
  Six, seven, eight, nine, ten;
   6,    7,     8,    9,    10,
  And let it go again.


    One misty moisty morning,
    When cloudy was the weather,
    There I met an old man
    Clothed all in leather;
    Clothed all in leather,
    With cap under his chin,
  How do you do, and how do you do,
  And how do you do again?


[Illustration:

  LOST GAME.

  ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR, FIVE,
  I CAUGHT A HARE ALIVE,
  SIX, SEVEN, EIGHT, NINE, TEN;
  AND LET IT GO AGAIN.]


  Pat a cake, pat a cake, baker's man,
  So I will, master, as fast as I can;
  Pat it, and prick it, and mark it with B.
  And toss it in the oven for Baby and me.


  Pussy-cat, Pussy-cat, where have you been?
  I've been to London to see the Queen.
  Pussy-cat, pussy-cat, what did you there?
  I frightened a little mouse under the chair.


  Rain, rain,
    Go away,
  Come again
    Another day;
  Little Johnny
    Wants to play.


  Ride a cock-horse to Banbury-Cross,
  To see an old woman ride on a black horse,
  With rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,
  And she shall have music wherever she goes.


  Robert Barnes, fellow fine,
  Can you shoe this horse of mine?
  Yes, good Sir, that I can,
  As well as any other man;
  There's a nail, and there's a prod,
  And now, good Sir, your horse is shod.


  Robin and Richard were two pretty men;
  They lay a-bed till the clock struck ten;
  Then up starts Robin and looks at the sky,
  "Oh! oh! brother Richard, the sun's very high,
  You go before with bottle and bag,
  And I'll follow after on little Jack Nag."


  Rock-a-bye, baby, upon the tree top,
  When the wind blows, the cradle will rock;
  When the bough breaks, the cradle will fall,
  Down will come cradle and baby and all.


  Rock-a-bye, baby, thy cradle is green;
  Father's a nobleman, mother's a queen;
  And Betty's a lady, and wears a gold ring;
  And Johnny's a drummer, and drums for the king.


  See-saw, Jack-a-daw,
  Johnny shall have a new master;
  Johnny shall have but a penny a day,
  Because he can work no faster.


  See-saw, Margery Daw
  Sold her bed, and laid upon straw;
  Was not she a dirty slut,
  To sell her bed and lie in the dirt?


  See-saw, sacaradown,
  Which is the way to London town?
  One foot up, the other foot down,
  That is the way to London town.


  Shoe the horse, shoe the colt,
    Shoe the wild mare;
  Here a nail, there a nail,
    Yet she goes bare.


  Sing! sing! what shall I sing?
  The cat's run away with the pudding-bag string.


  Sing a song of sixpence, a pocket full of rye,
  Four and twenty blackbirds baked in a pie.
  When the pie was opened, the birds began to sing,
  And was not that a dainty dish to set before the king?
  The king was in the parlour, counting out his money;
  The queen was in the kitchen, eating bread and honey;
  The maid was in the garden, hanging out the clothes;
  There came a little blackbird, and pecked off her nose.


  Snail! Snail! come out of your hole,
  Or else I'll beat you as black as a coal.


[Illustration:

  EVENING AT HOME

  THE CAT SAT ASLEEP BY THE FIRE
  THE MISTRESS SNORED LOUD AS A PIG.
  JACK TOOK UP HIS FIDDLE BY JENNY'S DESIRE
  AND STRUCK UP A BIT OF A JIG.]


  The cat sat asleep by the fire,
    The mistress snored loud as a pig,
  Jack took up his fiddle by Jenny's desire,
    And struck up a bit of a jig.


  Taffy was a Welshman,
    Taffy was a thief,
  Taffy came to my house,
    And stole a piece of beef.
  I went to Taffy's house,
    Taffy wasn't at home,
  Taffy came to my house,
    And stole a marrow bone.
  I went to Taffy's house,
    Taffy was in bed,
  I took the marrow bone,
    And beat about his head.


  The girl in the lane, that couldn't speak plain,
    Cried gobble, gobble, gobble:
  The man on the hill, that couldn't stand still,
    Went hobble, hobble, hobble.


  The lion and the unicorn
  Were fighting for the crown;
  The lion beat the unicorn
  All round about the town.
  Some gave them white bread,
  Some gave them brown,
  Some gave them plumcake,
  And sent them out of town.


    The man in the moon,
    Came down too soon,
  And ask'd his way to Norwich;
    He went by the south
    And burnt his mouth
  With eating cold plum-porridge.


  The man in the wilderness asked me,
  How many strawberries grew in the sea?
  I answered him as I thought good,
  As many red herrings as grew in the wood.


  The north wind doth blow,
    And we shall have snow,
  And what will poor Robin do then?
                          Poor thing!

    He'll sit in a barn,
    And keep himself warm,
  And hide his head under his wing.
                          Poor thing!


  There was a little boy went into a barn,
    And lay down on some hay;
  An owl came out and flew about,
    And the little boy ran away.


  There was a little guinea pig,
  Who being little was not big;
  He always walked upon his feet,
  And never fasted when he ate.

  When from a place he ran away,
  He never at that place did stay;
  And while he ran, as I am told,
  He ne'er stood still for young or old.

  He often squeak'd, and sometimes violent,
  And when he squeak'd he ne'er was silent;
  Though ne'er instructed by a cat,
  He knew a mouse was not a rat.

  One day, as I am certified,
  He took a whim and fairly died,
  And, as I'm told by men of sense,
  He never has been living since.


    There was a little man,
    And he had a little gun,
  And his bullets were made of lead, lead, lead;
    He went to the brook
    And saw a little duck,
  And he shot it through the head, head, head.

    He carried it home
    To his old wife Joan,
  And bid her a fire for to make, make, make;
    To roast the little duck,
    He had shot in the brook,
  And he'd go and fetch her the drake, drake, drake.


  There was a man of our town,
    And he was wondrous wise:
  He jump'd into a bramble bush,
    And scratched out both his eyes;
  And when he saw his eyes were out,
    With all his might and main,
  He jumped into another bush,
    And scratched them in again.


  There was an old man,
    And he had a calf;
    And that's half:
  He took him out of the stall,
  And put him on the wall;
    And that's all.


  There was an old woman went up in a basket,
  Seventy times as high as the moon;
  What she did there I could not but ask it,
  For in her hand she carried a broom.
  "Old woman, old woman, old woman," said I,
  "Whither, oh whither, oh whither so high?"
  "Only to sweep the cobwebs off the sky,
  And I shall be back again by and by."


  There was an old woman, and what do you think?
  She lived upon nothing but victuals and drink;
  Victuals and drink were the chief of her diet,
  And yet this old woman could never be quiet.


  There was an old woman who lived in a shoe,
  She had so many children she didn't know what to do;
  She gave them some broth without any bread,
  She whipped them all soundly and sent them to bed.


  There was an old woman lived under a hill,
  And if she ben't gone, she lives there still.


[Illustration:
  OLD WOMAN, OLD WOMAN, OLD WOMAN SAID I,
  WHITHER, OH WHITHER, OH WHITHER SO HIGH?]


  There was an old woman had three sons,
  Jeffery, Jemmy, and John;
  Jeffery was hung, and Jemmy was drowned,
  And Johnny was never more found:
  So there was an end of these three sons,
  Jeffery, Jemmy, and John.


  There were two little birds sat on a stone,
                      Fal la, la la lal de.
  One flew away, and then there was one,
                      Fal la, la la lal de.
  The other flew after, and then there was none,
                      Fal la, la la lal de.
  So the poor stone was left all alone,
                      Fal la, la la lal de.


  1. This little pig went to market;
  2. This little pig stayed at home;
  3. This little pig had a bit of bread and butter;
  4. This little pig had none;
  5. This little pig said "Wee, wee, wee,"
              I can't find my way home!

    _Note._ Addressed to the five toes.


  Three children sliding on the ice,
    Upon a summer's day;
  It so fell out, they all fell in,
    The rest they ran away.

  Now had these children been at home,
    Or sliding on dry ground,
  Ten thousand pounds to one penny,
    They had not all been drowned.

  You parents that have children dear,
    And eke you that have none;
  If you would have them safe abroad,
    Pray keep them safe at home.


  Three little dogs were basking in the cinders;
  Three little cats were playing in the windows;
  Three little mice popped out of a hole,
  And a piece of cheese they stole.
  The three little cats jumped down in a trice,
  And cracked the bones of the three little mice.


  To market, to market, to buy a plum bun,
    Home again, home again, market is done.


  Tom, Tom, the piper's son,
  Stole a pig and away he ran.
  The pig was ate, and Tom was beat,
  And Tom ran crying down the street.


  Two little blackbirds sat upon a hill,
  One named Jack, the other named Gill;
  Fly away, Jack; fly away, Gill;
  Come again, Jack; come again, Gill.


  Up the hill urge me not,
  Down the hill ride me not,
  Along the level spare me not,
  In the stable forget me not.


      When I was a batchelor,
        I lived by myself,
      And all the bread and cheese I got,
        I put upon the shelf.
  The rats and the mice they made such a strife,
  I was forced to go to London to buy me a wife:
  The roads were so bad, and the lanes were so narrow,
  I was forced to bring my wife home in a wheel-barrow.
  The wheel-barrow broke, and my wife had a fall,
  Down came wheel-barrow, wife and all.


THE END.


C. WHITTINGHAM, CHISWICK.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Felix Summerly's Home Treasury_ of Books and Pictures, purposed to
cultivate the Affections, Fancy, Imagination, and Taste of Children.

[Illustration: Felix Summerly crest]


_Shilling Series._

  1. Jack the Giant Killer. With 4 Pictures by Townshend.
  2. Little Red Riding-Hood. With 4 Pictures by Webster.
  3. Sleeping Beauty in the Wood. With 4 Pictures by Absolon.
  4. Beauty and the Beast. With 4 Pictures by Horsley.
  5. Jack and the Bean Stalk. With 4 Pictures by Cope.
  6. Cinderella. With 4 Pictures by Absolon.
  7. The Ballads of Chevy Chase. With 4 Pictures by F. Tayler.
  8. Sir Hornbook. A Ballad. With 4 Pictures by H. Corbould.
  9. The Sisters, and Golden Locks. With 3 Pictures by Redgrave, &c.
  10. Grumble and Cheery. With 3 Pictures by Cope, &c.
  11. The Life of Christ. With 4 Pictures by Albert Durer.
  12. Bible Events. First Series. With 8 Pictures by Holbein.
  13. Bible Events. Second Series. With 6 Pictures by Raffaelle.

Each of these Books is handsomely done up in a gold-paper cover, price
_1s._ or with coloured Plates _2s. 6d._


_Bound Series._


  1. The Traditional Nursery Songs of England.
  With 4 Pictures by Eminent Artists. Price _2s. 6d._, coloured _3s. 6d._

  2. Tales from the Faerie Queen.
  With 4 Pictures by Townshend. Price _3s. 6d._, coloured _4s. 6d._

  3. The Delectable History of Reynard the Fox.
  With 24 Pictures by Everdingen. Price _4s. 6d._, coloured _7s. 6d._

  4. An Alphabet of Quadrupeds.
  With 24 Pictures from the Old Masters. _4s. 6d._, coloured _7s. 6d._

  5. Tales of the Heroes of Greece.
  With 4 Pictures by Townshend. Price _3s. 6d._, coloured _4s. 6d._

  6. Faery Tales and Ballads.
  With 14 Pictures by Eminent Artists. _4s. 6d._, coloured _7s. 6d._

  7. Traditional Faery Tales.
  With 12 Pictures by Eminent Artists. _3s. 6d._, coloured _5s. 6d._

  8. Popular Faery Tales.
  With 12 Pictures by Eminent Artists. _3s. 6d._, coloured _5s. 6d._

  9. Summerly's Sacred History.
  With 18 Pictures by Albert Durer, &c. _4s. 6d._, coloured _7s. 6d._


[Illustration]

[Illustration]




Gammer Gurton's Story Books.




THE FAMOUS HISTORY OF GUY EARL OF WARWICK.




CHAPTER I.

     _The Praise of Guy Earl of Warwick, and how he fell in Love with
     Fair Felice._


In the blessed time when Athelstan wore the crown of the English nation,
Sir Guy, Warwick's mirror, and the wonder of all the world, was the
chief hero of the age, who in prowess surpassed all his predecessors,
and the trump of whose fame so loudly sounded, that Jews, Turks, and
Infidels became acquainted with his name.

But as Mars, the God of Battle, was inspired with the beauty of Venus,
so our Guy, by no arms conquered, was conquered by love for Felice the
Fair; whose beauty and virtue were so inestimable, and shone with such
heavenly lustre, that Helen, the pride of all Greece, might seem as a
Black-a-moor compared to her.

[Illustration]

Guy resolving not to stand doting at a distance, went to Warwick Castle
where Felice dwelt, she being daughter and heiress to Roband Earl of
Warwick. The Earl, her father, hearing of Guy's coming, bade him
heartily welcome, and prepared to entertain him with a match of hunting,
but he to that lent an unwilling ear, and to prevent it feigned himself
sick. The Earl, troubled for his friend, sent his own physician to him.
The doctor told Guy his disease was dangerous, and without letting blood
there was no remedy. Guy replied, "I know my body is distempered; but
you want skill to cure the inward inflammation of my heart: Galen's
Herbal cannot quote the flower I like for my remedy. There is a flower
which if I might but touch would heal me. It is called by a pretty
pleasing name, and I think Phaelix soundeth something like it." "I know
it not," replied the doctor, "nor is there in the Herbal any flower that
beareth such a name, as I remember."

So saying he departed, and left Guy to cast his eyes on the heavenly
face of his Felice, as she was walking in a garden full of roses and
other flowers.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER II.

     _Guy courts Fair Felice; she at first denies, but after grants his
     Suit on Conditions, which he accepts._


Guy immediately advanced to fair Felice, who was reposing herself in an
arbour, and saluted her with bended knees. "All hail, fair Felice,
flower of beauty, and jewel of virtue! I know, great princes seek to win
thy love, whose exquisite perfections might grace the mightiest monarch
in the world; yet may they come short of Guy's real affection, in whom
love is pictured with naked truth and honesty. Disdain me not for being
a steward's son, one of thy father's servants." Felice interrupted him
saying, "Cease, bold youth, leave off this passionate address; you are
but young and meanly born, and unfit for my degree: I would not my
father should know this." With this answer she departed from him.

Guy thus discomfited, lived for some time like one distracted, wringing
his hands, resolving to travel through the world to gain the love of
Felice, or death to end his misery.

Though Dame Fortune long may frown; when her course is run, she sends a
smile to cure the hearts that have been wounded by her frowns: so Cupid
sent from his bow a golden headed shaft and wounded Felice; and to her
sight presented an armed Knight saying, "This Knight shall become so
famous in the world that Kings and Princes shall his friendship court."
When Felice found herself wounded, she cried, "O pity me, gentle Cupid,
solicit for me to thy mother, and I will offer myself up at thy shrine."

[Illustration]

Guy little dreaming of this so sudden thaw, and wanting the balm of love
to apply to his sores, resolved to make a second encounter. So coming
again to his Felice, said, "Fair Lady, I have been arraigned long ago,
and now am come to receive my just sentence from the Tribunal of Love.
It is life, or death, fair Felice that I look for, let me not languish
in despair; give judgment, O ye fair, give judgment, that I may know my
doom. A word from thy sacred lips can cure my bleeding heart, or a frown
can doom me to the pit of misery."

"Gentle Guy," said she, "I am not at my own disposal, you know my
father's name is great in the nation, and I dare not match without his
consent."

"Sweet Lady," said Guy, "I make no doubt but quickly to obtain his love
and favour. Let me have thy love first, fair Felice, and there is no
fear of thy father's wrath preventing us."

"Sir Guy," quoth Felice, "make thy bold achievements and noble actions
shine abroad, glorious as the sun, that all opposers may tremble at thy
high applauded name, and then thy suit cannot be denied."

"Fair Felice," said Guy, "I ask no more. Oh that I were at work my task
to prove with some such churlish man as Hercules!"

[Illustration]




CHAPTER III.

     _Guy wins the Emperor's Daughter from several Princes, and
     returning to Warwick is sent forth by Felice to seek new
     Adventures; but before his departure destroys a monstrous Dun Cow
     upon Dunsmore Heath._


Our noble Guy, at last disengaged from Love's cruelty, now armed himself
like a Knight of Chivalry, and crossing the raging ocean, quickly
arrived at the Court of Thrace, where he heard that the Emperor of
Almain's fair daughter Blanch was to be made a prize for him that won
her in the field; upon which account the Worthies of the World assembled
to try their fortunes. The golden trumpets sounded with great joy and
triumph, and the stately pampered steeds pranced over the ground, and
each He there thought himself a Caesar that none could equal. Kings and
Princes were there, to behold who should be the conqueror, every one
thinking that fair Blanch should be his.

After desperate charging with horse and man, much blood was shed; and
our noble Guy laid about him like a lion, among the princes; here lay
one headless, another without a leg or an arm, and there a horse. Guy
still, like Hercules, charged desperately, and killed a German Prince
and his horse under him. Duke Otto, vowing revenge upon our English
champion, gave Guy a fresh assault, but his courage was soon cooled.
Then Duke Rayner would engage our favourite Knight, but with as little
success as the rest; and at length no man would encounter Guy any more:
so by his valour he won the Lady, in the field.

[Illustration]

The Emperor, being himself a spectator, sent a messenger for our English
Knight. Guy immediately came into the Emperor's presence, and made his
obeisance, when the Emperor, as a token of his affection, gave him his
hand to kiss, and withal resigned to him his daughter, a falcon and a
hound.

Guy thanked his Majesty for his gracious favour; but for fair Felice's
sake, left fair Blanch to her father's tuition, and departed from that
graceful Court, taking with him only the other tokens of his victory.

Now Guy beginning to meditate upon his long absence from his fair
Felice, and doubting of her prosperity, or that she might too much
forget him, departed for England; and having at last arrived at the
long-wished for haven of his love, thus greeted his beloved mistress:
"Fair foe," said he, "I am now come to challenge your promise, the
which was, upon my making my name famous by martial deeds, I should be
the master of my beloved mistress. Behold, fair Felice, this stately
steed, this falcon, and these hounds, part of the prize I have won in
the field, before Kings and Princes."

[Illustration]

"Worthy Knight," quoth Felice, "I have heard of thy winning the Lady
Blanch from Royal Dukes and Princes, and I am glad to find that Guy is
so victorious. But thou must seek more adventures, earn yet a nobler
name, before I wed thee."

Guy, discomfited at this unlooked for answer, took leave of fair Felice,
clad himself again in Bellona's livery, and set forth on his travels.

While waiting for a fair wind to sail for France, Guy heard of an
exceeding great and monstrous Cow, four yards in height and six in
length, lurking within the woods not many miles from Warwick, and making
there most dreadful devastations. This Cow was of a Dun colour, and from
thence named the Dun Cow; and the place where she lay being on the
borders of a great Heath, was from thence called Dunsmore Heath, which
name it retains to this day.

Guy arming himself with his sword, a strong battle axe, and his bow and
quiver, rode to the place where this monster used to lurk, which was in
a thicket of trees, which grew on the side of a heath near a pool of
standing water; and being come within a bow shot of it the monster
espied him, and set up a dreadful roaring, enough to fill any heart with
terror. Guy nothing daunted bent his bow of steel; but his arrow
rebounded as from an adamantine wall, when the dreadful beast rushed at
him like the wind. Guy observing this, lifted up his battle axe and
smote her such a blow as made her recoil. Enraged yet more, she again
rushed at him, and clapping her horns upon his breast, dented his
armour, though of highest proof. Wheeling his warlike steed about, he
gave her a desperate wound under the ear, and following this stroke with
others no less forcible, at last he brought her to the ground. Then Guy
alighting from his horse hewed her so long, till with a horrid groan she
breathed her last.

[Illustration]

The whole country, when they heard of the monster's death, came to
behold the dead carcase, and loaded Guy with thanks and presents; and
the King, after a splendid entertainment, gave him the Order of
Knighthood.




CHAPTER IV.

     _Guy, having performed great Wonders abroad, returns to England,
     and is married to Felice._


Guy now set forth in search of further adventures, and performed many
acts of valour. Once after a tedious journey, being seated by a spring
to refresh himself, he heard a hideous noise, and presently espied a
Lion and a Dragon, fighting, biting, and tearing each other. At length
Guy, perceiving the Lion ready to faint, encountered the Dragon, and
soon brought the ugly Cerberus roaring and yelling to the ground. The
Lion, in gratitude to Guy, run by his horse's side like a true born
spaniel, till lack of food made him retire to his wonted abode.

[Illustration]

Soon after Guy met with the Earl of Terry, whose father was confined in
his Castle by Duke Otto; but he and that Lord posted thither, and freed
the Castle immediately; and Guy in an open field slew Duke Otto, whose
dying words of repentance moved Guy to remorse and pity.

After this, as Guy returned through a desert, he met a furious boar that
had slain many Christians. Guy manfully drew his sword, and the boar
gaping, intending with his dreadful tusks to devour our noble champion,
Guy thrust it down his throat, and slew the greatest boar that ever man
beheld.

On Guy's arrival in England, he immediately repaired to King Athelston
at York, where the King told Guy of a mighty Dragon in Northumberland,
that destroyed men, women, and children. Guy desired a guide, and went
immediately to the Dragon's cave; when out came the monster, with eyes
like flaming fire. Guy charged him, courageously; but the Monster bit
the lance in two like a reed; then Guy drew his sword, and cut such
gashes in the Dragon's sides, that the blood and life poured out of his
venomous carcase. Then Guy cut off the head of the monster, and
presented it to the King, who in the memory of Guy's service, caused the
picture of the Dragon, which was thirty feet in length, to be worked in
a cloth of arras, and hung up in Warwick Castle for an everlasting
monument. Felice, hearing of Guy's return and success, came as far as
Lincoln to meet him, where they were married with much joy and great
triumph; King Athelstan, his Queen, and all the chief Nobles and Barons
of the land being present.

[Illustration]

No sooner were their nuptials celebrated, but Felice's father died,
leaving all his estate to Sir Guy, whom the King thereupon created Earl
of Warwick.




CHAPTER V.

     _Guy leaves his Wife, and goes a Pilgrimage to the Holy Land._


In the very height of Guy's glory, when he was exalted to his father's
dignities, conscience biddeth him repent of all his former sins; so Guy
resolved to travel to the Holy Land like a Pilgrim. Felice, perceiving
his melancholy, inquired of her Lord the cause of this passion? "Ah,
Felice!" said he, "I have spent much time in honouring thee, and to win
thy favour; but never spared one minute for my soul's health in
honouring the Lord."

[Illustration]

Felice, though very much grieved, understanding his determination,
opposed not his will. So with exchange of rings, and melting kisses, he
departed, like a stranger from his own habitation, taking with him
neither money nor scrip; while but a small quantity of herbs and roots,
such only as the wild fields could afford, formed his chief diet; and he
vowed never to fight more, but in a just cause.

Guy, after travelling many tedious miles, met an aged person oppressed
with grief, for the loss of fifteen sons, whom Armarant, a mighty Giant,
had taken from him, and held in strong captivity.

Guy borrowed the old man's sword, and went directly up to the Castle
gate, where the Giant dwelt, who coming to the door, asked grimly, "How
he durst so boldly knock at the gates?" vowing he would beat out his
brains. But Guy, laughing at him, said, "Sirrah, thou art quarrelsome;
but I have a sword that has often hewn such lubbards as you asunder." As
he spoke he laid his blade about the Giant's shoulders, so that he bled
abundantly; who being much enraged, flung his club at Guy with such
force, that it beat him down; and before Guy could recover his fall
Armarant had got up his club again. But in the end Guy killed this broad
backed monster, and released divers captives that had been in thraldom a
long time; some almost famished, and others ready to expire under
various tortures; who returned Guy thanks for their happy deliverance.
After which he gave up the Castle and keys to the old man and his
fifteen sons; and pursued his intended journey, and coming to a grave,
he took up a worm-eaten skull, which he thus addressed: Perhaps thou
wert a Prince, or a mighty Monarch, a King, a Duke, or a Lord! But the
King and the Beggar must all return to the earth; and therefore man had
need to remember his dying hour. Perhaps thou mightest have been a
Queen, or a Dutchess, or a Lady varnished with much beauty; but now thou
art wormsmeat, lying in the grave, the sepulchre of all creatures.

[Illustration]

While Guy was in this repenting solitude, fair Felice, like a mourning
widow, clothed herself in sable attire, and vowed chastity in the
absence of her beloved husband. Her whole delight was in divine
meditations and heavenly consolations, praying for the welfare of her
beloved Lord, whom she feared some savage monster had devoured. Thus
Felice spent the remainder of her life in sorrow for her dear Lord; and
to show her humility, she sold her jewels and the costly robes with
which she used to grace King Athelstan's Court, and gave the money
freely to the poor; she relieved the lame and the blind, the widow and
the fatherless, and all those that came to ask alms; and built a large
hospital for aged and sick people, that they might be comforted in their
sickness. Thus she laid up for herself treasure in heaven, which will be
paid again with life everlasting.

[Illustration]

In the mean time Guy travelled through many lands, and at last in the
course of his journeying he met the Earl of Terry, who had been exiled
from his territories by a merciless traitor. Guy bade him not be
dismayed, and promised to venture his life for his restoration. The Earl
thanked Guy most courteously, and they travelled together against
Terry's enemy. Guy challenged him into the field, and there slew him
hand to hand, and restored the Earl to his lands. The Earl full of
gratitude begged to know the name of his champion, but Guy insisted upon
remaining unknown; neither would he take any reward for his services.
Thus was the noble Guy successful in all his actions, until finding his
head crowned with silver hairs, after many years travel, he resolved to
end his days in his native country: and therefore returning from the
Holy Land, he came to England. On his arrival he found the nation in
great distress, the Danes having invaded the land, burning cities and
towns, plundering the country, and killing men, women, and children;
insomuch that King Athelstan was forced to take refuge in his invincible
city of Winchester.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

     _Guy fights with the Giant Colbran, and having overcome him,
     discovers himself to the King, then to his Wife, and dies in her
     Arms._


The Danes, having intelligence of King Athelstan's retreat to
Winchester, drew all their forces thither; and seeing there was no way
to win the city, they sent a summons to King Athelstan, desiring that an
Englishman might combat with a Dane, and that side to lose the whole
whose Champion was defeated. On this mighty Colbran singled himself from
the Danes, and entered upon Morn Hill, near Winchester, breathing
venomous words, calling the English cowardly dogs, whose carcases he
would make food for ravens. "What mighty boasting," said he, "hath there
been in the foreign nations of these English cowards, as if they had
done deeds of wonder, who now like foxes hide their heads."

Guy, hearing proud Colbran, could no longer forbear, but went
immediately to the King, and on his knee begged a combat; the King,
liking the courage of the pilgrim, bade him go and prosper. Whereupon
Guy departed out of the North gate to Morn Hill, where Colbran, the
Danish Champion, was. When Colbran espied Guy he disdained him, saying,
"Art thou the best Champion England can afford?" Quoth Guy, "It is
unbecoming a professed Champion to rail; my sword shall be my orator."
No longer they stood to parley, but with great courage fought most
manfully; but Guy was so nimble, that in vain Colbran struck; for every
blow fell upon the ground. Guy still laid about him like a dragon, which
gave great encouragement to the English; until Colbran in the end
growing faint, Guy brought the Giant to the ground. Upon which the
English all shouted with so much joy, that the welkin rang again. After
this battle the Danes retired back again to their own country.

[Illustration]

King Athelstan sent for this Champion to honour him; but Guy refused
honours, saying, "My Liege, I am a mortal man, and have set the vain
world at defiance." But at the King's earnest request, on promise of
concealment, Guy discovered himself to him; which rejoiced Athelstan's
heart, and he embraced his worthy Champion. But Guy took leave of his
Sovereign, and went to seek a solitary cave, wherein to spend the
remainder of his life. From time to time he repaired to Warwick Castle,
and received alms at the hands of his dear Lady, who showed more bounty
to pilgrims than any lady in the land besides.

[Illustration]

At length finding his hour draw nigh, he sent a messenger to Felice,
with a gold ring, at the sight of which token she hastened to her Lord.
And Guy soon after died in the arms of his beloved Felice, who, having
survived him only fifteen days, was buried in the same grave.


_Now is the Story brought to an end of Guy the bold Baron of price, and
of the fair maid Felice._

[Illustration]




Gammer Gurton's Story-Books.

Newly revised and amended, for the amusement and delight of all good
little Masters and Misses, by _Ambrose Merton_, Gent. F. S. A.


_Sixpenny Series._

  1. The Famous History of Sir Guy of Warwick.
  2. A True Tale of Robin Hood.
  3. Gammer Gurton's Garland.
  4. The Renowned History of Sir Bevis of Hampton.
  5. The Doleful Story of the Babes in the Wood.
  6. A Merry Tale of the King and the Cobbler.
  7. The Famous History of Friar Bacon.
  8. The Romantic Story of the Princess Rosetta.
  9. A Rare Ballad of the Beggar's Daughter.
  10. The Excellent History of Tom Hickathrift.
  11. The Mad Pranks of Robin Goodfellow.
  12. A Famous Ballad of Fair Rosamond.
  13. The Pleasant Story of Patient Grissell.

Each of these _Famous Histories_ is printed in the best style, with a
flower-border to every page, and one illustration by Tayler, Franklin,
or Absolon, and is done up in a gold paper cover. Price _6d._ Coloured
Series, _9d._ each.


_The following will shortly be published._

  1. The Songs of the Fairies.
  2. Whittington and his Cat.
  3. Goody Two Shoes.
  4. Valentine and Orson.
  5. The Hermit of Warkworth.
  6. The Seven Champions.
  7. Tom Thumb.
  8. Nursery Jingles.
  9. Fortunio.
  10. Brave Lord Willoughby.
  11. Wise Men of Gotham.
  12. George a Green.
  13. The Fair One with Golden Locks.

JOSEPH CUNDALL, 12, OLD BOND STREET.





End of Project Gutenberg's Traditional Nursery Songs of England, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NURSERY SONGS ***

***** This file should be named 30418.txt or 30418.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/4/1/30418/

Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
