The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Long Island Library Resources Council
(LILRC) Interlibrary Loan Manual: January, 1976, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Long Island Library Resources Council (LILRC) Interlibrary Loan Manual: January, 1976

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: November 28, 2009 [EBook #30557]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INTERLIBRARY LOAN MANUAL ***




Produced by Gerard Arthus, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









L I L R C

INTERLIBRARY LOAN MANUAL


January 1976


LONG ISLAND
LIBRARY
RESOURCES
COUNCIL Inc.

Box 31
Bellport, NY 11713




CONTENTS


1. Introduction                                                    2

2. Interlibrary loan policies and procedures                       3
     What may be borrowed
     Placing requests
     Form of request
     Verification
     Photocopying
     Expenses

3. Direct access to other libraries                                6
     Location service
     Research Loan Program

4. INS--How it works                                               7
     Billing
     Cancellations
     Delivery and pickup
     Microforms
     Photocopies of missing pages
     Recall
     Renewals
     Returns
     Status reports

5. Guide to the use of LILRC interlibrary loan request forms      10
     Instructions for completing serials request
     Instructions for completing book request

6. How to be a good borrower                                      15

7. How to be a good lender                                        15

8. Appendix
   A. Useful interlibrary loan manuals                            16
   B. Sample worksheet                                            17




Introduction


This manual has been prepared as a guide to the Information Network
Service, the interlibrary loan system of the Long Island Library
Resources Council (LILRC).

The manual contains a description of how the location and delivery
service works and the policy on which it is based, as well as standards
to which it is expected participating libraries will adhere.

Please do not hesitate to make suggestions and comments regarding this
manual and the interlibrary loan service to the Council office.

January 1976




INTERLIBRARY LOAN POLICIES AND PROCEDURES


Our interlibrary loan program is based on the premise that lending
among libraries for the benefit of individuals in Nassau and Suffolk
counties is in the public interest and should be encouraged. It is
impossible for any one library to be self-sufficient, and interlibrary
borrowing and lending is regarded by the libraries participating in
this program as essential to library service.

It is the policy of the Council that the routines of borrowing and
lending are simplified as much as possible consistent with the
protection of material. Every effort is made to emphasize speed and to
base the service on a spirit of cooperation and trust among
participating libraries.

What follows comprise the procedures and standards that have developed
gradually and voluntarily in our area--this is what works for us.
Changes may be introduced as the need arises.


What may be borrowed

It is recognized that interlibrary borrowing does not relieve any
library of the responsibility for developing its own collection. Each
library should provide the bulk of materials needed by its users for
purposes of study, instruction, information and research.

The borrowing library should make every effort to exhaust its own
resources before turning to interlibrary loan. It should also screen
requests carefully before transmitting them to the Council, eliminating
those which common sense indicates would not be supplied.

The borrowing library is responsible for returning loans promptly and
in good condition. The borrowing library should respond quickly to
overdue notices and is responsible for paying fees for lost books as
levied by the lending library. The library should refuse to request
books on interlibrary loan on behalf of borrowers who abuse the
privilege.


Placing requests

Our network is part of an hierarchical system. Requests we cannot
locate in the region we send to the New York State Interlibrary Loan
Network (NYSILL) which searches the State Library in Albany and
selected referral libraries in the State. The key to the success of
NYSILL is that it is asked only for materials not available locally.
The network would break down if the major libraries were asked to
supply commonly held materials. Medically oriented requests not found
on Long Island are transmitted to the Regional Medical Library
interlibrary loan network in Brooklyn.

Public libraries submit their requests through their respective library
systems, which process the requests through LILRC, NYSILL, or other
channels.

All other libraries in the region should submit their requests to
LILRC. Most libraries prefer to have local requests handled centrally,
and decline to fill regional requests unless they have been transmitted
by the Council. In special circumstances, libraries may arrange to deal
directly with each other.


Form of requests

Borrowing libraries may find it helpful to develop worksheets (see
samples in Appendix B) to be used by the reader and the librarian in
preparing the interlibrary loan request, indicating all the items we
need to know.

Requests may be submitted on LILRC interlibrary loan forms which we
supply, and sent in by mail or by our driver. They may be placed by
teletype, using a format based on the LILRC request form. Urgent
requests may be placed by telephone.

We ask that you fill out the form as completely and as accurately as
possible, including author's full first name. Supply all the
information you have been able to elicit from your patron, as well as
all you have been able to glean from bibliographic sources to complete
the request. The more information you give us the more likely we are to
locate the material you need--and the more quickly.

Try to develop techniques for drawing from your reader as much as he
knows about the item he is seeking and the source of the citation. He
must have some reason for believing the item exists, and we should be
able to pass this information on to the potential lending library.


Verification

Check as far as possible to verify the accuracy of the information the
reader gives you. We trust that you will verify citations as completely
and as accurately as your resources will allow.

The ALA and NYSILL manuals (see Appendix A) both contain a listing of
standard bibliographic tools and sources of verification. Verification
sources not found in the standard lists should be cited in full.
Remember that reference tools and abbreviations familiar to you may not
be known to the librarian trying to fill the request. Please give full
citation of the source of verification, including date, volume, series,
and the page on which verification was found. That is, not just "NUC,"
but "NUC, 1968-72, 25:478." In a request for a periodical article, both
the title of the periodical and the location of the article should be
verified, and both sources of verification should be given.

If you cannot verify the item in a standard bibliographic tool, please
supply a complete citation to the source of reference, including
author's full name, publisher, date, and page of citation.

When libraries are unable to verify requests completely because their
bibliographic resources and staff are severely limited, we will _try_
to verify the information and to locate the item. If a request is
hopelessly inadequate, with vital information missing or with
incomprehensible abbreviations, we will return it for clarification.


OCLC verification

Please use caution when citing OCLC numbers as verification for
interlibrary loan requests. The Council office and most of the
libraries in our region do not have OCLC terminals. Include OCLC #,
author and title, place, publisher and date, and Nassau-Suffolk and
NYSILL locations where given. Be sure all information has been copied
correctly.


Data base verification

If an item is requested on the basis of a citation on a computer
printout, supply all information given and be sure to indicate which
data base was used, such as ERIC, Psych Abstracts, Compendex, BIOSIS,
etc.


Photocopying

The lending library may choose to supply photocopies of articles in
lieu of lending whole issues or volumes of serials. By mutual
agreement, libraries in our region generally absorb the costs of
photocopying articles, although there may be a charge for longer
articles. Libraries have usually found that by photocopying for each
other without charge they come out reasonably even and avoid the
expense and trouble of accounting and billing procedures.


Expenses

LILRC along among the 3R's Councils in the State has chosen to maintain
a low membership fee which is the same for all libraries. Our income is
supplemented by a system of charges and credits for completed
interlibrary loan transactions, so that libraries pay in proportion to
the use they make of our service. These charges are not related to the
cost of the service.

The borrowing library is charged a fee for each item it obtains through
LILRC. The lending library receives a credit (presently $1.00) equal to
one-half the charge (presently $2.00) for each item it supplies.
Libraries with collections from which we borrow heavily, paying for
teletype machines to receive our requests, may be given additional
credit if replies are transmitted promptly.




DIRECT ACCESS TO OTHER LIBRARIES


Both the Nassau Library System and the Suffolk Cooperative Library
System have policies of direct access, including borrowing privileges,
among the public libraries within their respective counties. A reader
may find another library convenient; remind him to check with his local
public library for details.

Other alternatives to interlibrary loan include:


Location service

It may be more practical for some readers to use books and periodicals
at the library which holds them rather than request them on
interlibrary loan. For periodicals, you may refer readers on the basis
of the _Nassau-Suffolk Union List of Serials_. Please check the list of
participating libraries in the front of volume 1 which notes some
limitations of public access to materials in certain libraries.

For monographs, call LILRC and ask for a check of a few libraries in
the microfilms of card catalogs to get locations for needed items.


Research Loan Program

Through this program, patrons of participating libraries have direct
access, including circulation privileges, to specific subject area
collections in other participating libraries. In lieu of numerous
interlibrary loan requests, libraries may wish to recommend their
readers take advantage of this program. The latest LILRC membership
list indicates libraries which have joined this program. Details are
available in all participating libraries and from LILRC.




INFORMATION NETWORK SERVICE-How it works


Requests are received daily from participating libraries by teletype
and on LILRC interlibrary loan forms by mail and delivery service. A
limited number of urgent requests may be received by telephone. All
requests are transcribed onto LILRC request forms if they have not
arrived on that form.

All requests are checked to make sure that all necessary bibliographic
information has been given. If a glaring error or omission can be
corrected easily, the INS clerk will do so and process the request. If
the error is not easily corrected, the request is returned to the
requesting library for clarification.

When a monograph request is received, the clerk checks the appropriate
catalogs in the data bank of library card catalogs in microfilm in the
LILRC office (or calls libraries for materials not listed in the
catalogs). For serials the clerk checks the _Nassau-Suffolk Union List
of Serials_ and other tools. When an item is located, the clerk calls,
teletypes a message, or sends a copy of the request to the prospective
lender to see if the item is actually available.

The INS staff tries to maintain a balance between locating the needed
items most efficiently and at the same time spreading the load so that
the larger libraries are not overburdened with requests and so that all
libraries are given a chance to build up credits.

Each time we check with a prospective lender, a notation is made on the
interlibrary loan form indicating the library's name and response. If
"yes," arrangements are made for pickup. If "no," the search goes on.
"Maybe" takes a little longer; although the item is in the catalog, the
shelf must be checked to see if the volume is available for loan or
photocopying.

When a loan is arranged, the clerk prepares the interlibrary loan forms
(still intact) for the driver. Having begun her run in the morning,
delivering books and copies picked up the previous day, the driver
returns to the LILRC office in the early afternoon with that day's
deliveries and pickups. The driver collects the day's batch of slips
and prepares her itinerary for the next day.

Copies of the interlibrary loan form are used as follows:

_Serials_                                             _Books_

white      Sent to lending library                     pink

yellow     Inserted into each book delivered           yellow
           to borrowing library or clipped
           to copy of article

pink      Filed by name of borrowing library           white
          in LILRC circulation file,
          used for statistics, then filed

gold     Returned to borrowing library with            gold
            bill unless retained by library
            before submitting request to LILRC

If an item is not located at a member library, the request is
considered for transmission to the State Library in Albany and the
NYSILL network or to the Regional Medical Library network. Certain
categories of requests may be submitted to the State Library but are
not normally eligible for transmission to NYSILL, such as: fiction,
text books, current publications and those in popular demand, rare
books, genealogy, children's books, multi-volume sets, reference books,
non-research books (self-help, recreation, etc.). Interlibrary loan
librarians should familiarize themselves with the NYSILL manual (see
Appendix A) so they will know what to expect when we send requests to
NYSILL for them.

Each day, the requests not located on Long Island are teletyped to the
State Library in Albany. If available, the book or copy will be sent
from the State Library or the library to which it has been referred,
directly to the requesting library whose name and address have been
coded into the NYSILL transmission format. Medically-oriented requests
are sent to the Regional Medical Library network via the Medical
Research Library in Brooklyn and may be sent to the requesting library
directly or via LILRC.

If the item is not available from any of these sources, a report is
teletyped to LILRC and we send it on to the requesting library.


Billing

Bills are sent quarterly unless a library asks that it be billed
monthly or semi-annually, or annually as part of the dues. The gold
copy (part 4) of the interlibrary loan form is included with the bill
unless a library retains it when initiating the request or indicates
the copy need not be returned.


Cancellations

Occasionally, libraries find it necessary to cancel a request. It is
understood that if the item is in the process of being supplied the
requesting library will be charged for the completed loan.


Delivery and pickup

The Council drivers stop at each library which has a pickup or delivery
to be made (public libraries send materials to LILRC via their
respective systems). While the drivers stop nearly every day at the
heaviest users, we do not know you have something for us unless you let
us know. If you are supplying a monograph or photocopy, or have a book
to return, _call and tell us_.


Microforms

INS tries to obtain needed items in a form usable in the borrowing
library. If the supplying library cannot produce a hard copy of a
microform it is lending, and if your library does not have an
appropriate reader, we will try to have a copy made (if there is an
additional charge you will be notified in advance) or tell you where
your patron can read or copy the material himself.


Photocopies of missing pages

Missing pages from monographs and serials may be requested in the usual
manner. For an additional fee, INS will try to obtain copies suitable
for binding, printed on both sides.


Recall

It is understood that the lending library may recall a book needed for
one of its own readers.


Renewals

Please request a renewal before the date due noted on the request form
or in the volume. For books received from LILRC member libraries, call
the LILRC office and give author, title, date due, library from which
borrowed. Renewals will usually be granted for two weeks from date due
unless a lending library has indicated otherwise.

Books received from the State Library or through NYSILL or the Regional
Medical Library must be renewed directly with the lending library, not
LILRC.


Returns

Books received from LILRC should be returned via our driver. Call and
let us know you have a book to be returned.

Books received from the State Library or through NYSILL or the Regional
Medical Library should _be mailed directly to the lending library_. The
book usually arrives with a return label. The package in which it comes
will give information regarding return address and insurance.


Status reports

Requests are processed and reports submitted to the requesting library
as rapidly as possible. It is not always possible to give an immediate
report on the status of an outstanding request in the process of being
searched at a member library. Please hold requests for status reports
to a minimum.




Guide to the use of LILRC Interlibrary Loan Request Forms


The number of interlibrary loan requests received by LILRC is steadily
increasing. In order to process the requests efficiently we ask that
requests be submitted either on the LILRC interlibrary loan request
form or via teletype.

Please do not send requests on lists or in other formats. Telephone
requests can be accepted only for a limited number of urgent requests.

Use the "book" request form for all monographs, reports, whole volumes
of proceedings, transactions, congresses, etc.

Use "serials" request form for all articles from periodicals, papers
from transactions, proceedings or congresses, and for chapters or other
sections of books.

Please use LILRC interlibrary loan request forms only for requests sent
to LILRC.




INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING SERIAL REQUEST


------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATE OF REQUEST: (1)  YOUR REQUEST #: (2) DEWEY NO.: (3)| LILRC USE ONLY
REQUESTING LIBRARY: (4) USER:  (5)                      |DATE DUE  (17)
                        STATUS:  (6)                    |---------------
SERIAL:  (7)                                            |NBELS  |NHEMH
                                                        |NBETG  |NHUHI
VOL./ISSUE:  (8)        DATE:  (9)        PAGES:  (10)  |NCSHB  |NHUI (16)
                                                        |NEAH   |NKIPM
AUTHOR:  (11)                                           |NEMMC  |NMELA
                                                        |NFARUA |NMON
TITLE OF ARTICLE:  (12)                                 |NGCA   |NNHPJ
                                                        |NGCCC  |NNOPOVA
VERIFICATION/        (13)                               |NGCE   |NOWNI
SOURCE OF REFERENCE:                                    |NGCG   |NOWU
--------------------------------------------------------|NGCNLS |NSBSU
  LONG ISLAND LIBRARY  |      LILRC USE ONLY            |NGLCM  |   -H
   RESOURCES COUNCIL   |                                |NGLCW  |NSELC
                       |TRANSMITTED:  (14)              |NGLH   |NSM
BOX 31, BELLPORT, N.Y. |                                |NGRNS  |NSOAS
      11713            |FINAL STATUS:  (15)             |NGVP   |NUPB
                       |                                |NHAPSA |NWEBE
  (516) 286-0400       |                                |---------------
                       |
SERIAL-1               |

PLEASE TYPE ALL INFORMATION

     1. _Date of request._ Fill in date you are submitting your
     request to LILRC.

     2. _Your request #._ Libraries submitting many interlibrary
     loan requests often number the requests consecutively each
     month. Thus, "10-59" would indicate the fifty-ninth request
     Library X submitted to LILRC during October. Libraries
     making fewer requests may number consecutively through the
     year or may choose to omit a number.

     3. _Dewey No._ Supply 3-digit Dewey number wherever known.
     This is necessary for requests submitted to NYSILL so they
     can be referred to appropriate subject referral library.
     Verification will often give Dewey number, usually supplied
     with LC cataloging in NUC and NST.

     4. _Requesting library._ Name of institution submitting
     request. Since delivery is through LILRC driver, full
     mailing address is not needed.

     5. Name of library _user_ for whom request is being made.
     Some libraries file pending requests by name of user. Also
     helpful in identifying request if there is a question while
     it is being processed.

     6. _Status._ Needed for determining eligibility of request
     for referral to NYSILL. Indicate student, faculty,
     professional, industry, or other.

     7. _Serial._ Name of periodical in which needed article
     appears. Give name of journal as it appears in the
     _Nassau-Suffolk Union list of Serials_, _Union List of
     Serials_ 3rd ed., _New Serials Titles_, or other standard
     bibliographic source. Do not use abbreviations. If not
     verified, give name of journal as fully as you have been
     able to find it.

     8. _Vol./issue._ Indicate volume number of periodical, and
     issue number if known. If serial has dates but no volume
     number, leave space blank.

     9. _Date_ of issue in which needed article appears.

     10. _Pages_ on which article appears. If complete pagination
     is not known, add "+" or "to end of article" after number of
     beginning page, so that the person copying the article will
     look for a continuation and not copy only the single page
     cited.

     11. _Author_ of article required, including first name(s).
     If more than one author, give full names of two, and
     indicate "and others."

     12. _Title_ of article requested.

     13. _Verification._ Please supply verification of both name
     of the journal and of the existence of the article in this
     issue of the journal cited. Standard sources for journals
     include union lists mentioned in #7 above. Articles can be
     verified in standard periodical indexes and abstracting
     services such as _Reader's Guide_, _Education Index_,
     _Psychological Abstracts_, _Engineering Index_, etc. Give
     full citation including volume, series, year/date, page,
     abstract number of verification. If request could not be
     verified, indicate sources checked.

     If not possible to verify, indicate _source of reference_,
     such as bibliography in monograph, review article, etc.
     Where did the requestor see this item _in print_? Include
     author, title, publisher and date or journal title and date,
     and page number on which citation is found. If it is more
     convenient, you may supply a photocopy of the cited
     reference.

     If impossible to verify or supply a source of reference,
     indicate "zz."

     _For LILRC use only_

     14. Records information regarding request forwarded to LILRC
     member or NYSILL or RML and awaiting response.

     15. Indicates whether item has been found and delivered or
     request cancelled.

     16. Checked to indicate by NUC symbol libraries believed to
     have needed item, on the basis of the _Nassau-Suffolk Union
     List of Serials_.

     17. Records date due of book to be returned. Left blank in
     cases where photocopy has been supplied; photocopy becomes
     the property of the user.




INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING BOOK REQUEST FORM


------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATE OF REQUEST: (1) YOUR REQUEST #: (2) DEWEY NO.: (3)| LILRC USE ONLY
REQUESTING LIBRARY: (4) USER:  (5)                     |DATE DUE  (16)
                        STATUS:  (6)                   |----------------
AUTHOR:  (7)                                           |NBELS  |NHEMH
                                                       |NBETG  |NHUHI
TITLE:  (8)                                            |NCSHB  |NHUI (15)
                                                       |NEAH   |NKIPM
PLACE:  (9)                                            |NEMMC  |NMELA
                                                       |NFARUA |NMON
PUBLISHER, DATE:                                       |NGCA   |NNHPJ
            (10) & (11)                                |NGCCC  |NNOPOVA
VERIFICATION/                                          |NGCE   |NOWNI
SOURCE OF REFERENCE:  (12)                             |NGCG   |NOWU
-------------------------------------------------------|NGCNLS |NSBSU
  LONG ISLAND LIBRARY  |      LILRC USE ONLY           |NGLCM  |   -H
   RESOURCES COUNCIL   |                               |NGLCW  |NSELC
                       |TRANSMITTED:  (13)             |NGLH   |NSM
BOX 31, BELLPORT, N.Y. |                               |NGRNS  |NSOAS
      11713            |FINAL STATUS:  (14)            |NGVP   |NUPB
                       |                               |NHAPSA |NWEBE
  (516) 286-0400       |                               |----------------
                       |
BOOK-1                 |

PLEASE TYPE ALL INFORMATION

     1. _Date of request._ Fill in date you are submitting your
     request to LILRC.

     2. _Your request #._ Libraries submitting many interlibrary
     loan requests often number the requests consecutively each
     month. Thus, "10-59" would indicate the fifty-ninth request
     Library X submitted to LILRC during October. Libraries
     making fewer requests may number consecutively through the
     year or may choose to omit a number.

     3. _Dewey No._ Supply three-digit Dewey number wherever
     known. This is necessary for requests submitted to NYSILL so
     they can be referred to appropriate subject referral
     libraries. Verification will often give Dewey number,
     usually supplied with LC cataloging in NUC and NST.

     4. _Requesting library._ Name of institution submitting
     request. Since delivery is through the LILRC driver, full
     mailing address is not needed.

     5. _User._ Name of library user for whom request is being
     made. Some libraries file pending requests by name of user.
     Also helpful in identifying request if there is a question
     while it is being processed.

     6. _Status._ Needed for determining eligibility of request
     for referral to NYSILL. Indicate student, faculty,
     professional, industry, or other.

     7. _Author._ Give full name of author of monograph. Give
     last name, followed by first name(s). Give full name
     wherever possible, not initials. If more than one author,
     give full names of two authors, and write "and others" if
     there are more. If author is a corporate body, give name as
     fully and accurately as possible.

     8. _Title._ Give full title of book. If title is excessively
     long, it may be shortened after giving first several words
     exactly and filling space allotted with remaining key words.

     9. _Place._ City of publication. }
         are acceptable.              }
                                      } Indicate in this space if other
     10. Name of _publisher._         } editions are acceptable.
                                      }
     11. _Date_ of publication.       }

     12. _Verification._ Please supply verification of all
     information given, particularly main entry. Preferred source
     is _National Union Catalog_, followed by CBI. _Books in
     Print_ is not an adequate verification since information
     there is often inaccurate or incomplete. Give full reference
     to volume, series, date, page of verification. If request
     could not be verified, indicate sources checked, as in: NUC
     1968-72-0; CBI 1971-0.

     If it is not possible to verify the author and title,
     indicate _sources of reference_ such as bibliography in a
     monograph, review article, etc. Where did the requestor see
     this item _in print_? Supply author, title, publisher and
     date or journal title and date, and page number on which
     citation is found. If it is more convenient you may supply a
     photocopy of the cited reference.

     If impossible to verify or supply a source of reference,
     indicate "zz."


     _For LILRC use only_

     13. Records information regarding request forwarded to LILRC
     member or NYSILL or RML and awaiting response.

     14. Indicates whether item has been found and delivered or
     request cancelled.

     15. Checked to indicate by NUC symbol libraries believed to
     have needed item, on the basis of the data bank of library
     card catalogs in microfilm or telephone confirmation.

     16. Records date due of book to be returned. Left blank in
     cases where photocopy has been supplied; photocopy becomes
     the property of the user.




How to be a good borrower:


     _Educate your readers._ Explain that some materials may not
     be available on interlibrary loan, that requests may take
     time to fill, that renewals may not always be granted.

     _Encourage_ your readers to take full notes of bibliographic
     sources and references, to supply all necessary data, to
     fill out a work sheet for each request.

     _Screen_ requests carefully. Eliminate requests for items
     that are too new, too popular, too inexpensive to process,
     too ephemeral.

     _VERIFY_ all citations.

     _Make sure_ your teletype messages and interlibrary loan
     forms are free from typographical errors.

     _Return_ materials promptly. If a renewal is necessary, ask
     for it before the date due. If a book is lost, notify the
     Council and pay the bill promptly. Your library is
     responsible for all books it borrows on interlibrary loan.
     Books received through NYSILL should be returned directly to
     the lending library, not to LILRC.

     _Limit_ the number of items you request on behalf of any
     reader at one time. Materials on a given subject should not
     be monopolized by one patron in the region, and deadlines
     and due dates must be honored.

     _Notify_ us when you have a book to be returned.




How to be a good lender:


     _Answer promptly_ and courteously when you receive a
     teletype message, telephone call or typed forms by mail or
     courier. The library you supply today may supply you
     tomorrow.

     _Reciprocity_ is the key word.

     Please say "_yes_" only when you are prepared to supply the
     photocopy or volume quickly. If you cannot fill a request,
     let us know promptly so that we may try to locate the item
     elsewhere. It is not fair to keep any library's patron
     waiting. A quick "No" is preferable to a drawn out "Maybe."

     _Notify_ us when you have an item ready for us to pick up.

     _Have items ready_ for pickup at the designated spot when
     the driver arrives.

     _Identify_ all photocopies with our request number (if
     given) and the title and issue of the journal from which
     they are made.




APPENDIX A

Useful tools for interlibrary loan:


New Jersey State Library. _Interlibrary loan, photocopy and reference
     procedures manual._
     Copies available upon request: New Jersey State Library,
     Interlibrary Reference and Loan Service, 185 W. State St.,
     Trenton, NJ 08625.

New York State Education Department. New York State Interlibrary Loan
     Network. NYSILL Manual, 1970.
     Copies available upon request: State Education Department,
     Division of Library Development, Albany, NY 12224.

Thomson, Sarah Katherine. _Interlibrary loan procedure manual._
     Chicago, ALA, 1970.
     May be ordered from ALA, 50 E. Huron St., Chicago, Ill.
     69601.




Appendix B

Sample worksheets for interlibrary loans


          Interlibrary Loan Book Request
                                               For library
                                               use only
Author: -----------------------------------   -------------
                                               Verified
Title: ------------------------------------

Publisher --------- Place & date ----------

Citation sources: -------------------------

      Author: -----------------------------   -------------
                                               Requested
      Title: ------------------------------

      Page -------------  Date ------------

-------------------------------------------

Name: ------------------------ Phone ------

Address: ----------------------------------

Not wanted after: ---------------

Date of request: ------- Accepted by ------

-----------------------------------------------------------
                                               For library
                  Periodical Request           use only
                                              -------------
                                               Verified

Periodical title: -------------------------

          Vol. ----- Date ----- Pages -----

Author: -----------------------------------   -------------
                                               Requested
Title: ------------------------------------

Abstracts or index used: ------------------

          Vol. ----- Date ----- Pages -----

Name: ----------------------- Phone -------

Address: ----------------------------------

Not wanted after: -------------------------

Date of request -------- Accepted by ------




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Page 7: Changed sumitting to submitting
  (before sumitting request to LILRC).

Page 11: Changed conscecutively to consecutively
  (may number conscecutively).

Page 14: Changed alloted to allotted
  (space alloted with remaining key words).

Page 14: Under 9. Place. City of publication,
  "are acceptable" may be a typo.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Long Island Library Resources
Council (LILRC) Interlibrary Loan Manual: January, 1976, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INTERLIBRARY LOAN MANUAL ***

***** This file should be named 30557.txt or 30557.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/5/5/30557/

Produced by Gerard Arthus, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
