The Project Gutenberg EBook of His Last Week, by
William E. Barton and Theodore G. Soares and Sydney Strong

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: His Last Week
       The Story of the Passion and Resurrection of Jesus

Author: William E. Barton
        Theodore G. Soares
        Sydney Strong

Release Date: November 29, 2009 [EBook #30561]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS LAST WEEK ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










  His Last Week

  THE STORY OF THE PASSION AND
  RESURRECTION OF JESUS

  IN THE WORDS OF THE FOUR GOSPELS

  PREPARED BY
  WILLIAM E. BARTON, THEODORE G. SOARES
  SYDNEY STRONG

  HOPE PUBLISHING COMPANY
  CHICAGO




PREFACE.


ONE HUNDREDTH THOUSAND.

The evangelists have devoted one-third of the Gospel record to our Lord's
Passion and Resurrection. A comparison of the four narratives clearly
indicates the order of events upon the several days of the Holy Week. The
devotional reading of the story is a most natural and helpful observance of
the Easter season. As an aid to such observance this booklet has been
prepared. It is the story, day by day, of the last week in our Lord's
earthly life in the words of the four evangelists, containing all that they
record, but without repetition. Messrs. Thomas Nelson and Sons have
generously co-operated in permitting the use of the best translation.

Originally planned for the churches of all denominations in a single
community, the booklet has proved a blessing to many thousands of
Christians. May this new edition help in the fulfillment of the great
purpose which the Gospel epilogue expresses.

    ------------------------------------------------------
    | COPYRIGHT, 1905, BY THE OAK PARK PASTORS' UNION.   |
    | THE TEXT OF THE AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE,   |
    | COPYRIGHT 1901, BY THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, IS USED |
    | BY SPECIAL ARRANGEMENT AND WITH THEIR PERMISSION.  |
    ------------------------------------------------------




HIS LAST WEEK


GOING UP TO JERUSALEM.

And it came to pass when the days were well nigh come that Jesus should
be received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem. And he
departed from Galilee, and passed through the borders of Samaria and
Galilee, and came into the borders of Judaea beyond the Jordan. And great
multitudes followed him, and he healed them there.

And they were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was going
before them: and they were amazed; and they that followed were afraid.

And he took again the twelve, and began to tell them the things that
were to happen unto them, saying, "Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and
the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests and the
scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him unto
the Gentiles; and they shall mock him, and shall spit upon him, and shall
scourge him, and shall kill him; and after three days he shall rise again."

Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus, said unto his fellow-disciples,
"Let us also go, that we may die with him."

And he entered and passed through Jericho and went on before, going up
to Jerusalem.

Now the passover of the Jews was at hand: and many went up to Jerusalem
out of the country before the passover, to purify themselves. They
sought therefore for Jesus, and spake one with another, as they stood in
the temple, "What think ye? That he will not come to the feast?"

Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given commandment, that, if
any man knew where he was, he should show it, that they might take him.


THE FEAST AT BETHANY.

Jesus therefore six days before the passover came to Bethany, where Lazarus
was, whom Jesus raised from the dead. So they made him a supper there in
the house of Simon the leper; and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of
them that sat at meat with him. Mary therefore took a pound of ointment of
pure nard, very precious, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his
feet with her hair; and the house was filled with the odor of the ointment.

But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples, that should betray him, saith,
"Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred shillings, and given
to the poor?"

Now this he said, not because he cared for the poor; but because he was
a thief, and having the bag took away what was put therein.

Jesus therefore said, "Suffer her to keep it against the day of my
burying. For the poor ye have always with you; but me ye have not
always. She hath done what she could; she hath anointed my body
beforehand for the burying. And verily I say unto you, Wheresoever the
gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, that also which
this woman hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her."

The common people therefore of the Jews learned that he was there: and
they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus
also, whom he had raised from the dead. But the chief priests took
counsel that they might put Lazarus also to death; because that by
reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus.




PALM SUNDAY--THE DAY OF TRIUMPH.


THE TRIUMPHAL ENTRY.

On the morrow when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and
Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sendeth two of his disciples, and saith
unto them, "Go your way into the village that is over against you: and
straightway as ye enter into it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon no man
ever yet sat; loose him, and bring him. And if any one say unto you, 'Why
do ye this?' say ye, 'The Lord hath need of him; and straightway he will
send him back hither.'"

Now this is come to pass, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken
through the prophet, saying,

        "Tell ye the daughter of Zion,
        Behold, thy King cometh unto thee,
        Meek, and riding upon an ass,
        And upon a colt the foal of an ass."

And they went away, and found a colt tied at the door without in the
open street: and they loose him. And certain of them that stood there
said unto them, "What do ye, loosing the colt?" And they said unto them
even as Jesus had said: and they let them go. And they bring the colt
unto Jesus, and cast on him their garments; and he sat upon him.

And the most part of the multitude spread their garments upon the way;
and others branches, which they had cut from the fields. And as he was
drawing nigh, even at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole
multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud
voice for all the mighty works which they had seen. And they that went
before, and they that followed, cried, "Hosanna to the Son of David;
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Blessed is the kingdom
that cometh, the kingdom of our father David: Hosanna in the highest."

These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when Jesus
was glorified, then remembered they that these things were written of
him, and that they had done these things unto him.

The multitude, therefore, that was with him when he called Lazarus out
of the tomb, and raised him from the dead, bare witness. For this
cause also the multitude went and met him, for that they heard that he
had done this sign.

And some of the Pharisees from the multitude said unto him, "Teacher,
rebuke thy disciples."

And he answered and said, "I tell you that, if these shall hold their
peace, the stones will cry out."

And when he drew nigh, he saw the city and wept over it, saying, "If thou
hadst known in this day, even thou, the things which belong unto peace! but
now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, when
thine enemies shall cast up a bank about thee, and compass thee round, and
keep thee in on every side, and shall dash thee to the ground, and thy
children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon
another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation."

And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was stirred, saying,
"Who is this?"

And the multitude said, "This is the prophet, Jesus, from Nazareth of
Galilee."

The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, "Behold, how ye prevail
nothing; lo, the world is gone after him."

And he entered into Jerusalem, into the temple; and when he had looked
round about upon all things, it being now eventide, he went out unto
Bethany with the twelve.




MONDAY--THE DAY OF AUTHORITY.


THE CURSING OF THE FIG TREE.

And on the morrow, when they were come out from Bethany, he hungered.
And seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came, if haply he might
find anything thereon: and when he came to it, he found nothing but
leaves; for it was not the season of figs. And he answered and said unto
it, "No man eat fruit from thee henceforward for ever."

And his disciples heard it.


THE CLEANSING OF THE TEMPLE.

And they come to Jerusalem: and he entered into the temple, and began to
cast out them that sold and them that bought in the temple, and
overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of them that
sold the doves: and he would not suffer that any man should carry a
vessel through the temple. And he taught, and said unto them, "Is it not
written, 'My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the
nations'? but ye have made it a den of robbers."

And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed
them. But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful
things that he did, and the children that were crying in the temple and
saying, "Hosanna to the son of David": they were moved with indignation,
and said unto him, "Hearest thou what these are saying?"

And Jesus saith unto them, "Yea: did ye never read, 'Out of the mouth of
babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise'?"

And the chief priests and the scribes and the principal men of the
people sought to destroy him: and they could not find what they might
do; for the people all hung upon him, listening.

And he left them, and went forth out of the city to Bethany, and lodged
there.




TUESDAY--THE DAY OF CONTROVERSY.


THE LESSON FROM THE WITHERED FIG TREE.

And as they passed by in the morning, they saw the fig tree withered
away from the roots. And Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him,
"Rabbi, behold the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away."

And Jesus answering saith unto them, "Have faith in God. Verily I say
unto you, Whosoever shall say unto this mountain, 'Be thou taken up
and cast into the sea'; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall
believe that what he saith cometh to pass; he shall have it. Therefore
I say unto you, All things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe
that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. And whensoever ye stand
praying, forgive, if ye have aught against any one; that your Father
also who is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses."


THE CHALLENGE OF CHRIST'S AUTHORITY.

And they came again to Jerusalem. And all the people came early in the
morning to him in the temple to hear him. And as he was teaching the
people in the temple, and preaching the gospel, there came upon him the
chief priests and the scribes with the elders; and they spake, saying
unto him, "Tell us: By what authority doest thou these things? or who is
he that gave thee this authority?"

And Jesus answered, and said unto them, "I also will ask you one question,
which if ye tell me, I likewise will tell you by what authority I do these
things. The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven or from men?"

And they reasoned with themselves, saying, "If we shall say, 'From
heaven'; he will say unto us, 'Why did ye not believe him?' But if we
shall say, 'From men'; all the people will stone us: for they are
persuaded that John was a prophet."

And they answered Jesus, and said, "We know not."

And Jesus said unto them, "Neither tell I you by what authority I do
these things."


THE TWO SONS.

"But what think ye? A man had two sons; and he came to the first, and
said, 'Son, go work to-day in the vineyard.' And he answered and said,
'I will not': but afterward he repented himself, and went. And he came
to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, 'I go, sir':
and went not. Which of the two did the will of his father?"

They say, "The first."

Jesus saith unto them, "Verily I say unto you, that the publicans and
the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. For John came unto
you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the
publicans and the harlots believed him; and ye, when ye saw it, did not
even repent yourselves afterward that ye might believe him."


THE WICKED HUSBANDMEN.

"Hear another parable: There was a man who was a householder, who
planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and digged a winepress
in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into
another country. And when the season of the fruits drew near, he sent
his servants to the husbandmen to receive his fruits. And the
husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and
stoned another. Again, he sent other servants more than the first; and
they did unto them in like manner. But afterward he sent unto them his
son, saying, 'They will reverence my son.' But the husbandmen, when
they saw the son, said among themselves, 'This is the heir; come, let
us kill him, and take his inheritance.' And they took him, and cast
him forth out of the vineyard, and killed him. When therefore the lord
of the vineyard shall come, what will he do unto those husbandmen?"

They say unto him, "He will miserably destroy those miserable men, and
will let out the vineyard unto other husbandmen, who shall render him
the fruits in their seasons."

Jesus saith unto them, "Did ye never read in the scriptures,

        'The stone which the builders rejected,
        The same was made the head of the corner;
        This was from the Lord,
        And it is marvellous in our eyes'?

Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken away from
you, and shall be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.
And he that falleth on this stone shall be broken to pieces; but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will scatter him as dust."

And when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they
perceived that he spake of them. And when they sought to lay hold on
him, they feared the multitudes, because they took him for a prophet.


THE MARRIAGE OF THE KING'S SON.

And Jesus answered and spake again in parables unto them, saying, "The
kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain king, who made a marriage feast
for his son, and sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to
the marriage feast: and they would not come. Again he sent forth other
servants, saying, Tell them that are bidden, 'Behold, I have made ready my
dinner; my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready; come
to the marriage feast.' But they made light of it, and went their ways, one
to his own farm, another to his merchandise; and the rest laid hold on his
servants, and treated them shamefully, and killed them. But the king was
wroth; and he sent his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned
their city. Then saith he to his servants, 'The wedding is ready, but they
that were bidden were not worthy. Go ye therefore unto the partings of the
highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage feast.' And
those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as
many as they found, both bad and good; and the wedding was filled with
guests. But when the king came in to behold the guests, he saw there a man
who had not on a wedding-garment: and he saith unto him, 'Friend, how
camest thou in hither not having a wedding-garment?' And he was speechless.
Then the king said to the servants, 'Bind him hand and foot and cast him
out into the outer darkness'; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing
of teeth. For many are called, but few chosen."


TRIBUTE TO CAESAR.

Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might ensnare him
in his talk so as to deliver him up to the rule and to the authority
of the governor. And they send to him their disciples, with the
Herodians, saying, "Teacher, we know that thou art true, and teachest
the way of God in truth, and carest not for any one: for thou
regardest not the person of men. Tell us therefore, What thinkest
thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?"

But Jesus perceived their craftiness, and said, "Why make ye trial of
me, ye hypocrites? Show me the tribute money."

And they brought unto him a denarius. And he saith unto them, "Whose is
this image and superscription?"

They say unto him, "Caesar's."

Then he saith unto them, "Render therefore unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's."

And when they heard it, they marvelled, and left him, and went away.


THE QUESTION OF THE RESURRECTION.

And there came to him certain of the Sadducees, they that say that
there is no resurrection; and they asked him, saying, "Teacher, Moses
wrote unto us, that if a man's brother die, having a wife, and he be
childless, his brother should take the wife, and raise up seed unto
his brother. There were therefore seven brethren: and the first took a
wife, and died childless; and the second; and the third took her; and
likewise the seven also left no children, and died. Afterward the
woman also died. In the resurrection therefore whose wife of them
shall she be? for the seven had her to wife."

And Jesus said unto them, "Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the
power of God. The sons of this world marry, and are given in marriage; but
they that are accounted worthy to attain to that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage: for
neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are
sons of God, being sons of the resurrection. But that the dead are raised,
even Moses showed, in the place concerning the Bush, when he calleth the
Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Now he
is not the God of the dead, but of the living: for all live unto him."

And when the multitudes heard it, they were astonished at his teaching.


THE GREATEST COMMANDMENT.

And one of the scribes came, and heard them questioning together, and
knowing that he had answered them well, asked him, "What commandment is
the first of all?"

Jesus answered, "The first is, 'Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the
Lord is one: and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength.' The second is this, 'Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself.' There is none other commandment greater than these."

And the scribe said unto him, "Of a truth, Teacher, thou hast well said
that he is one: and there is none other but he: and to love him with all
the heart, and with all the understanding and with all the strength, and
to love his neighbor as himself, is much more than all whole
burnt-offerings and sacrifices."

And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him, "Thou
art not far from the kingdom of God."


THE UNANSWERABLE QUESTION OF JESUS.

Now while the Pharisees were gathered together Jesus asked them a
question, saying, "What think ye of the Christ? whose son is he?"

They say unto him, "The son of David."

He saith unto them, "How then doth David in the Spirit call him Lord,
saying,

        'The Lord said unto my Lord,
        Sit thou on my right hand,
        Till I put thine enemies underneath thy feet?'

If David then calleth him Lord, how is he his son?"

And no one was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from
that day forth ask him any more questions.

And the common people heard him gladly.


DISCOURSE OF JESUS AGAINST THE SCRIBES AND PHARISEES.

Then spake Jesus to the multitudes and to his disciples, saying, "The
scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat: all things therefore
whatsoever they bid you, these do and observe: but do not ye after their
works; for they say, and do not. Yea, they bind heavy burdens and grievous
to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not
move them with their finger. But all their works they do to be seen of men:
for they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their
garments, and love the chief place at feasts, and the chief seats in the
synagogues, and the salutations in the market-places, and to be called of
men, 'Rabbi.' But be not ye called 'Rabbi,' for one is your teacher, and
all ye are brethren. And call no man your father on the earth: for one is
your Father, even he who is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters: for
one is your master, even the Christ. But he that is greatest among you
shall be your servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled:
and whosoever shall humble himself shall be exalted.

"But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye shut
the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye enter not in yourselves,
neither suffer ye them that are entering in to enter.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and
land to make one proselyte; and when he is become so, ye make him
twofold more a son of hell than yourselves.

"Woe unto you, ye blind guides, that say, 'Whosoever shall swear by the
temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the
temple, he is a debtor.' Ye fools and blind: for which is greater, the
gold, or the temple that hath sanctified the gold? And, 'Whosoever
shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by
the gift that is upon it, he is a debtor.' Ye blind: for which is
greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift? He therefore
that sweareth by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all things thereon.
And he that sweareth by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him that
dwelleth therein. And he that sweareth by the heaven, sweareth by the
throne of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye tithe mint and
anise and cummin, and have left undone the weightier matters of the law,
justice, and mercy, and faith: but these ye ought to have done, and not
to have left the other undone. Ye blind guides, that strain out the
gnat, and swallow the camel!

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye cleanse the
outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full from
extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of
the cup and of the platter, that the outside thereof may become clean also.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto
whited sepulchres, which outwardly appear beautiful, but inwardly are
full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also
outwardly appear righteous unto men, but inwardly ye are full of
hypocrisy and iniquity.

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye build the
sepulchres of the prophets, and garnish the tombs of the righteous,
and say, 'If we had been in the days of our fathers, we should not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.' Wherefore
ye witness to yourselves, that ye are sons of them that slew the
prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye
offspring of vipers, how shall ye escape the judgment of hell?
Therefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and
scribes: some of them shall ye kill and crucify; and some of them
shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city:
that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from
the blood of Abel the righteous unto the blood of Zachariah son of
Barachiah, whom ye slew between the sanctuary and the altar. Verily I
say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.

"O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth the prophets, and stoneth them
that are sent unto her! how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto
you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, 'Blessed is he
that cometh in the name of the Lord.'"


THE WIDOW'S TWO MITES.

And he sat down over against the treasury, and beheld how the multitude
cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much. And
there came a poor widow, and she cast in two mites, which make a farthing.
And he called unto him his disciples, and said unto them, "Verily, I say
unto you, This poor widow cast in more than all they that are casting into
the treasury: for they all did cast in of their superfluity; but she of her
want did cast in all that she had, even all her living."


THE GENTILES SEEK JESUS.

Now there were certain Greeks among those that went up to worship at the
feast: these therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee,
and asked him, saying, "Sir, we would see Jesus."

Philip cometh and telleth Andrew: Andrew cometh, and Philip, and they
tell Jesus.

And Jesus answereth them, saying, "The hour is come, that the Son of man
should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a grain of
wheat fall into the earth and die, it abideth by itself alone; but if it
die, it beareth much fruit. He that loveth his life loseth it: and he
that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal. If
any man serve me, let him follow me: and where I am, there shall also my
servant be: if any man serve me, him will the Father honor. Now is my
soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. But
for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name."

There came therefore a voice out of heaven, saying, "I have both
glorified it, and will glorify it again."

The multitude, therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it had
thundered: others said, "An angel hath spoken to him."

Jesus answered and said, "This voice hath not come for my sake, but for
your sakes. Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of
this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will
draw all men unto myself."

But this he said, signifying by what manner of death he should die.

The multitude therefore answered him, "We have heard out of the law that
the Christ abideth forever: and how sayest thou, 'The Son of man must be
lifted up'? who is this Son of man?"

Jesus therefore said unto them, "Yet a little while is the light among
you. Walk while ye have the light that darkness overtake you not: and he
that walketh in the darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye
have the light, believe on the light, that ye may become sons of light."

These things spake Jesus, and he departed and hid himself from them.


THE JEWS REJECT JESUS.

But though he had done so many signs before them, yet they believed not on
him: that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which he
spake,

        "Lord, who hath believed our report?
        And to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?"

For this cause they could not believe, for that Isaiah said again,

        "He hath blinded their eyes, and he hardened their heart;
        Lest they should see with their eyes, and perceive with their
              heart,
        And should turn,
        And I should heal them."

These things said Isaiah, because he saw his glory; and he spake of him.
Nevertheless even of the rulers many believed on him; but because of the
Pharisees they did not confess it, lest they should be put out of the
synagogue: for they loved the glory that is of men more than the glory that
is of God.

And Jesus cried and said, "He that believeth on me, believeth not on me,
but on him that sent me. And he that beholdeth me beholdeth him that
sent me. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on
me may not abide in the darkness. And if any man hear my sayings, and
keep them not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the world, but
to save the world. He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my sayings,
hath one that judgeth him: the word that I spake, the same shall judge
him in the last day. For I spake not from myself; but the Father that
sent me, he hath given me a commandment, what I should say, and what I
should speak. And I know that his commandment is life eternal; the things
therefore which I speak, even as the Father hath said unto me, so I speak."


DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE FUTURE.

And Jesus went out from the temple, and was going on his way; and his
disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple.

But he answered and said unto them, "See ye not all these things? Verily
I say unto you, There shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down."

And as he sat on the mount of Olives over against the temple, Peter and
James and John and Andrew asked him privately, "Tell us, when shall
these things be? and what shall be the sign when these things are all
about to be accomplished?"

And Jesus began to say unto them, "Take heed that no man lead you
astray. Many shall come in my name, saying, 'I am he,' and shall lead
many astray. And when ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars, be not
troubled: these things must needs come to pass; but the end is not yet.
For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there
shall be earthquakes in divers places; there shall be famines: these
things are the beginning of the travail.

"But take ye heed to yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to
councils; and in synagogues shall ye be beaten; and before governors
and kings shall ye stand for my sake, for a testimony unto them. And
the gospel must first be preached unto all the nations. And when they
lead you to judgment, and deliver you up, be not anxious beforehand
what ye shall speak; but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour,
that speak ye; for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Spirit. But
ye shall be delivered up even by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk,
and friends: and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And
ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake.

"And then shall many stumble, and shall deliver up one another, and shall
hate one another. And many false prophets shall arise, and shall lead many
astray. And because iniquity shall be multiplied, the love of the many
shall wax cold. But he that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved.

"But when ye see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that her
desolation is at hand. Then let them that are in Judaea flee unto the
mountains; let him that is on the housetop not go down to take out the
things that are in his house; and let him that is in the field not
return back to take his cloak. For these are days of vengeance, that all
things which are written may be fulfilled.

"But woe unto them that are with child and to them that give suck in
those days! And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither
on a Sabbath: for then shall be great tribulation, such as hath not been
from the beginning of the world until now, no, nor ever shall be. And
except those days had been shortened, no flesh would have been saved:
but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened. Then if any man
shall say unto you, 'Lo, here is the Christ,' or, 'Here,' believe it
not. For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders; so as to lead astray, if possible, even
the elect. But take ye heed: behold, I have told you all things
beforehand. If, therefore, they shall say unto you, 'Behold, he is in
the wilderness,' go not forth: 'Behold, he is in the inner chambers,'
believe it not. For as the lightning cometh forth from the east and is
seen even unto the west, so shall be the coming of the Son of man.
Wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

"But immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall
fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken: and
then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall
all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man
coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he
shall send forth his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and shall
gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part
of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.

"Now from the fig tree learn her parable: when her branch is now become
tender, and putteth forth its leaves, ye know that the summer is nigh; even
so ye also, when ye see all these things, know ye that he is nigh, even at
the doors. Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass away till
all these things be accomplished. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my
words shall not pass away. But of that day and hour knoweth no one, not
even the angels of heaven, neither the Son, but the Father only.

"But take heed to yourselves, lest haply your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day come
on you suddenly as a snare; for so shall it come upon all them that
dwell on the face of all the earth. But watch ye at every season, making
supplication, that ye may prevail to escape all these things that shall
come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.

"And as were the days of Noah, so shall be the coming of the Son of man.
For as in those days which were before the flood they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered
into the ark, and they knew not until the flood came, and took them all
away; so shall be the coming of the Son of man. Then shall two men be in
the field; one is taken, and one is left; two women shall be grinding at
the mill; one is taken, and one is left. Watch therefore: for ye know not
on what day your Lord cometh.

"But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what watch
the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have suffered
his house to be broken through. Therefore be ye also ready; for in an
hour that ye think not the Son of man cometh.

"Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is. It is as
when a man, sojourning in another country, having left his house, and given
authority to his servants, to each one his work, commanded also the porter
to watch. Watch therefore: for ye know not when the lord of the house
cometh, whether at even, or at midnight, or at cockcrowing, or in the
morning; lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. And what I say unto you
I say unto all, Watch.

"Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the lord hath set over his
household, to give them their food in due season? Blessed is that servant,
whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you,
that he will set him over all that he hath. But if that evil servant shall
say in his heart, 'My lord tarrieth'; and shall begin to beat his
fellow-servants, and shall eat and drink with the drunken; the lord of that
servant shall come in a day when he expecteth not, and in an hour when he
knoweth not, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint his portion with the
hypocrites: there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth."


THE PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS.

"Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, who
took their lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of
them were foolish, and five were wise. For the foolish, when they took
their lamps, took no oil with them: but the wise took oil in their
vessels with their lamps. Now while the bridegroom tarried, they all
slumbered and slept. But at midnight there is a cry, 'Behold, the
bridegroom! Come ye forth to meet him.' Then all those virgins arose,
and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise, 'Give us
of your oil; for our lamps are going out.' But the wise answered,
saying, 'Peradventure there will not be enough for us and you: go ye
rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.'

"And while they went away to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that
were ready went in with him to the marriage feast: and the door was
shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, 'Lord, Lord, open
to us.' But he answered and said, 'Verily I say unto you, I know you not.'

"Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour."


THE PARABLE OF THE TALENTS.

"For it is as when a man, going into another country, called his own
servants, and delivered unto them his goods. And unto one he gave five
talents, to another two, to another one; to each according to his several
ability; and he went on his journey. Straightway he that received the five
talents went and traded with them, and made other five talents. In like
manner he also that received the two gained other two. But he that received
the one went away and digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money.

"Now after a long time the lord of these servants cometh, and maketh a
reckoning with them. And he that received the five talents came and brought
other five talents, saying, 'Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents:
lo, I have gained other five talents.' His lord said unto him, 'Well done,
good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I
will set thee over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy lord.'

"And he also that received the two talents came and said, 'Lord, thou
deliveredst unto me two talents: lo, I have gained other two talents.'

"His lord said unto him, 'Well done, good and faithful servant: thou
hast been faithful over a few things, I will set thee over many things;
enter thou into the joy of thy lord.'

"And he also that had received the one talent came and said, 'Lord, I
knew thee that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou didst not sow,
and gathering where thou didst not scatter; and I was afraid, and went
away and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, thou hast thine own.'

"But his lord answered and said unto him, 'Thou wicked and slothful
servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I did
not scatter; thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the bankers,
and at my coming I should have received back mine own with interest. Take
ye away therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him that hath the
ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have
abundance; but from him that hath not, even that which he hath shall be
taken away. And cast ye out the unprofitable servant into the outer
darkness: there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.'"


THE JUDGMENT SCENE.

"But when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the angels with
him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory: and before him shall be
gathered all the nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as
the shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats; and he shall set the
sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall the King say
unto them on his right hand, 'Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: for I was
hungry, and ye gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a
stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye
visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me.'

"Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, 'Lord, when saw we thee
hungry, and fed thee? or athirst, and gave thee drink? And when saw we
thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? And when
saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?' And the King shall
answer and say unto them, 'Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it
unto one of these my children, even these least, ye did it unto me.'

"Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, 'Depart from me, ye
cursed, into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his
angels: for I was hungry, and ye did not give me to eat; I was thirsty, and
ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye
clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.' Then shall
they also answer, saying, 'Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or athirst, or a
stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?'
Then shall he answer them, saying, 'Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye
did it not unto one of these least, ye did it not unto me.' And these shall
go away into eternal punishment: but the righteous into eternal life."


THE CONSPIRACY AGAINST JESUS.

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these words, he said
unto his disciples, "Ye know that after two days the passover cometh,
and the Son of man is delivered up to be crucified."

Then were gathered together the chief priests, the elders of the people,
unto the court of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas; and they took
counsel together that they might take Jesus by subtlety, and kill him. But
they said, "Not during the feast, lest a tumult arise among the people."

And Satan entered into Judas, who was called Iscariot, being of the number
of the twelve. And he went away and communed with the chief priests and
captains, how he might deliver him unto them. And they were glad, and they
weighed unto him thirty pieces of silver. And from that time he sought
opportunity to deliver him unto them in the absence of the multitude.




WEDNESDAY--THE DAY OF RETIREMENT.


[There is no record of the events of this day. Jesus spent it in
retirement, almost certainly in the home of his friends at Bethany.]




THURSDAY--THE DAY OF FELLOWSHIP.


PREPARATION FOR THE PASSOVER.

And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the
passover, his disciples say unto him, "Where wilt thou that we go and
make ready that thou mayest eat the passover?"

And he sendeth two of his disciples, and saith unto them, "Go into the
city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water; follow
him; and wheresoever he shall enter in, say to the master of the house,
'The Teacher saith, My time is at hand. Where is my guest-chamber, where
I shall eat the passover with my disciples?' And he will himself show
you a large upper room furnished and ready: and there make ready for us."

And the disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he
had said unto them: and they made ready the passover.


STRIFE AMONG THE DISCIPLES.

And when it was evening he cometh with the twelve. And there arose also
a contention among them, which of them was accounted to be greatest. And
he said unto them, "The kings of the Gentiles have lordship over them;
and they that have authority over them are called Benefactors. But ye
shall not be so: but he that is the greater among you, let him become as
the younger: and he that is chief, as he that doth serve. For which is
greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that serveth? Is not he that
sitteth at meat? But I am in the midst of you as he that serveth. But ye
are they that have continued with me in my temptations; and I appoint
unto you a kingdom, even as my Father appointed unto me, that ye may
eat and drink at my table in my kingdom; and ye shall sit on thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel."


JESUS WASHING THE DISCIPLES' FEET.

Now before the feast of the passover, Jesus knowing that his hour was
come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having
loved his own that were in the world, he loved them unto the end.

And during supper, the devil having already put into the heart of Judas
Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him, Jesus, knowing that the Father had
given all things into his hands, and that he came forth from God, and
goeth unto God, riseth from supper, and layeth aside his garments; and
he took a towel, and girded himself. Then he poureth water into the
basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the
towel wherewith he was girded.

So he cometh to Simon Peter. He saith unto him, "Lord, dost thou wash my
feet?"

Jesus answered and said unto him, "What I do thou knowest not now; but
thou shalt understand hereafter."

Peter saith unto him, "Thou shalt never wash my feet."

Jesus answered him, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me."

Simon Peter saith unto him, "Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands
and my head."

Jesus saith to him, "He that is bathed needeth not save to wash his
feet, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all." For he
knew him that should betray him; therefore said he, "Ye are not all clean."

So when he had washed their feet, and taken his garments, and sat down
again, he said unto them, "Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call me
Teacher, and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. If I then, the Lord
and the Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one
another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye also should do
as I have done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, A servant is not
greater than his lord; neither one that is sent greater than he that
sent him. If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them.

"I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but that the scripture
may be fulfilled, He that eateth my bread lifted up his heel against me.
From henceforth I tell you before it come to pass, that, when it is come to
pass, ye may believe that I am he. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that
receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me
receiveth him that sent me."


THE BETRAYER POINTED OUT.

When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in the spirit, and testified, and
said, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me."

The disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake. And
they were exceeding sorrowful, and began to say unto him every one,
"Is it I, Lord?"

And he answered and said, "He that dipped his hand with me in the dish,
the same shall betray me. The Son of man goeth, even as it is written of
him: but woe unto that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! Good
were it for that man if he had not been born."

And Judas, who betrayed him, answered and said, "Is it I, Rabbi?"

He saith unto him, "Thou hast said."

There was at the table reclining in Jesus' bosom one of his disciples,
whom Jesus loved. Simon Peter therefore beckoneth to him, and saith unto
him, "Tell us who it is of whom he speaketh."

He leaning back, as he was, on Jesus' breast, saith unto him, "Lord, who
is it?"

Jesus therefore answereth, "He it is, for whom I shall dip the sop, and
give it him."

So when he had dipped the sop, he taketh and giveth it to Judas, the son
of Simon Iscariot. And after the sop, then entered Satan into him.

Jesus therefore saith unto him, "What thou doest, do quickly."

Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him. For
some thought because Judas had the bag, that Jesus said unto him, "Buy
what things we have need of for the feast," or that he should give
something to the poor. He then having received the sop went out
straightway: and it was night.

When therefore he was gone out, Jesus saith, "Now is the Son of man
glorified, and God is glorified in him; and God shall glorify him in
himself, and straightway shall he glorify him."


THE LORD'S SUPPER.

And he said unto them, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover
with you before I suffer: for I say unto you, I shall not eat it until
it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God."

And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave
to them, saying, "This is my body; which is given for you; this do in
remembrance of me."

And he took a cup, in like manner after supper, and gave thanks, and gave
to them, saying, "Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the new
covenant, which is poured out for you, for many, unto remission of sins.
Take this and divide it among yourselves; for I say unto you, I shall not
drink from henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until the Kingdom of God
shall come."


THE FAREWELL CONVERSATION.

"Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and
as I said unto the Jews, 'Whither I go, ye cannot come,' so now I say unto
you. A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another; even as I
have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another."

Simon Peter saith unto him, "Lord, whither goest thou?"

Jesus answered, "Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou
shalt follow afterwards."

And Jesus saith unto them, "All ye shall be offended: for it is written,
I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered abroad.
Howbeit, after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee."

But Peter said unto him, "Although all shall be offended, yet will not I."

And Jesus saith unto him, "Verily I say unto thee, that thou to-day,
even this night, before the cock crow twice, shalt deny me thrice.
Simon, Simon, behold Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you as
wheat: but I make supplication for thee, that thy faith fail not: and do
thou, when once thou hast turned again, establish thy brethren."

But he spake vehemently, "If I must die with thee, I will not deny
thee." And in like manner also said they all.

       *       *       *       *       *

And he said unto them, "When I sent you forth without purse, and wallet,
and shoes, lacked ye anything?"

And they said, "Nothing."

And he said unto them, "But now, he that hath a purse, let him take it,
and likewise a wallet; and he that hath none, let him sell his cloak,
and buy a sword. For I say unto you, that this which is written must be
fulfilled in me, 'And he was reckoned with transgressors': for that
which concerneth me hath fulfillment."

And they said, "Lord, behold, here are two swords."

And he said unto them, "It is enough."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Let not your heart be troubled; believe in God, believe also in me. In
my Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have
told you; for I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a
place for you, I come again, and will receive you unto myself; that
where I am, there ye may be also. And whither I go, ye know the way."

Thomas saith unto him, "Lord, we know not whither thou goest; how know
we the way?"

Jesus saith unto him, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no one
cometh unto the Father, but by me. If ye had known me, ye would have
known my Father also: from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him."

Philip saith unto him, "Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us."

Jesus saith unto him, "Have I been so long time with you, and dost thou
not know me, Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen the Father; how
sayest thou, 'Show us the Father'? Believest thou not that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me? The words that I say unto you I speak not
from myself: but the Father abiding in me doeth his works. Believe me
that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for
the very works' sake. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth
on me, the works that I do shall he do also: and greater works than
these shall he do; because I go unto the Father. And whatsoever ye shall
ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the
Son. If ye shall ask anything in my name, that will I do. If ye love
me, ye will keep my commandments. And I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, even
the Spirit of truth: whom the world cannot receive; for it beholdeth him
not, neither knoweth him: ye know him, for he abideth with you, and
shall be in you. I will not leave you desolate: I come unto you.

"Yet a little while, and the world beholdeth me no more; but ye behold me:
because I live, ye shall live also. In that day ye shall know that I am in
my Father, and ye in me, and I in you. He that hath my commandments, and
keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved
of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself unto him."

Judas (not Iscariot) saith unto him, "Lord, what is come to pass that
thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?"

Jesus answered and said unto him, "If a man love me, he will keep my
word: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make
our abode with him. He that loveth me not keepeth not my words: and the
word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's who sent me.

"These things have I spoken unto you, while yet abiding with you. But
the Comforter, even the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all
that I said unto you. Peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto you:
not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be fearful. Ye heard how I said to you, I go
away, and I come unto you. If ye loved me, ye would have rejoiced,
because I go unto the Father: for the Father is greater than I.

"And now I have told you before it come to pass, that, when it is come
to pass, ye may believe. I will no more speak much with you, for the
prince of the world cometh: and he hath nothing in me; but that the
world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father gave me
commandment, even so I do."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in me
that beareth not fruit, he taketh it away: and every branch that beareth
fruit, he cleanseth it, that it may bear more fruit. Already ye are clean
because of the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in me, and I in
you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the
vine; so neither can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the
branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same beareth much fruit:
for apart from me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in me, he is cast
forth as a branch, and is withered; and they gather them, and cast them
into the fire, and they are burned. If ye abide in me, and my words abide
in you, ask whatsoever ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Herein is my
Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit: and so shall ye be my disciples.
Even as the Father hath loved me, I also have loved you: abide ye in my
love. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have
kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love.

"These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy may be in you, and
that your joy may be made full. This is my commandment, that ye love
one another, even as I have loved you. Greater love hath no man than
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ye are my friends,
if ye do the things which I command you. No longer do I call you
servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have
called you friends; for all things that I heard from my Father I have
made known unto you. Ye did not choose me, but I chose you, and
appointed you, that ye should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit
should abide: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name,
he may give it you. These things I command you, that ye may love one
another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hath hated me before
it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love its own:
but because ye are not of the world, but I chose you out of the world,
therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto
you, A servant is not greater than his lord. If they persecuted me,
they will also persecute you; if they kept my word, they will keep
yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for my name's
sake, because they know not him that sent me. If I had not come and
spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no excuse
for their sin. He that hateth me hateth my Father also. If I had not
done among them the works which none other did, they had not had sin:
but now have they both seen and hated me and my Father. But this
cometh to pass, that the word may be fulfilled that is written in
their law, 'They hated me without a cause.' But when the Comforter is
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of
truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall bear witness of me:
and ye also bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning.

"These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be caused to
stumble. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the hour
cometh, that whosoever killeth you shall think that he offereth
service unto God. And these things will they do, because they have not
known the Father, nor me. But these things have I spoken unto you,
that when their hour is come, ye may remember them, how that I told
you. And these things I said not unto you from the beginning, because
I was with you. But now I go unto him that sent me; and none of you
asketh me, 'Whither goest thou?' But because I have spoken these
things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart. Nevertheless I tell
you the truth: It is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not
away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I go, I will send
him unto you. And he, when he is come, will convict the world in
respect of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: of sin, because
they believe not on me; of righteousness, because I go to the Father,
and ye behold me no more; of judgment, because the prince of this
world hath been judged. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come,
he shall guide you into all the truth: for he shall not speak from
himself; but what things soever he shall hear, these shall he speak:
and he shall declare unto you the things that are to come. He shall
glorify me: for he shall take of mine, and shall declare it unto you.
All things whatsoever the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that
he taketh of mine, and shall declare it unto you. A little while, and
ye behold me no more; and again a little while, and ye shall see me."

Some of his disciples therefore said one to another, "What is this that
he saith unto us, 'A little while, and ye behold me not; and again a
little while, and ye shall see me': and 'Because I go to the Father'?"

They said therefore, "What is this that he saith, 'A little while'? We
know not what he saith."

Jesus perceived that they were desirous to ask him, and he said unto them,
"Do ye inquire among yourselves concerning this, that I said, 'A little
while, and ye behold me not, and again a little while, and ye shall see
me'? Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the
world shall rejoice: ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy. A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is
come: but when she is delivered of the child she remembereth no more the
anguish, for the joy that a man is born into the world. And ye therefore
now have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice,
and your joy no one taketh away from you. And in that day ye shall ask me
no question. Verily, verily, I say unto you, If ye shall ask anything of
the Father, he will give it you in my name. Hitherto have ye asked nothing
in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be made full.

"These things have I spoken unto you in dark sayings: the hour cometh,
when I shall no more speak unto you in dark sayings, but shall tell you
plainly of the Father. In that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say
not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you; for the Father
himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I
came forth from the Father. I came out from the Father, and am come into
the world; again, I leave the world, and go unto the Father."

His disciples say, "Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no dark
saying. Now know we that thou knowest all things, and needest not that any
man should ask thee: by this we believe that thou camest forth from God."

Jesus answered them, "Do ye now believe? Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is
come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me
alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me. These things
have I spoken unto you, that in me ye may have peace. In the world ye have
tribulation: but be of good cheer: I have overcome the world."


THE INTERCESSORY PRAYER.

These things spake Jesus; and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said,
"Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that the Son may glorify thee:
even as thou gavest him authority over all flesh, that to all whom thou
hast given him, he should give eternal life. And this is life eternal, that
they should know thee the only true God, and him whom thou didst send, even
Jesus Christ. I glorified thee on the earth, having accomplished the work
which thou hast given me to do. And now, Father, glorify thou me with thine
own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. I
manifested thy name unto the men whom thou gavest me out of the world:
thine they were, and thou gavest them to me; and they have kept thy word.
Now they know that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are from thee:
for the words which thou gavest me I have given unto them; and they
received them, and knew of a truth that I came forth from thee, and they
believed that thou didst send me. I pray for them: I pray not for the
world, but for those whom thou hast given me; for they are thine: and all
things that are mine are thine, and thine are mine: and I am glorified in
them. And I am no more in the world, and these are in the world, and I come
to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy name which thou hast given me, that
they may be one, even as we are. While I was with them, I kept them in thy
name which thou hast given me; and I guarded them, and not one of them
perished, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled.
But now I come to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they
may have my joy made full in themselves. I have given them thy word, and
the world hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not
of the world. I pray not that thou shouldest take them from the world, but
that thou shouldest keep them from the evil one. They are not of the world,
even as I am not of the world. Sanctify them in the truth: thy word is
truth. As thou didst send me into the world, even so sent I them into the
world. And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they themselves also may
be sanctified in truth. Neither for these only do I pray, but for them also
that believe on me through their word; that they may all be one; even as
thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be in us: that
the world may believe that thou didst send me. And the glory which thou
hast given me I have given unto them; that they may be one, even as we are
one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be perfected into one; that
the world may know that thou didst send me, and lovedst them, even as thou
lovedst me. Father, I desire that they also whom thou hast given me be with
me where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for
thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world. O righteous Father, the
world knew thee not, but I knew thee; and these knew that thou didst send
me; and I made known unto them thy name, and will make it known; that the
love wherewith thou lovedst me may be in them, and I in them."

And when they had sung a hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.




FRIDAY--THE DAY OF SUFFERING.


THE AGONY IN GETHSEMANE.

And they come unto a place which was named Gethsemane: and he saith unto
his disciples, "Sit ye here, while I pray."

And he taketh with him Peter and James and John, and began to be greatly
amazed, and sore troubled. And he saith unto them, "My soul is exceeding
sorrowful even unto death: abide ye here, and watch."

And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that,
if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him.

And he said, "Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; remove
this cup from me: howbeit not what I will, but what thou wilt."

And there appeared unto him an angel from heaven, strengthening him.

And being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly; and his sweat became as
it were great drops of blood falling down upon the ground.

And when he rose up from his prayer, he came unto the disciples, and
found them sleeping for sorrow, and said unto Peter, "Simon, sleepest
thou? Couldest thou not watch one hour? Watch and pray, that ye enter
not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."

Again a second time he went away, and prayed, saying, "My Father, if
this cannot pass away, except I drink it, thy will be done."

And he came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
And he left them again, and went away, and prayed a third time, saying
the same words.

Then cometh he to the disciples, and saith unto them, "Sleep on now,
and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners.

"Arise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that betrayeth me."


THE BETRAYAL AND ARREST.

And straightway, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve,
and with him a multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests
and the scribes and the elders.

Now he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying, "Whomsoever I
shall kiss, that is he; take him, and lead him away safely." And when he
was come, straightway he came to him, and saith, "Rabbi," and kissed him.

But Jesus said unto him, "Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a
kiss?"

Jesus, therefore, knowing all the things that were coming upon him, went
forth, and saith unto them, "Whom seek ye?"

They answered him, "Jesus of Nazareth."

Jesus saith unto them, "I am he."

And Judas also, who betrayed him, was standing with them. When therefore
he said unto them, "I am he," they went backward, and fell to the ground.

Again therefore he asked them, "Whom seek ye?"

And they said, "Jesus of Nazareth."

Jesus answered, "I told you that I am he; if therefore ye seek me, let
these go their way": that the word might be fulfilled which he spake,
"Of those whom thou hast given me I lost not one."

And when they that were about him saw what would follow, they said,
"Lord, shall we smite with the sword?"

Simon Peter therefore having a sword drew it, and struck the high priest's
servant, and cut off his right ear. Now the servant's name was Malchus.

But Jesus answered and said, "Suffer ye them thus far." And he touched
his ear, and healed him.

Then saith Jesus unto Peter, "Put up again thy sword into its place:
for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Or
thinkest thou that I cannot beseech my Father and he shall even now
send me more than twelve legions of angels? How then should the
scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? The cup which the
Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?"

And Jesus said unto the chief priests and captains of the temple, and
elders, that were come against him, "Are ye come out as against a
robber, with swords and staves? When I was daily with you in the
temple, ye stretched not forth your hands against me: but this is your
hour, and the power of darkness."

Then all the disciples left him, and fled.

And a certain young man followed with him, having a linen cloth cast
about him, over his naked body: and they lay hold on him; but he left
the linen cloth, and fled naked.


THE TRIAL BEFORE THE JEWISH AUTHORITIES.

So the band and the chief captain, and the officers of the Jews,
seized Jesus and bound him, and led him to Annas first; for he was
father in law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. Now Caiaphas
was he that gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one
man should die for the people.

And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple. Now that
disciple was known unto the high priest, and entered in with Jesus into
the court of the high priest; but Peter was standing at the door
without. So the other disciple, who was known unto the high priest,
went out and spake unto her that kept the door, and brought in Peter.

The maid therefore that kept the door saith unto Peter, "Art thou also
one of this man's disciples?"

He saith, "I am not."

Now the servants and the officers were standing there, having made a
fire of coals; for it was cold; and they were warming themselves; and
Peter also was with them standing and warming himself.

The high priest therefore asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his
teaching. Jesus answered him, "I have spoken openly to the world; I even
taught in synagogues, and in the temple, where all the Jews come together;
and in secret spake I nothing. Why askest thou me? Ask them that have heard
me, what I spake unto them: behold, these know the things which I said."

And when he had said this, one of the officers standing by struck Jesus
with his hand, saying, "Answerest thou the high priest so?"

Jesus answered him, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil;
but if well, why smitest thou me?"

Annas therefore sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.

Now the chief priests and the whole council sought witness against Jesus to
put him to death; and found it not. For many bare false witness against
him, and their witness agreed not together. And there stood up certain, and
bare false witness against him, saying, "We heard him say, I will destroy
this temple that is made with hands, and in three days I will build another
made without hands." And not even so did their witness agree together.

And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying,
"Answerest thou nothing? What is it which these witness against thee?"

But he held his peace, and answered nothing.

And the high priest said unto him, "I adjure thee by the living God,
that thou tell us whether thou art the Christ, the Son of God."

And Jesus said, "I am: and ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the
right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of heaven."

And the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, "What further need have
we of witnesses? Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye?"

And they all condemned him to be worthy of death.

Then did they spit in his face and buffet him. And they blindfolded him
and smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, "Prophesy unto us,
thou Christ: who is he that struck thee?"


THE DENIAL OF PETER.

And as Peter was beneath in the court, there cometh one of the maids of
the high priest; and seeing Peter warming himself, she looked upon him,
and saith, "Thou also wast with the Nazarene, even Jesus."

But he denied, saying, "I neither know nor understand what thou sayest,"
and he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.

And after a little while they that stood by came and said to Peter, "Of
a truth thou also art one of them; for thy speech maketh thee known."

Then began he to curse and to swear, "I know not the man." And
straightway the cock crew.

And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the
word of the Lord, how that he said unto him, "Before the cock crow twice
thou shalt deny me thrice."

And he went out, and wept bitterly.

And straightway in the morning the chief priests with the elders and
scribes, and the whole council, held a consultation, and bound Jesus,
and carried him away, and delivered him up to Pilate, the governor.


THE REMORSE OF JUDAS.

Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented
himself, and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests
and elders, saying, "I have sinned in that I betrayed innocent blood."

But they said, "What is that to us? See thou to it."

And he cast down the pieces of silver into the sanctuary, and departed;
and he went away and hanged himself.

And the chief priests took the pieces of silver, and said, "It is not
lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood."
And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter's field, to
bury strangers in. Wherefore that field was called, "The field of
blood," unto this day.

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet,
saying, "And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him
that was priced, whom certain of the children of Israel did price; and
they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me."


THE TRIAL BEFORE PILATE.

They led Jesus therefore from Caiaphas into the Praetorium: and it was
early; and they themselves entered not into the Praetorium, that they
might not be defiled, but might eat the passover. Pilate therefore went
out unto them, and saith, "What accusation bring ye against this man?"

They answered and said unto him, "If this man were not an evil-doer, we
should not have delivered him up unto thee."

Pilate therefore said unto them, "Take him yourselves, and judge him
according to your law."

The Jews said unto him, "It is not lawful for us to put any man to
death": that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake,
signifying by what manner of death he should die.

And they began to accuse him, saying, "We found this man perverting our
nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, and saying that he
himself is Christ a king."

And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered
nothing. Then saith Pilate unto him, "Hearest thou not how many things
they witness against thee?" And he gave him no answer, not even to one
word: insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.

Pilate therefore entered again into the Praetorium, and called Jesus, and
said unto him, "Art thou the King of the Jews?"

Jesus answered, "Sayest thou this of thyself, or did others tell it thee
concerning me?"

Pilate answered, "Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests
delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done?"

Jesus answered, "My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of
this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered
to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence."

Pilate therefore said unto him, "Art thou a king then?"

Jesus answered, "Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end have I been
born, and to this end am I come into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice."

Pilate saith unto him, "What is truth?"

And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith
unto them, "I find no crime in him."

But they were the more urgent, saying, "He stirreth up the people, teaching
throughout all Judaea, and beginning from Galilee, even unto this place."

But when Pilate heard it, he asked whether the man were a Galilaean. And
when he knew that he was of Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him unto
Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem in these days.


JESUS BEFORE HEROD.

Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad; for he was of a long time
desirous to see him, because he had heard concerning him; and he hoped to
see some miracle done by him. And he questioned him in many words; but he
answered him nothing. And the chief priests and the scribes stood,
vehemently accusing him. And Herod with his soldiers set him at nought, and
mocked him, and arraying him in gorgeous apparel sent him back to Pilate.

And Herod and Pilate became friends with each other that very day: for
before they were at enmity between themselves.


THE TRIAL BEFORE PILATE RESUMED.

And Pilate called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people,
and said unto them, "Ye brought unto me this man, as one that perverteth
the people: and behold, I, having examined him before you, found no fault
in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him: no, nor yet Herod:
for he sent him back unto us; and behold, nothing worthy of death hath been
done by him. I will therefore chastise him, and release him."

Now at the feast the governor was wont to release unto the multitude one
prisoner, whom they would. And they had then a notable prisoner, called
Barabbas, lying bound with them that had made insurrection, men who in
the insurrection had committed murder. And the multitude went up and
began to ask him to do as he was wont to do unto them.

And Pilate answered them, saying, "Will ye that I release unto you the
King of the Jews?" For he perceived that for envy the chief priests had
delivered him up.

Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes that they
should ask for Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.

But the governor answered and said unto them, "Which of the two will ye
that I release unto you?"

And they said, "Barabbas."

Pilate saith unto them, "What then shall I do unto Jesus who is called
Christ?"

They all say, "Let him be crucified."

And he said unto them a third time, "Why, what evil hath this man done? I
have found no cause of death in him: I will therefore chastise and release
him."

Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him.

And the soldiers led him away within the court, which is the Praetorium;
and they call together the whole band.

And they stripped him, and arrayed him in a purple garment. And they
platted a crown of thorns and put it upon his head, and a reed in his
right hand; and they kneeled down before him, and mocked him, saying:
"Hail, King of the Jews!" and they struck him with their hands. And they
spat upon him, and took the reed and smote him upon the head.

And Pilate went out again, and saith unto them, "Behold, I bring him out
to you, that ye may know that I find no crime in him."

Jesus therefore came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple
garment. And Pilate saith unto them, "Behold, the man!"

When therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried
out, saying, "Crucify him, crucify him!"

Pilate saith unto them, "Take him yourselves, and crucify him: for I
find no crime in him."

The Jews answered him, "We have a law, and by that law he ought to die,
because he made himself the Son of God."

When Pilate therefore heard this saying, he was the more afraid; and he
entered into the Praetorium again, and saith unto Jesus, "Whence art thou?"

But Jesus gave him no answer.

Pilate therefore saith unto him, "Speakest thou not unto me? Knowest thou
not that I have power to release thee, and have power to crucify thee?"

Jesus answered him, "Thou wouldest have no power against me, except it
were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee
hath greater sin."

Upon this Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out, saying,
"If thou release this man, thou art not Caesar's friend: every one that
maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar."

When Pilate therefore heard these words, he brought Jesus out, and sat
down on the judgment-seat at a place called The Pavement, but in
Hebrew, Gabbatha.

And while he was sitting on the judgment-seat, his wife sent unto him,
saying, "Have thou nothing to do with that righteous man; for I have
suffered many things this day in a dream because of him."

Now it was the Preparation of the passover: it was about the sixth hour.
And he saith unto the Jews, "Behold, your King."

They therefore cried out, "Away with him, away with him, crucify him!"

Pilate saith unto them, "Shall I crucify your King?"

The chief priests answered, "We have no king but Caesar."

So when Pilate saw that he prevailed nothing, but rather that a tumult
was arising, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude,
saying, "I am innocent of the blood of this righteous man; see ye to it."

And all the people answered and said, "His blood be on us, and on our
children."

And they were urgent with loud voices asking that he might be crucified.
And their voices prevailed.

And Pilate, wishing to content the multitude, gave sentence that what
they asked for should be done. And he released unto them Barabbas, him
that for insurrection and murder had been cast into prison, whom they
asked for; but Jesus he delivered up to their will.

And when they had mocked him, they took off from him the robe, and put
on him his garments, and led him away to crucify him.


THE SORROWFUL WAY.

They took Jesus therefore: and he went out, bearing the cross for himself.

And as they came out, they laid hold upon one Simon of Cyrene, the
father of Alexander and Rufus, who was passing by, coming from the
country; him they compelled to go with them, and laid on him the cross,
that he might bear it after Jesus.

And there followed him a great multitude of the people, and of women who
bewailed and lamented him.

But Jesus turning unto them said, "Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not
for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children. For behold,
the days are coming, in which they shall say, 'Blessed are the barren,
and the wombs that never bare, and the breasts that never gave suck.'
Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, 'Fall on us'; and to
the hills, 'Cover us.' For if they do these things in the green tree,
what shall be done in the dry?"

And there were also two others, malefactors, led with him to be put to
death.


THE CRUCIFIXION.

And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say,
The place of a skull, they gave him wine to drink mingled with gall: and
when he had tasted it, he would not drink.

There they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand and
the other on the left.

And Jesus said, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do."

And Pilate wrote a title also, and put it on the cross. And there was
written:

    --------------------------------------------
    | JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS. |
    --------------------------------------------

This title therefore read many of the Jews, for the place where Jesus
was crucified was nigh to the city; and it was written in Hebrew, and in
Latin, and in Greek.

The chief priests of the Jews therefore said to Pilate, "Write not, 'The
King of the Jews,' but that he said, 'I am King of the Jews.'"

Pilate answered, "What I have written I have written."

The soldiers therefore, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments
and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also the coat: now the
coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout. They said
therefore one to another, "Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it,
whose it shall be": that the scripture might be fulfilled, which saith,

        "They parted my garments among them,
        And upon my vesture did they cast lots."

These things therefore the soldiers did; and they sat and watched him
there.

And the people stood beholding.

And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying,
"Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save
thyself: if thou art the Son of God, come down from the cross."

In like manner also, the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes and
elders, said, "He saved others; himself he cannot save. Let the Christ,
the King of Israel, now come down from the cross, that we may see and
believe. He trusteth on God; let him deliver him now, if he desireth
him: for he said, I am the Son of God."

And one of the malefactors that were hanged railed on him, saying, "Art
not thou the Christ? Save thyself and us."

But the other answered, and rebuking him said, "Dost thou not even fear
God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for
we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing
amiss." And he said, "Jesus, remember me when thou comest in thy kingdom."

And he said unto him, "Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with
me in Paradise."

But there were standing by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his
mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene. When
Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by whom he
loved, he saith unto his mother, "Woman, behold thy son!"

Then saith he to the disciple, "Behold thy mother!"

And from that hour the disciple took her unto his owns home.

And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land
until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud
voice, "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?" which is, being interpreted, "My
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"

And some of them that stood by, when they heard it, said, "Behold, he
calleth Elijah."

After this, Jesus, knowing that all things are now finished, that the
scripture might be accomplished, saith, "I thirst."

There was set there a vessel full of vinegar: so they put a sponge full
of the vinegar upon hyssop, and brought it to his mouth. When Jesus
therefore had received the vinegar, he said, "It is finished."

And Jesus, crying with a loud voice, said, "Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit," and having said this, he gave up the ghost.

And behold, the veil of the temple was rent in two from the top to the
bottom; and the earth did quake; and the rocks were rent; and the tombs
were opened; and many bodies of the saints that had fallen asleep were
raised; and coming forth out of the tombs after his resurrection they
entered into the holy city and appeared unto many.

Now the centurion, and they that were with him watching Jesus, when they
saw the earthquake, and the things that were done, feared exceedingly,
saying, "Truly this was the Son of God."

And all the multitudes that came together to this sight, when they
beheld the things that were done, returned smiting their breasts. And
many women were there beholding from afar, who had followed Jesus from
Galilee, ministering unto him; among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary
the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.

The Jews therefore, because it was the Preparation, that the bodies
should not remain on the cross upon the sabbath (for the day of that
sabbath was a high day), asked of Pilate that their legs might be
broken, and that they might be taken away.

The soldiers therefore came, and brake the legs of the first, and of
the other that was crucified with him: but when they came to Jesus, and
saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs; howbeit one of
the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and straightway there came
out blood and water. And he that hath seen hath borne witness, and his
witness is true: and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye also may
believe. For these things came to pass, that the scripture might be
fulfilled, "A bone of him shall not be broken." And again another
scripture saith, "They shall look on him whom they pierced."


THE BURIAL.

And after these things, when even was come, there came a rich man from
Arimathaea, named Joseph, a councillor of honorable estate, a disciple of
Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews; and he boldly went in unto Pilate
and asked for the body of Jesus. And Pilate marvelled if he were already
dead: and calling unto him the centurion, he asked him whether he had been
any while dead. And when he learned it of the centurion, he granted the
corpse to Joseph.

He came therefore, and took away his body. And there came also Nicodemus,
he who at the first came to him by night, bringing a mixture of myrrh and
aloes, about a hundred pounds. So they took the body of Jesus, and bound it
in linen cloths with the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to bury.

Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden: and in the
garden a new tomb wherein was never man yet laid. There then because of
the Jews' Preparation (for the tomb was nigh at hand), they laid Jesus;
and rolled a stone against the door of the tomb.

And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld the tomb, and how
his body was laid. And they returned, and prepared spices and ointments.




SATURDAY--THE DAY OF SILENCE AND SORROW.


THE WATCH AT THE TOMB.

Now on the morrow, which is the day after the Preparation, the chief
priests and the Pharisees were gathered together unto Pilate, saying, "Sir,
we remember that that deceiver said while he was yet alive, 'After three
days I rise again.' Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until
the third day, lest haply his disciples come and steal him away, and say
unto the people, 'He is risen from the dead,' and the last error will be
worse than the first."

Pilate said unto them, "Ye have a guard: go, make it as sure as ye can."

So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, the guard
being with them.




SUNDAY--THE DAY OF RESURRECTION.


THE EARTHQUAKE.

And behold, there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord
descended from heaven, and came and rolled away the stone, and sat upon
it. His appearance was as lightning, and his raiment white as snow: and
for fear of him the watchers did quake, and became as dead men.


THE EMPTY TOMB.

Now on the first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, while it
was yet dark, unto the tomb, and seeth the stone taken away from the
tomb. She runneth therefore, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other
disciple whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them, "They have taken away
the Lord out of the tomb, and we know not where they have laid him."

Peter therefore went forth, and the other disciple, and they went toward
the tomb. And they ran both together: and the other disciple outran
Peter, and came first to the tomb; and stooping and looking in, he seeth
the linen cloths lying; yet entered he not in.

Simon Peter therefore also cometh, following him, and entered into the
tomb: and he beholdeth the linen cloths lying, and the napkin, that was
upon his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but rolled up in a place by
itself. Then entered in therefore the other disciple also, who came first
to the tomb, and he saw, and believed. For as yet they knew not the
scripture, that he must rise again from the dead. So the disciples went
away again unto their own home.


THE APPEARANCE TO MARY.

But Mary was standing without at the tomb weeping: so, as she wept, she
stooped and looked into the tomb; and she beholdeth two angels in white
sitting, one at the head, and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus
had lain. And they say unto her, "Woman, why weepest thou?"

She saith unto them, "Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know
not where they have laid him."

When she had thus said, she turned herself back, and beholdeth Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.

Jesus saith unto her, "Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou?"

She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, "Sir, if thou hast
borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him
away."

Jesus saith unto her, "Mary."

She turneth herself, and saith unto him in Hebrew, "Rabboni"; which is
to say, "Teacher."

Jesus saith to her, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended unto the
Father; but go unto my brethren, and say to them, 'I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father, and my God and your God.'"

Mary Magdalene cometh and telleth the disciples, "I have seen the Lord";
and that he had said these things unto her.


THE APPEARANCE TO THE WOMEN.

And the women which had come with him out of Galilee came unto the tomb,
bringing the spices which they had prepared. And they were saying among
themselves, "Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the tomb?"
and looking up, they see that the stone is rolled back: for it was
exceeding great. And entering into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting
on the right side, arrayed in a white robe; and they were amazed. And he
saith unto them, "Be not amazed: ye seek Jesus, the Nazarene, who hath been
crucified; he is risen; he is not here: behold, the place where they laid
him! But go, tell his disciples and Peter, 'He goeth before you into
Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.'"

And they departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran
to bring his disciples word.

And behold, Jesus met them, saying, "All hail." And they came and took
hold of his feet, and worshipped him.

Then saith Jesus unto them, "Fear not: go tell my brethren that they
depart into Galilee, and there shall they see me."


REPORT OF THE WATCH.

Now while they were going, behold, some of the guard came into the city,
and told unto the chief priests all the things that were come to pass.
And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel,
they gave much money unto the soldiers, saying, "Say ye, 'His disciples
came by night, and stole him away while we slept.' And if this come to
the governor's ears, we will persuade him, and rid you of care."

So they took the money and did as they were taught: and this saying was
spread abroad among the Jews, and continueth until this day.


THE APPEARANCE AT EMMAUS.

And behold, two of them were going that very day to a village named
Emmaus, which was three-score furlongs from Jerusalem. And they communed
with each other of all these things which had happened.

And it came to pass, while they communed and questioned together, that
Jesus himself drew near, and went with them. But their eyes were holden
that they should not know him.

And he said unto them, "What communications are these that ye have one
with another, as ye walk?"

And they stood still, looking sad. And one of them, named Cleopas,
answering, said unto him, "Dost thou alone sojourn in Jerusalem and not
know the things which are come to pass there in these days?"

And he said unto them, "What things?"

And they said unto him, "The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene, who
was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God, and all the people:
and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be
condemned to death, and crucified him. But we hoped that it was he who
should redeem Israel. Yea, and besides all this, it is now the third
day since these things came to pass. Moreover, certain women of our
company amazed us, having been early at the tomb; and when they found
not his body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of
angels, who said that he was alive. And certain of them that were with
us went to the tomb, and found it even so as the women had said: but
him they saw not."

And he said unto them, "O foolish men, and slow of heart to believe in
all that the prophets have spoken! Behooved it not the Christ to suffer
these things, and to enter into his glory?"

And beginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to
them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.

And they drew nigh unto the village, whither they were going: and he
made as though he would go further. And they constrained him, saying,
"Abide with us; for it is toward evening, and the day is now far spent."

And he went in to abide with them. And it came to pass, when he had sat
down with them to meat, he took the bread and blessed; and breaking it,
he gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he
vanished out of their sight.

And they said one to another, "Was not our heart burning within us,
while he spake to us in the way, while he opened to us the scriptures?"

And they rose up that very hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found
the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them, saying, "The
Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon." And they rehearsed
the things that happened in the way, and how he was known of them in the
breaking of the bread.


THE APPEARANCE TO THE DISCIPLES.

When therefore it was evening, on that day, the first day of the week, and
when the doors were shut where the disciples were, for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in the midst and saith unto them, "Peace be unto you."

But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they beheld a
spirit. And he said unto them, "Why are ye troubled? and wherefore do
questionings arise in your heart? See my hands and my feet, that it is I
myself: handle me, and see: for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye
behold me having."

And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and his feet.

And while they still disbelieved for joy, and wondered, he said unto
them, "Have ye here anything to eat?"

And they gave him a piece of broiled fish. And he took it, and ate
before them.

Jesus therefore said to them again, "Peace be unto you: as the Father hath
sent me, even so send I you." And when he had said this, he breathed on
them, and saith unto them, "Receive ye the Holy Spirit: whose soever sins
ye forgive, they are forgiven unto them; whose soever sins ye retain, they
are retained."




AFTER THE RESURRECTION DAY.


THE APPEARANCE TO THE DISCIPLES AND TO THOMAS.

But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus
came. The other disciples therefore said unto him, "We have seen the Lord."

But he said unto them, "Except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and put my hand
into his side, I will not believe."

And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with
them. Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and
said, "Peace be unto you."

Then saith he to Thomas, "Reach hither thy finger, and see my hands; and
reach hither thy hand, and put it into my side: and be not faithless,
but believing."

Thomas answered and said unto him, "My Lord and my God."

Jesus saith unto him, "Because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed:
blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed."


THE APPEARANCE TO THE SEVEN BY THE SEA.

After these things Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples at
the sea of Tiberias; and he manifested himself on this wise. There were
together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus and Nathanael of Cana in
Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples.

Simon Peter saith unto them, "I go a fishing."

They say unto him, "We also come with thee."

They went forth, and entered into the boat; and that night they took
nothing. But when day was now breaking, Jesus stood on the beach: yet
the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.

Jesus therefore saith unto them, "Children, have ye aught to eat?"

They answered him, "No."

And he said unto them, "Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and
ye shall find."

They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of fishes.

That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, "It is the
Lord." So when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his coat
about him (for he was naked), and cast himself into the sea.

But the other disciples came in the little boat (for they were not far from
the land, but about two hundred cubits off), dragging the net full of
fishes.

So when they got out upon the land, they see a fire of coals there, and
fish laid thereon, and bread. Jesus saith unto them, "Bring of the fish
which ye have now taken."

Simon Peter therefore went up, and drew the net to land, full of great
fishes, a hundred and fifty and three; and for all there were so many,
the net was not rent.

Jesus saith unto them, "Come and break your fast."

And none of the disciples durst inquire of him, "Who art thou?" knowing
that it was the Lord.

Jesus cometh, and taketh the bread, and giveth them, and the fish likewise.

This is now the third time that Jesus was manifested to the disciples,
after that he was risen from the dead.

So when they had broken their fast, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, "Simon,
son of John, lovest thou me more than these?"

He saith unto him, "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee."

He saith unto him, "Feed my lambs."

He saith unto him again a second time, "Simon, son of John, lovest thou
me?"

He saith unto him, "Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee."

He saith unto him, "Tend my sheep."

He saith unto him the third time, "Simon, son of John, lovest thou me?"

Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, "Lovest thou
me?" And he said unto him, "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest
that I love thee."

Jesus saith unto him, "Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When
thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest;
but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another
shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not."

Now this he spake, signifying by what manner of death he should glorify
God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, "Follow me."

Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; who
also leaned back on his breast at the supper, and said, "Lord, who is he
that betrayeth thee?" Peter therefore seeing him saith to Jesus, "Lord,
and what shall this man do?"

Jesus saith unto him, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that
to thee? Follow thou me."

This saying therefore went forth among the brethren, that that disciple
should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, that he should not die,
but, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?"


THE APPEARANCE TO THE ELEVEN ON THE MOUNTAIN.

The eleven disciples went into Galilee, unto the mountain where Jesus
had appointed them. And when they saw him, they worshipped him; but some
doubted. And Jesus came to them and spake unto them, saying, "All
authority hath been given unto me in heaven and on earth. Go ye
therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit: teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I commanded you: and lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world."


THE LAST APPEARANCE AND ASCENSION.

And he said unto them, "These are my words which I spake unto you, while I
was yet with you, that all things must needs be fulfilled, which are
written in the law of Moses, and the prophets, and the psalms, concerning
me."

Then opened he their mind, that they might understand the scriptures;
and he said unto them, "Thus it is written, that the Christ should
suffer, and rise again from the dead the third day; and that repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in his name unto all the
nations, beginning from Jerusalem. Ye are witnesses of these things. And
behold, I send forth the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in
the city, until ye be clothed with power from on high."

And he led them out until they were over against Bethany: and he lifted
up his hands, and blessed them.

And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he parted from them, and was
carried up into heaven. And they worshipped him, and returned to
Jerusalem with great joy: and were continually in the temple, blessing God.

       *       *       *       *       *

MANY OTHER SIGNS THEREFORE DID JESUS IN THE PRESENCE OF THE DISCIPLES,
WHICH ARE NOT WRITTEN IN THIS BOOK: BUT THESE ARE WRITTEN, THAT YE MAY
BELIEVE THAT JESUS IS THE CHRIST, THE SON OF GOD; AND THAT BELIEVING YE
MAY HAVE LIFE IN HIS NAME.




[Transcriber's Note:


* p. 11: Replaced the word "Caesar" with "Caesar" located in the phrase
"Tribute to Caesar" to be consistent with other similar spellings.

* p. 14: Corrected spelling of word "cribes" to "scribes" located in the
phrase "But woe unto you, cribes".

* p. 23: Added missing closing quotation after the word "hour" located
in the phrase "not the day nor the hour".

* p. 24: Added missing closing quotation after the word "teeth" located
in the phrase "and the gnashing of teeth".

* p. 34: Corrected spelling of word "m" to "me" located in the phrase
"If a man abide not in m".

* p. 43: Corrected spelling of word "ever" to "even" located in the
phrase "I ever taught in synagogues".]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of His Last Week, by
William E. Barton and Theodore G. Soares and Sydney Strong

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS LAST WEEK ***

***** This file should be named 30561.txt or 30561.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/5/6/30561/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
