The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Lord of Misrule, by Alfred Noyes,
Illustrated by Spencer Baird Nichols


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Lord of Misrule
       And Other Poems


Author: Alfred Noyes



Release Date: December 16, 2009  [eBook #30687]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LORD OF MISRULE***


E-text prepared by Marius Masi, Juliet Sutherland, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 30687-h.htm or 30687-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/30687/30687-h/30687-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/30687/30687-h.zip)





THE LORD OF MISRULE

And Other Poems

         *       *       *       *       *

BY THE SAME AUTHOR

  DRAKE: AN ENGLISH EPIC
  THE ENCHANTED ISLAND AND OTHER POEMS
  SHERWOOD
  TALES OF THE MERMAID TAVERN
  THE WINE-PRESS
  COLLECTED POEMS. 2 VOLS.
  A BELGIAN CHRISTMAS EVE (RADA)

         *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration:

  Come up, come in with streamers!
  Come in with boughs of May!
                     _Page 1._]



THE LORD OF MISRULE

And Other Poems

by

ALFRED NOYES

With Frontispiece in Colours by Spencer Baird Nichols







[Illustration]

New York
Frederick A. Stokes Company
Publishers

Copyright, 1915, by
Frederick A. Stokes Company

All rights reserved, including that of translation
into foreign languages

October, 1915




CONTENTS


                                           PAGE

    THE LORD OF MISRULE                       1

    THE REPEAL                                7

    THE SEARCH-LIGHTS                         9

    FORWARD                                  11

    A SPELL                                  13

    CRIMSON SAILS                            18

    BLIND MOONE OF LONDON                    22

    OLD GREY SQUIRREL                        28

    THE GREAT NORTH ROAD                     31

    THE RIVER OF STARS                       34

    A KNIGHT OF OLD JAPAN                    43

    BEYOND DEATH                             44

    THE STRANGE GUEST                        46

    GHOSTS                                   49

    THE DAY OF REMEMBRANCE                   51

    ON THE EMBANKMENT                        53

    THE IRON CROWN                           58

    THE OLD DEBATE                           59

    A SONG OF HOPE                           60

    THE HEDGE-ROSE OPENS                     62

    THE MAY-TREE                             63

    OLD LETTERS                              64

    LAMPS                                    66

    AT EDEN GATES                            68

    THE PSYCHE OF OUR DAY                    70

    PARACLETE                                73

    AFTER RAIN                               75

    THE DEATH OF A GREAT MAN                 76

    THE ROMAN WAY                            78

    THE INNER PASSION                        80

    A COUNTRY LANE IN HEAVEN                 82

    TO THE DESTROYERS                        84

    THE TRUMPET-CALL                         85

    THE HEART OF CANADA                      89

    THE RETURN OF THE HOME-BORN              91

    A SALUTE FROM THE FLEET                  93

    IN MEMORY OF A BRITISH AVIATOR          103

    THE WAGGON                              105

    THE SACRED OAK                          107

    THE WORLD'S WEDDING                     120

    IN MEMORIAM: SAMUEL COLERIDGE-TAYLOR    123

    INSCRIPTION                             126

    VALUES                                  127

    THE HEROIC DEAD                         128

    THE CRY IN THE NIGHT                    130

    ASTRID                                  133

    THE INIMITABLE LOVERS                   136

    THE CRAGS                               143

    THE GHOST OF SHAKESPEARE, 1914          147

    THE WHITE CLIFFS                        152

    ON THE SOUTH COAST                      154

    OLDER THAN THE HILLS                    156

    THE TORCH                               158

    THE OUTLAW                              161

    THE YOUNG FRIAR                         163

    A FOREST SONG                           167

    THE TRUMPET OF THE LAW                  169

    THRICE-ARMED                            180

    THE SONG-TREE                           182




THE LORD OF MISRULE

"On May days the wild heads of the parish would choose a Lord of Misrule,
whom they would follow even into the church, though the minister were at
prayer or preaching, dancing and swinging their may-boughs about like
devils incarnate."--_Old Puritan Writer._


  All on a fresh May morning, I took my love to church,
  To see if Parson Primrose were safely on his perch.
  He scarce had got to _Thirdly_, or squire begun to snore,
      When, like a sun-lit sea-wave,
        A green and crimson sea-wave,
  A frolic of madcap May-folk came whooping through the door:--

      Come up, come in with streamers!
        Come in, with boughs of may!
      Come up and thump the sexton,
        And carry the clerk away.

      Now skip like rams, ye mountains,
        Ye little hills, like sheep!
      Come up and wake the people
        That parson puts to sleep.

  They tickled their nut-brown tabors. Their garlands flew in showers,
  And lasses and lads came after them, with feet like dancing flowers.
  Their queen had torn her green gown, and bared a shoulder as white,
      O, white as the may that crowned her,
        While all the minstrels round her
  Tilted back their crimson hats and sang for sheer delight:

      Come up, come in with streamers!
        Come in, with boughs of may!
      Now by the gold upon your toe
        You walked the primrose way.
      Come up, with white and crimson!
        O, shake your bells and sing;
      Let the porch bend, the pillars bow,
        Before our Lord, the Spring!

  The dusty velvet hassocks were dabbled with fragrant dew.
  The font grew white with hawthorn. It frothed in every pew.
  Three petals clung to the sexton's beard as he mopped and mowed at the
           clerk,
      And "Take that sexton away," they cried;
        "Did Nebuchadnezzar eat may?" they cried.
  "Nay, that was a prize from Betty," they cried, "for kissing her in the
           dark."

      Come up, come in with streamers!
        Come in, with boughs of may!
      Who knows but old Methuselah
         May hobble the green-wood way?
      If Betty could kiss the sexton,
        If Kitty could kiss the clerk,
      Who knows how Parson Primrose
        Might blossom in the dark?

  The congregation spluttered. The squire grew purple and all,
  And every little chorister bestrode his carven stall.
  The parson flapped like a magpie, but none could hear his prayers;
      For Tom Fool flourished his tabor,
        Flourished his nut-brown tabor,
  Bashed the head of the sexton, and stormed the pulpit stairs.

        High in the old oak pulpit
          This Lord of all misrule--
        I think it was Will Summers
          That once was Shakespeare's fool--
        Held up his hand for silence,
          And all the church grew still:
        "And are you snoring yet," he said,
          "Or have you slept your fill?

  "Your God still walks in Eden, between the ancient trees,
  Where Youth and Love go wading through pools of primroses.
  And this is the sign we bring you, before the darkness fall,
      That Spring is risen, is risen again,
        That Life is risen, is risen again,
  That Love is risen, is risen again, and Love is Lord of all.

        "At Paske began our morrice
          And, ere Pentecost, our May;
        Because, albeit your words be true,
          You know not what you say.
        You chatter in church like jackdaws,
          Words that would wake the dead,
        Were there one breath of life in you,
          One drop of blood," he said.

  "_He died and He went down to hell!_ You know not what you mean.
  Our rafters were of green fir. Also our beds were green.
  But out of the mouth of a fool, a fool, before the darkness fall,
      We tell you He is risen again,
        The Lord of Life is risen again,
  The boughs put forth their tender buds, and Love is Lord of all!"

        He bowed his head. He stood so still,
          They bowed their heads as well.
        And softly from the organ-loft
          The song began to swell.
        _Come up with blood-red streamers_,
          The reeds began the strain.
        The _vox humana_ pealed on high,
          _The Spring is risen again!_

  The _vox angelica_ replied--_The shadows flee away!
  Our house-beams were of cedar. Come in, with boughs of may!_
  The _diapason_ deepened it--_Before the darkness fall_,
        _We tell you He is risen again!
          Our God hath burst His prison again!
  Christ is risen, is risen again; and Love is Lord of all._




THE REPEAL


  I dreamed the Eternal had repealed
    His cosmic code of law last night.
  Our prayers had made the Unchanging yield.
    Caprice was king from depth to height.

  On Beachy Head a shouting throng
    Had fired a beacon to proclaim
  Their licence. With unmeasured song
    They proved it, dancing in the flame.

  They quarrelled. One desired the sun,
    And one desired the stars to shine.
  They closed and wrestled and burned as one,
    And the white chalk grew red as wine.

  The furnace licked and purred and rolled,
    A laughing child held up its hands
  Like dreadful torches, dropping gold;
    For pain was dead at their commands.

  Painless and wild as clouds they burned,
    Till the restricted Rose of Day
  With all its glorious laws returned,
    And the wind blew their ashes away.




THE SEARCH-LIGHTS

"Political morality differs from individual morality because there is no
power above the state."


  Shadow by shadow, stripped for fight,
    The lean black cruisers search the sea.
  Night-long their level shafts of light
    Revolve, and find no enemy.
  Only they know each leaping wave
  May hide the lightning, and their grave.

  And in the land they guard so well
    Is there no silent watch to keep?
  An age is dying, and the bell
    Rings midnight on a vaster deep.
  But over all its waves, once more,
  The search-lights move, from shore to shore.

  And captains that we thought were dead,
    And dreamers that we thought were dumb,
  And voices that we thought were fled,
    Arise, and call us, and we come;
  And "search in thine own soul," they cry;
  "For there, too, lurks thine enemy."

  Search for the foe in thine own soul,
    The sloth, the intellectual pride;
  The trivial jest that veils the goal
    For which our fathers lived and died;
  The lawless dreams, the cynic Art,
  That rend thy nobler self apart.

  Not far, not far into the night,
    These level swords of light can pierce;
  Yet for her faith does England fight,
    Her faith in this our universe;
  Believing Truth and Justice draw
  From founts of everlasting law;

  Therefore a Power above the State,
    The unconquerable Power returns.
  The fire, the fire that made her great
    Once more upon her altar burns.
  Once more, redeemed and healed and whole,
  She moves to the Eternal Goal.




FORWARD


  _A thousand creeds and battle-cries,
    A thousand warring social schemes,
  A thousand new moralities,
    And twenty thousand thousand dreams!_

  _Each on his own anarchic way,
    From the old order breaking free,--
  Our ruined world desires_, you say,
    _Licence, once more, not Liberty._

  But ah, beneath the struggling foam,
    When storm and change are on the deep,
  How quietly the tides come home,
    And how the depths of sea-shine sleep;

  And we who march towards a goal,
    Destroying only to fulfil
  The law, the law of that great soul
    Which moves beneath your alien will;

  We, that like foemen meet the past
    Because we bring the future, know
  We only fight to achieve at last
    A great re-union with our foe;

  Re-union in the truths that stand
    When all our wars are rolled away;
  Re-union of the heart and hand
    And of the prayers wherewith we pray;

  Re-union in the common needs,
    The common strivings of mankind;
  Re-union of our warring creeds
    In the one God that dwells behind.

  Then--in that day--we shall not meet
    Wrong with new wrong, but right with right;
  Our faith shall make your faith complete
    When our battalions re-unite.

  Forward!--what use in idle words?--
    Forward, O warriors of the soul!
  There will be breaking up of swords
    When that new morning makes us whole.




A SPELL

(_An Excellent Way to get a Fairy_)


  Gather, first, in your left hand
    (This must be at fall of day)
  Forty grains of wild sea-sand
    Where you think a mermaid lay.
  I have heard that it is best
    If you gather it, warm and sweet,
  Out of the dint of her left breast
    Where you see her heart has beat.

      _Out of the dint in that sweet sand
        Gather forty grains, I say;
      Yet--if it fail you--understand,
        There remains a better way._

  Out of this you melt your glass
    While the veils of night are drawn,
  Whispering, till the shadows pass,
    "_Nixie--pixie--leprechaun!_"
  Then you blow your magic vial,
    Shape it like a crescent moon,
  Set it up and make your trial,
    Singing, "_Elaby, ah, come soon!_"

      _Round the cloudy crescent go,
        On the hill-top, in the dawn,
      Singing softly, on tip-toe,
        "Elaby Gathon! Elaby Gathon!
      Nixie--pixie--leprechaun!"_

  Bring the blood of a white hen
    Slaughtered at the break of day,
  While the cock, in the fairy glen,
    Thrusts his gold neck every way,
  Over the brambles, peering, calling,
    Under the ferns, with a sudden fear,
  Far and wide--as the dews are falling--
    Clamouring, calling, everywhere.

      _Round the crimson vial go,
        On the hill-top, in the dawn,
      Singing softly, on tip-toe,
        "Nixie--pixie--leprechaun!"
      If this fail, at break of day,
      I can show you a better way._

  Bring the buds of the hazel-copse,
    Where two lovers kissed at noon;
  Bring the crushed red wild-thyme tops
    Where they murmured under the moon.
  Bring the four-leaved clover also,
    One of the white, and one of the red,
  Bring the flakes of the may that fall so
    Lightly over their bridal bed.

      _Drop them into the vial--so--
        On the hill-top, in the dawn,
      Singing softly, on tip-toe,
        "Nixie--pixie--leprechaun!"
      And, if once will not suffice,
        Do it thrice!
      If this fail, at break of day,
        There remains a better way._

  Bring an old and crippled child
    --_Ah, tread softly, on tip-toe!_--
  Tattered, tearless, wonder-wild,
    From that under-world below,
  Bring a wizened child of seven
    Reeking from the City slime,
  Out of hell into your heaven,
    Set her knee-deep in the thyme.

      _Feed her--clothe her--even so!
        Set her on a fairy-throne.
      When her eyes begin to glow
        Leave her for an hour--alone._

  You shall need no spells or charms,
    On that hill-top, in that dawn.
  When she lifts her wasted arms,
    You shall see a veil withdrawn.
  There shall be no veil between them,
    Though her head be old and wise!
  You shall know that she has seen them
    By the glory in her eyes.

      _Round her irons on that hill
        Earth has tossed a fairy fire:
      Watch, and listen, and be still,
        Lest you baulk your own desire._

  When she sees four azure wings
    Light upon her claw-like hand;
  When she lifts her head and sings,
    You shall hear and understand:
  You shall hear a bugle calling
    Wildly over the dew-dashed down;
  And a sound as of the falling
    Ramparts of a conquered town.

      _You shall hear a sound like thunder;
        And a veil shall be withdrawn,
      When her eyes grow wide with wonder
        On that hill-top, in that dawn._




CRIMSON SAILS


  _When Salomon sailed from Ophir_ ...
    The clouds of Sussex thyme
  That crown the cliffs in mid-July
  Were all we needed--you and I--
  _But Salomon sailed from Ophir_,
    And broken bits of rhyme
  Blew to us on the white chalk coast
    From O, what elfin clime?

  A peacock butterfly flaunted
    Its four great crimson wings,
  As over the edge of the chalk it flew
  Black as a ship on the Channel blue ...
  _When Salomon sailed from Ophir_,--
    He brought, as the high sun brings,
  Honey and spice to the Queen of the South,
  Sussex or Saba, a song for her mouth,
  Sweet as the dawn-wind over the downs
  And the tall white cliffs that the wild thyme crowns
    A song that the whole sky sings:--

  When Salomon sailed from Ophir,
    With Olliphants and gold,
  The kings went up, the kings went down,
  Trying to match King Salomon's crown,
  But Salomon sacked the sunset,
    Wherever his black ships rolled.
  He rolled it up like a crimson cloth,
    And crammed it into his hold.

  _Chorus_: Salomon sacked the sunset!
            Salomon sacked the sunset!
          He rolled it up like a crimson cloth,
            And crammed it into his hold.

  His masts were Lebanon cedars,
    His sheets were singing blue,
  But that was never the reason why
  He stuffed his hold with the sunset sky!
  The kings could cut their cedars,
    And sail from Ophir, too;
  But Salomon packed his heart with dreams
    And all the dreams were true.

  _Chorus_: The kings could cut their cedars,
            Cut their Lebanon cedars;
          But Salomon packed his heart with dreams,
            And all the dreams were true.

  When Salomon sailed from Ophir,
    He sailed not as a king.
  The kings--they weltered to and fro,
  Tossed wherever the winds could blow;
  But Salomon's tawny seamen
    Could lift their heads and sing,
  Till all their crowded clouds of sail
    Grew sweeter than the Spring.

  _Chorus_: Their singing sheets grew sweeter,
            Their crowded clouds grew sweeter,
          For Salomon's tawny seamen, sirs,
            Could lift their heads and sing:

  When Salomon sailed from Ophir
    With crimson sails so tall,
  The kings went up, the kings went down,
  Trying to match King Salomon's crown;
  But Salomon brought the sunset
    To hang on his Temple wall;
  He rolled it up like a crimson cloth,
    So his was better than all.

  _Chorus_: Salomon gat the sunset,
            Salomon gat the sunset;
          He carried it like a crimson cloth
            To hang on his Temple wall.




BLIND MOONE OF LONDON


         Blind Moone of London
           He fiddled up and down,
         Thrice for an angel,
           And twice for a crown.
         He fiddled at the _Green Man_,
           He fiddled at the _Rose_;
         And where they have buried him
           Not a soul knows.

  All his tunes are dead and gone, dead as yesterday.
         And his lanthorn flits no more
         Round the _Devil Tavern_ door,
  Waiting till the gallants come, singing from the play;
         Waiting in the wet and cold!
         All his Whitsun tales are told.
  He is dead and gone, sirs, very far away.

         He would not give a silver groat
           For good or evil weather.
         He carried in his white cap
           A long red feather.
         He wore a long coat
           Of the Reading-tawny kind,
         And darned white hosen
           With a blue patch behind.

  So--one night--he shuffled past, in his buckled shoon.
         We shall never see his face,
         Twisted to that queer grimace,
  Waiting in the wind and rain, till we called his tune;
         Very whimsical and white,
         Waiting on a blue Twelfth Night!
  He is grown too proud at last--old blind Moone.

         Yet, when May was at the door,
           And Moone was wont to sing,
         Many a maid and bachelor
           Whirled into the ring:
         Standing on a tilted wain
           He played so sweet and loud
         The Mayor forgot his golden chain
           And jigged it with the crowd.

  Old blind Moone, his fiddle scattered flowers along the street;
         Into the dust of Brookfield Fair
         Carried a shining primrose air,
  Crooning like a poor mad maid, O, very low and sweet,
         Drew us close, and held us bound,
         Then--to the tune of _Pedlar's Pound_,
  Caught us up, and whirled us round, a thousand frolic feet.

         Master Shakespeare was his host.
           The tribe of Benjamin
         Used to call him Merlin's Ghost
           At the _Mermaid Inn_.
         He was only a crowder,
           Fiddling at the door.
         Death has made him prouder.
           We shall not see him more.

  Only--if you listen, please--through the master's themes,
         You shall hear a wizard strain,
         Blind and bright as wind and rain
  Shaken out of willow-trees, and shot with elfin gleams.
         _How should I your true love know?_
         Scraps and snatches--even so!
  That is old blind Moone again, fiddling in your dreams.

         Once, when Will had called for sack
           And bidden him up and play,
         Old blind Moone, he turned his back,
           Growled, and walked away,
         Sailed into a thunder-cloud,
           Snapped his fiddle-string,
         And hobbled from _The Mermaid_
           Sulky as a king.

  Only from the darkness now, steals the strain we knew:
         No one even knows his grave!
         Only here and there a stave,
  Out of all his hedge-row flock, be-drips the may with dew.
         And I know not what wild bird
         Carried us his parting word:--
  _Master Shakespeare needn't take the crowder's fiddle, too._

         Will has wealth and wealth to spare.
           Give him back his own.
         _At his head a grass-green turf,
           At his heels a stone._
         See his little lanthorn-spark.
           Hear his ghostly tune,
         Glimmering past you, in the dark,
           Old blind Moone!

  All the little crazy brooks, where love and sorrow run
         Crowned with sedge and singing wild,
         Like a sky-lark--or a child!--
  Old blind Moone, he knew their springs, and played 'em every one;
         Stood there, in the darkness, blind,
         And sang them into Shakespeare's mind....
  Old blind Moone of London, O now his songs are done,
  The light upon his lost white face, they say it was the sun!

  The light upon his poor old face, they say it was the sun!




OLD GREY SQUIRREL


  A great while ago, there was a school-boy.
    He lived in a cottage by the sea.
  And the very first thing he could remember
    Was the rigging of the schooners by the quay.

  He could watch them, when he woke, from his window,
    With the tall cranes hoisting out the freight.
  And he used to think of shipping as a sea-cook,
    And sailing to the Golden Gate.

  For he used to buy the yellow penny dreadfuls,
    And read them where he fished for conger eels,
  And listened to the lapping of the water,
    The green and oily water round the keels.

  There were trawlers with their shark-mouthed flat-fish,
    And red nets hanging out to dry,
  And the skate the skipper kept because he liked 'em,
    And landsmen never knew the fish to fry.

  There were brigantines with timber out of Norroway,
    Oozing with the syrups of the pine.
  There were rusty dusty schooners out of Sunderland,
    And ships of the Blue Cross line.

  And to tumble down a hatch into the cabin
    Was better than the best of broken rules;
  For the smell of 'em was like a Christmas dinner,
    And the feel of 'em was like a box of tools.

  And, before he went to sleep in the evening,
    The very last thing that he could see
  Was the sailor-men a-dancing in the moonlight
    By the capstan that stood upon the quay.

  _He is perched upon a high stool in London.
    The Golden Gate is very far away.
  They caught him, and they caged him, like a squirrel.
    He is totting up accounts, and going grey._

  _He will never, never, never sail to 'Frisco.
    But the very last thing that he will see
  Will be sailor-men a-dancing in the sunrise
    By the capstan that stands upon the quay...._

  _To the tune of an old concertina,
    By the capstan that stands upon the quay._




THE GREAT NORTH ROAD


  Just as the moon was rising, I met a ghostly pedlar
    Singing for company beneath his ghostly load,--
  Once, there were velvet lads with vizards on their faces,
    Riding up to rob me on the great North Road.

  Now, my pack is heavy, and my pocket full of guineas
    Chimes like a wedding-peal, but little I enjoy
  Roads that never echo to the chirrup of their canter,--
    The gay Golden Farmer and the Hereford Boy.

  Rogues were they all, but their raid was from Elf-land!
    Shod with elfin silver were the steeds they bestrode.
  Merlin buckled on the spurs that wheeled thro' the wet fern
    Bright as Jack-o'-Lanthorns off the great North Road.

  Tales were told in country inns when Turpin rode to Rippleside!
    Puck tuned the fiddle-strings, and country maids grew coy,
  Tavern doors grew magical when Colonel Jack might tap at them,
    The gay Golden Farmer and the Hereford Boy.

  What are you seeking then? I asked this honest pedlar.
    --O, Mulled Sack or Natty Hawes might ease me of my load!--
  Where are they flown then?--Flown where I follow;
    They are all gone for ever up the great North Road.

  Rogues were they all; but the white dust assoils 'em!
    Paradise without a spice of deviltry would cloy.
  Heavy is my pack till I meet with Jerry Abershaw,
    The gay Golden Farmer and the Hereford Boy.




THE RIVER OF STARS

(_A tale of Niagara_)


  _The lights of a hundred cities are fed by its midnight power.
  Their wheels are moved by its thunder. But they, too, have their hour.
  The tale of the Indian lovers, a cry from the years that are flown,
       While the river of stars is rolling,
         Rolling away to the darkness,
  Abides with the power in the midnight, where love may find its own._

  She watched from the Huron tents, till the first star shook in the air.
  The sweet pine scented her fawn-skins, and breathed from her braided
           hair.
  Her crown was of milk-white blood-root, because of the tryst she would
           keep,
       Beyond the river of beauty
         That drifted away in the darkness
  Drawing the sunset thro' lilies, with eyes like stars, to the deep.

  He watched, like a tall young wood-god, from the red pine that she
           named;
  But not for the peril behind him, where the eyes of the Mohawks flamed.
  Eagle-plumed he stood. But his heart was hunting afar,
       Where the river of longing whispered ...
         And one swift shaft from the darkness
  Felled him, her name in his death-cry, his eyes on the sunset star.

         *       *       *       *       *

  She stole from the river and listened. The moon on her wet skin shone.
  As a silver birch in a pine-wood, her beauty flashed and was gone.
  There was no wave in the forest. The dark arms closed her round.
       But the river of life went flowing,
         Flowing away to the darkness,
  For her breast grew red with his heart's blood, in a night where the
           stars are drowned.

  _Teach me, O my lover, as you taught me of love in a day,
  Teach me of death, and for ever, and set my feet on the way,
  To the land of the happy shadows, the land where you are flown._
       --And the river of death went weeping,
          Weeping away to the darkness.--
  _Is the hunting good, my lover, so good that you hunt alone?_

  She rose to her feet like a shadow. She sent a cry thro' the night,
  _Sa-sa-kuon_, the death-whoop, that tells of triumph in fight.
  It broke from the bell of her mouth like the cry of a wounded bird,
       But the river of agony swelled it
         And swept it along to the darkness,
  And the Mohawks, couched in the darkness, leapt to their feet as they
           heard.

  Close as the ring of the clouds that menace the moon with death,
  At once they circled her round. Her bright breast panted for breath.
  With only her own wild glory keeping the wolves at bay,
       While the river of parting whispered,
         Whispered away to the darkness,
  She looked in their eyes for a moment, and strove for a word to say.

  _Teach me, O my lover!_--She set her foot on the dead.
  She laughed on the painted faces with their rings of yellow and red,--
  _I thank you, wolves of the Mohawk, for a woman's hands might fail._--
       --And the river of vengeance chuckled,
          Chuckled away to the darkness,--
  _But ye have killed where I hunted. I have come to the end of my trail._

  _I thank you, braves of the Mohawk, who laid this thief at my feet.
  He tore my heart out living, and tossed it his dogs to eat.
  Ye have taught him of death in a moment, as he taught me of love in a
           day._
       --And the river of passion deepened,
          Deepened and rushed to the darkness.--
  _And yet may a woman requite you, and set your feet on the way._

  _For the woman that spits in my face, and the shaven heads that gibe,
  This night shall a woman show you the tents of the Huron tribe.
  They are lodged in a deep valley. With all things good it abounds.
       Where the red-eyed, green-mooned river
         Glides like a snake to the darkness,
  I will show you a valley, Mohawks, like the Happy Hunting Grounds._

  _Follow!_ They chuckled, and followed like wolves to the glittering
           stream.
  Shadows obeying a shadow, they launched their canoes in a dream.
  Alone, in the first, with the blood on her breast, and her milk-white
           crown,
       She stood. She smiled at them, _Follow_,
         Then urged her canoe to the darkness,
  And, silently flashing their paddles, the Mohawks followed her down.

         *       *       *       *       *

  And now--as they slid thro' the pine-woods with their peaks of midnight
           blue,
  She heard, in the broadening distance, the deep sound that she knew,
  A mutter of steady thunder that grew as they glanced along;
       But ever she glanced before them
         And glanced away to the darkness,
  And or ever they heard it rightly, she raised her voice in a song:--

  _The wind from the Isles of the Blessed, it blows across the foam.
  It sings in the flowing maples of the land that was my home.
  Where the moose is a morning's hunt, and the buffalo feeds from the
           hand._--
       And the river of mockery broadened,
         Broadened and rolled to the darkness--
  _And the green maize lifts its feathers, and laughs the snow from the
           land._

  The river broadened and quickened. There was nought but river and sky.
  The shores were lost in the darkness. She laughed and lifted a cry:
  _Follow me! Sa-sa-kuon!_ Swifter and swifter they swirled--
       And the flood of their doom went flying,
         Flying away to the darkness,
  _Follow me, follow me, Mohawks, ye are shooting the edge of the world._

  They struggled like snakes to return. Like straws they were whirled on
           her track.
  For the whole flood swooped to that edge where the unplumbed night dropt
           black,
  The whole flood dropt to a thunder in an unplumbed hell beneath,
       And over the gulf of the thunder
         A mountain of spray from the darkness
  Rose and stood in the heavens, like a shrouded image of death.

  She rushed like a star before them. The moon on her glorying shone.
  _Teach me, O my lover_,--her cry flashed out and was gone.
  A moment they battled behind her. They lashed with their paddles and
           lunged;
       Then the Mohawks, turning their faces
         Like a blood-stained cloud to the darkness,
  Over the edge of Niagara swept together and plunged.

  _And the lights of a hundred cities are fed by the ancient power;
  But a cry returns with the midnight; for they, too, have their hour.
  Teach me, O my lover, as you taught me of love in a day,
       --While the river of stars is rolling,
          Rolling away to the darkness,--
  Teach me of death, and for ever, and set my feet on the way!_




A KNIGHT OF OLD JAPAN


  Make me a stave of song, the Master said,
  On yonder cherry-bough, whose white and red
    Hangs in the sunset over those green seas.
  The young knight looked upon his untried blade,
  Then shrugged his wings of gold and blue brocade:
    _How should a warrior play with thoughts like these?_

  Fresh from the battle, in that self-same hour,
  A mail-clad warrior watched each delicate flower
    Close in that cloud of beauty against the West.
  Drinking the last deep light, he watched it long.
  He raised his face as if to pray. _The strong_,
    The Master whispered, _are the tenderest_.




BEYOND DEATH


    I

    In lonely bays
  Where Love runs wild,
    All among the flowering grasses,
  Where light, light, light, as a sea-bird's wing
    The chuckle of the child-god passes,
  O, to awake, to shake away the night
    And find you dreaming there,
  On the other side of death, with the sea-wind blowing round you,
    And the scent of the thyme in your hair.


    II

    Tho' beauty perish,
  Perish like a flower,
    And song be an idle breath,
  Tho' heaven be a dream, and youth for but an hour,
    And life much less than death,
  And the Maker less than that He made,
    And hope less than despair,
  If Death have shores where Love runs wild
    I think you might be there.


    III

    Re-born, re-born
  From the splendid sea,
    There should you awake and sing,
  With every supple sweet from the head to the feet
    Modelled like a wood-dove's wing,--
  O, to awake, to shake away the night,
    And find you happy there,
  On the other side of death, with the sea-wind blowing round you,
    And the scent of the thyme in your hair.




THE STRANGE GUEST


  You cannot leave a new house
    With any open door,
  But a strange guest will enter it
    And never leave it more.

  Build it on a waste land,
    Dreary as a sin.
  Leave her but a broken gate,
    And Beauty will come in.

  Build it all of scarlet brick.
    Work your wicked will.
  Dump it on an ash-heap
    Then--O then, be still.

  Sit and watch your new house.
    Leave an open door.
  A strange guest will enter it
    And never leave it more.

  She will make your raw wood
    Mellower than gold.
  She will take your new lamps
    And sell them for old.

  She will crumble all your pride,
    Break your folly down.
  Much that you rejected
    She will bless and crown.

  She will rust your naked roof,
    Split your pavement through,
  Dip her brush in sun and moon
    And colour it anew.

  Leave her but a window
    Wide to wind and rain,
  You shall find her footsteps
    When you come again.

  Though she keep you waiting
    Many months or years,
  She shall stain and make it
    Beautiful with tears.

  She shall hurt and heal it,
    Soften it and save,
  Blessing it, until it stand
    Stronger than the grave.

  _You cannot leave a new house
    With any open door,
  But a strange guest will enter it
    And never leave it more._




GHOSTS


  O to creep in by candle-light,
    When all the world is fast asleep,
  Out of the cold winds, out of the night,
    Where the nettles wave and the rains weep!
  O, to creep in, lifting the latch
    So quietly that no soul could hear,
  And, at those embers in the gloom,
    Quietly light one careful match--
  You should not hear it, have no fear--
    And light the candle and look round
  The old familiar room;
    To see the old books upon the wall
  And lovingly take one down again,
    And hear--O, strange to those that lay
  So patiently underground--
    The ticking of the clock, the sound
  Of clicking embers ...
                        watch the play
  Of shadows ...
                            till the implacable call
  Of morning turn our faces grey;
    And, or ever we go, we lift and kiss
  Some idle thing that your hands may touch,
    Some paper or book that your hands let fall,
  And we never--when living--had cared so much
    As to glance upon twice ...
                              But now, O bliss
  To kiss and to cherish it, moaning our pain,
    Ere we creep to the silence again.




THE DAY OF REMEMBRANCE


  Dazzle of the sea, azure of the sky, glitter of the dew on the grass,
      Pass to Oblivion
        In the darkness
    With all that ever is or ever was.

  Yet, O flocks of cloud with your violet shadows, O white may crowding
           o'er the lane,
        The Shepherd that drives you
          To the darkness
    Shall lead you thro' the crimson dawn again.

  Bear your load of beauty to the sunset, and the golden gates of death.
        The Eternal shall remember
          In the darkness
    And recall you at a word, at a breath.

  Even as the mind of a man may remember his lost and linkless hours,
      This world that is scattered
        To the darkness
    Dismembered and dis-petalled, clouds and flowers,

  Cities, suns, and systems, as He said of old, they sleep! Not a bird,
           not a leaf shall pass by,
      But on the day of remembrance
        In the darkness,
    In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,

  They shall flash to their places in the music of the whole, even as our
           fathers said!
      For a Power shall remember
        In the darkness,
    And the universal sea give up her dead.




ON THE EMBANKMENT


  Within, it was colour and laughter, warmth and wine.
    Without, it was darkness, hunger and bitter cold,
  Where those white globes on the wet Embankment shine,
    Greasing the Thames with gold.

  And was it a bundle of fog in the dark drew nigh?
    A bundle of rags and bones it crept to the light,--
  A monstrous thing that coughed as it shuffled by,
    A shape of the shapeless night,

  Spawned as brown things that mimic their mothering earth,
    Green creeping things that the grass lifts to the sun,
  Out of its wrongs the City had brought to the birth
    The shape of those wrongs, in one.

  A woman, a woman whose lips had once been kissed,
    (It was Christmas Eve, and the bells began their chime!)
  She sank to a seat like a coughing bundle of mist
    Exhaled from the river-slime.

  _Bells for the birth of Christ!_ She heard, and she thought--
    Vacantly--of her man, that was long since dead,
  The smell of the Christmas food, and the drink they had bought
    Together, the year they were wed.

  She thought of their one-room home, and the night-long sigh
    Recalled, as he slept, of his breath in her loosened hair.
  _He slept._ She opened her haggard eyes with a cry.
    But only the night was there.

  Nay, out of the formless night, at her furtive glance,
    Crouched at the end of her cold wet bench, there grew
  A bundle of fog, a bundle of rags that, perchance,
    Once was a woman, too.

  A huddled shape, a fungus of foul grey mist
    Spawned of the river, in peace and much good-will,
  And even the woman whose lips had once been kissed
    Wondered, it crouched so still.

  No breath, no shadow of breath in the lamp-light smoked,
    It crouched so still--that bunch at the bench's end.
  She stretched her neck like a crow, then leaned and croaked,
    "_A Merry Christmas, friend!_"

  She rose, and peered, peered at its vacant eyes.
    Touched its cold claws. Its arms of knotted bone
  Were wands of ice; like iron rods the thighs;
    The left breast--like a stone.

  _Far, far along the rows of warmth and light
    The Christmas waits, with cornet and bassoon,
  Carolled "While shepherds watched their flocks by night."
    The bells pealed to the moon._

  A bundle of rags and bones, a bundle of mist,
    And never a hell or heaven to hear or see,
  The woman, the woman whose lips had once been kissed,
    Knelt down feverishly.

  She plucked the shawl out of that frozen clutch.
   The dead are dead. Why should the living freeze?
  She touched the cold flesh that she feared to touch
   Kneeling upon her knees.

  Her palsied hands unlaced the shoes--good shoes!--
    She tore them quick from the crooked yellow feet.
  If Death be generous, why should Life refuse
    To take, and pawn, and eat?

  A heavy step drew nearer thro' the mist.
    She bundled them into the shawl. Her eyes were bright.
  The woman, the woman whose lips had once been kissed,
    Slunk, chuckling, thro' the night.




THE IRON CROWN


  Not memory of a vanished bliss,
    But suddenly to know,
  I had forgotten! This, O this
    With iron crowned my woe:

  To know that on some midnight sea
    Whence none could lift the pall
  A drowning hand was waved to me,
    Then--swept beyond recall.




THE OLD DEBATE


  His angels fell, and myriads grope
    In doubt, for this dark cause alone,--
  That God hath given them room for hope,
    And made their struggling wills their own.

  In the same breath, they plead for chains
    And freedom; pray for ordered spheres,
  Then murmur that the sun retains
    Its course, unchecked by smiles or tears.

  "The Omnipotent would grant us this,
    Or else He is not good," they say;
  But O, the Power withholds their bliss
    Till they agree what prayer to pray.




A SONG OF HOPE


  Not in those eyes, too kind for truth,
    Which dare not note how beauties wane;
  Nor in that crueller joy of youth
    Which turns from sorrow with disdain;
            No--no--not there,
    Abides the hope that answers our despair.

  Lie where they hid thy dead away.
    Knock on that unrelenting door;
  Then break, O desolate heart, and say
    Farewell, farewell, for evermore ...
            There, only there,
    Abides the hope that conquers all despair.

  The silence that refused to bless
    Till grief had turned the heart to stone ...
  What soul compact of nothingness
    Could hear so fierce a trumpet blown?
            Then hear, O hear,
    The dreadful hope that equals all despair.

  There, till the deep atoning Might
    Shall answer all that each can pray,
  The very boundlessness of night
    Proclaims--and waits--an equal day.
            There, only there,
  --_But O, sing low, sweet strings, lest hope take wing!_--
    Abides the hope that answers all despair.




THE HEDGE-ROSE OPENS


  How passionately it opens after rain,
            And O, how like a prayer
  To those great shining skies! Do they disdain
            A bride so small and fair?
  See the imploring petals, how they part
            And utterly lay bare
  The perishing treasures of that piteous heart
            In wild surrender there.
  What? Would'st _thou_, too, drink up the Eternal bliss,
            Ecstatically dare,
  O, little bride of God, to invoke _His_ kiss?--
            But O, how like a prayer!




THE MAY-TREE


  The May-tree on the hill
    Stands in the night
  So fragrant and so still,
    So dusky white.

  That, stealing from the wood
    In that sweet air,
  You'd think Diana stood
    Before you there.

  If it be so, her bloom
    Trembles with bliss.
  She waits across the gloom
    Her shepherd's kiss.

  Touch her. A bird will start
    From those pure snows,--
  The dark and fluttering heart
    Endymion knows.




OLD LETTERS


  Read them? Strangle that sick cry?
      Christ God, no!
  Shut the box. Lock the lid.
      You'll be safer--so.
  Could you read one crooked word
      Scrawled so long ago,
  Love would rise before your face
      And blind you, like a blow.

  _Close it! Quickly! For I caught,
      In a childish hand,
  Something that she never thought
      I should understand._

  So I crouch. And shall our God
      Prove Him baser yet,
  He who filled her eyes with light
      Quite renounce His debt,

  Give her worlds to love, and then--
      Ere the sun be set,
  Strike her down and coffin all?
      Christ, shall _He_ forget?

  _Close it! Quickly! For I caught,
      In a childish hand,
  Something that she never thought
      I should understand._




LAMPS


  Immense and silent night,
    Over the lonely downs I go;
  And the deep gloom is pricked with points of light
    Above me and below.

  I cannot break the bars
    Of Time and Fate; and if I scan the sky,
  There comes to me, questioning those cold stars,
    No signal, no reply.

  Yet are they less than these--
    These village-lights, which I do scan
  Below me, or far out on darkling seas
    Those messages from man?

  Round me the darkness rolls.
    Out of the depth, each lance of light
  Shoots from lost lanthorns, thrills from living souls,
    And shall I doubt the height?

  No signal? No reply?
    As through the deepening night I roam,
  Hope opens all her casements in the sky
    And lights the lamps of home.




AT EDEN GATES


  _To Eden Garden_--so the sign-post said;
    I could not see the road;
  But, where the Sussex clover blossomed red
    Its runaway blisses flowed.

  I traced them back for many a night and day,
    --The way she, too, had gone!--
  Till lo, the terrible Angel in the way
    Inexorably shone.

  Up to the Gates, a fearless fool I came;
    Between the lily and rose
  Fluttering these evil rags of sordid shame,
    A thing to scare the crows.

  "And hath the Master given thee, then, no word?"
    The scornful Angel smiled:
  Only two souls may pass my Flaming Sword,--
    The Lover and the Child.

  I raised my head,--"Now let all hell make mirth,
    Where Love went, I go, too!"
  His eyes met mine. The sword sank to the earth,
    And let her lover through.




THE PSYCHE OF OUR DAY


  As constant lovers may rejoice
    With seas between, with worlds between,
  Because a fragrance and a voice
    Are round them everywhere:
  So let me travel to the grave,
    Believing still--for I have seen--
  That Love's triumphant banners wave
    Beyond my own despair.

  I have no trust in my own worth;
    Yet have I faith, O love, for you,
  That every beauty in bloom or leaf,
    That even age and wrong
  May touch, may hurt you, on this earth,
    But only, only as kisses do;
  Or as the fretted string of grief
    Completes the bliss of song;

  That you shall see, on any grave
    The snow fall, like that unseen hand
  Which O, so often, pressed your hair
    To cherish and console:
  That seas may roar and winds rave
    But you shall feel and understand
  What vast caresses everywhere
    Convey you to the goal.

  So was it always in the years
    When Love began, when Love began
  With eyes that were not touched of tears
    And lips that still could sing--
  And all around us, in the may,
    The child-god with his laughter ran,
  And every bloom, on every spray,
    Betrayed his fluttering wing.

  So hold it, keep it, count it, sweet,
    Until the end, until the end.
  It is not cruelty, but bliss
    That pains and is so fond:
  Crush life like thyme beneath your feet,
    And O, my love, when that strange friend,
  The Shadow of Wings, which men call Death
    Shall close your eyes, with that last kiss,
  Ask not His name. A rosier breath
    Shall waken you--beyond.




PARACLETE


  Tongue hath not told it,
    Heart hath not known;
  Yet shall the bough swing
    When it hath flown.

  Dreams have denied it,
    Fools forsworn:
  Yet it hath comforted
    Each man born.

  Once and again it is
    Blown to me,
  Sweet from the wild thyme,
    Salt from the sea;

  Blown thro' the ferns
    Faint from the sky;
  Shadowed in water,
    Yet clear as a cry.

  Light on a face,
    Or touch of a hand,
  Making my still heart
    Understand.

  Earth hath not seen it.
    Nor heaven above,
  Yet shall the wild bough
    Bend with the Dove.

  Yea, tho' the bloom fall
    Under Thy feet,
  _Veni, Creator,
    Paraclete!_




AFTER RAIN


  Listen! On sweetening air
    The blackbird growing bold
  Flings out, where green boughs glisten,
    Three splashes of wild gold.

  Daughter of April, hear;
    And hear, O barefoot boy!
  That carol of wild sweet water
    Has washed the world with joy.

  Glisten, O fragrant earth
    Assoiled by heaven anew,
  And O, ye lovers, listen,
    With eyes that glisten, too.




THE DEATH OF A GREAT MAN


  No--not that he is dead. The pang's not there,
    Nor in the City's many-coloured bloom
  Of swift black-lettered posters, which the throng
    Passes with bovine stare,
  To say _He is dead_ and _Is it going to rain?_
    Or hum stray snatches of a rag-time song.
  Nor is it in that falsest shibboleth
  (Which orators toss to the dumb scorn of death)
    That all the world stands weeping at his tomb.
  London is dining, dancing, through it all.
    And, in the unchecked smiles along the street
  Where men, that slightly knew him, lightly meet,
    With all the old indifferent grimaces,
  There is no jot of grief, no tittle of pain.
    No. No. For nearer things do most tears fall.
  Grief is for near and little things. But pride,
    O, pride was to be found by two or three,
  And glory in his great battling memory,
    Prouder and purer than the loud world knows,
  In one more dreadful sign, the day he died--
    The dreadful light upon a thousand faces,
  The peace upon the faces of his foes.




THE ROMAN WAY


  He that has loyally served the State
    Whereof he found himself a part,
  Or spent his life-blood to create
    A kingdom's treasure in his art;

  Who sees the enemies of his land
    Applauded, by her sects and schools;
  And the high thought they scarce had scanned
    Derided and befogged by fools;

  --Better to know it soon than late!--
    Struggling, he wins a meed of praise;
  Achieving, he is dogged by hate
    And furtive malice all his days.

  O, Emperor of the Stoic clan,
    Enfold him, then, with nobler pride.
  Teach him that nought can hurt a man
    Who will not turn or stoop to chide.

  Can falsehood kindle or bedim
    One bay-leaf in his quiet crown?
  Ten thousand Lies may pluck at him,
    But only Truth can tear him down.

  Why should he heed the thing they say?
    They never asked if it were true.
  Why brush one scribbler's tale away
    For others to invent a new?

  No, let him search his heart, secure
    --If Truth be there--from tongue or pen;
  And teach us, Emperor, to endure,
    To think like Romans and like men.




THE INNER PASSION


  There is a Master in my heart
    To whom, though oft against my will,
  I bring the songs I sing apart
    And strive to think that they fulfil
  His silent law, within my heart.

  But He is blind to my desires,
    And deaf to all that I would plead:
  He tests my truth at purer fires
    And shames my purple with His need.
  He claims my deeds, not my desires.

  And often when my comrades praise,
    I sadden, for He turns from me!
  But, sometimes, when they blame, I raise
    Mine eyes to His, and in them see
  A tenderness too deep for praise.

  He is not to be bought with gold,
    Or lured by thornless crowns of fame;
  But when some rebel thought hath sold
    Him to dishonour and to shame,
  And my heart's Pilate cries, "Behold,"

  "Behold the Man," I know Him then;
    And all those wild thronged clamours die
  In my heart's judgment hall again,
    Or if it ring with "Crucify!"
  Some few are faithful even then.

  Some few sad thoughts,--one bears His cross;
    To that dark Calvary of my pride;
  One stands far off and mourns His loss,
    And one poor thief on either side
  Hangs on his own unworthy cross.

  And one--O, truth in ancient guise!--
    Rails, and one bids him cease alway,
  And the God turns His hungering eyes
    On that poor thought with, "Thou, this day,
  Shalt sing, shalt sing, in Paradise."




A COUNTRY LANE IN HEAVEN


  The exceeding weight of glory bowed
    My head, in that pure clime:
  I found a road that ran through cloud
    Along the coasts of Time....

  Out of that mist of years there came
    A cross-barred gate of wood.
  I clutched, I kissed the unheavenly frame
    So hard, it trickled blood.

  My head upon the iron lay.
    I slobbered blood and foam.
  Yea, like a dog, I knew the way,
    A hundred yards from home.

  _Iron and blood and wood! They knew
    The secret of that cry
  When the Eternal Passion drew
    Their Maker through--to die._

  I knew each little hawthorn-cloud
    Along my misty lane,
  Then my heart burst. She sobbed aloud,
    Between my arms again.




TO THE DESTROYERS


  Yes. You have shattered many an ancient wrong,
    And we were with you, heart and mind and soul,
    But there are fools who cast away control
  In life and thought and art; because the Strong--
  We dare to say it--have now destroyed so long,
    That careless minds forget the unchanging goal--
    The nobler Order which shall make us whole,
  The Service which is freedom, beauty, song.

  We shall be stoned as traitors to your cause
    While the real traitors that you did not know,
      Chaos and Vice, trumpet themselves as free.
  Pray God that, loyal to the Eternal laws,
    A little remnant, mauled by friend and foe,
      Save you through Truth, and bring you Liberty.




THE TRUMPET-CALL


    I

    Trumpeter, sound the great recall!
  Swift, O swift, for the squadrons break,
    The long lines waver, mazed in the gloom!
      Hither and thither the blind host blunders.
  Stand thou firm for a dead Man's sake,
    Firm where the ranks reel down to their doom,
      Stand thou firm in the midst of the thunders,
    Stand where the steeds and the riders fall,
      Set the bronze to thy lips and sound
      A rally to ring the whole world round.
    Trumpeter, rally us, rally us, rally us!
            Sound the great recall.


    II

    Trumpeter, sound for the ancient heights!
  Clouds of the earth-born battle cloak
    The heaven that our fathers held from of old;
      And we--shall we prate to their sons of the gain
  In gold or bread? Through yonder smoke
    The heights that never were won with gold
      Wait, still bright with their old red stain,
      For the thousand chariots of God again,
    And the steel that swept thro' a hundred fights
      With the Ironsides, equal to life and death,
      The steel, the steel of their ancient faith.
    Trumpeter, rally us, rally us, rally us!
            Sound for the sun-lit heights.


    III

    Trumpeter, sound for the faith again!
  Blind and deaf with the dust and the blood,
    Clashing together we know not whither
      The tides of the battle would have us advance.
  Stand thou firm in the crimson flood,
    Send the lightning of thy great cry
      Through the thunders, athwart the storm,
    Sound till the trumpets of God reply
    From the heights we have lost in the steadfast sky,
    From the Strength we despised and rejected. Then,
      Locking the ranks as they form and form,
        Lift us forward, banner and lance,
    Mailed in the faith of Cromwell's men,
        When from their burning hearts they hurled
        The gage of heaven against the world!
    Trumpeter, rally us, rally us, rally us,
            Up to the heights again.


    IV

    Trumpeter, sound for the last Crusade!
  Sound for the fire of the red-cross kings,
    Sound for the passion, the splendour, the pity
      That swept the world for a dead Man's sake,
  Sound, till the answering trumpet rings
    Clear from the heights of the holy City,
      Sound till the lions of England awake,
    Sound for the tomb that our lives have betrayed;
      O'er broken shrine and abandoned wall,
      Trumpeter, sound the great recall,
    Trumpeter, rally us, rally us, rally us;
             Sound for the last Crusade!


    V

    Trumpeter, sound for the splendour of God!
  Sound the music whose name is law,
    Whose service is perfect freedom still,
      The order august that rules the stars.
  Bid the anarchs of night withdraw,
    Too long the destroyers have worked their will,
      Sound for the last, the last of the wars.
  Sound for the heights that our fathers trod,
      When truth was truth and love was love,
      With a hell beneath, but a heaven above,
    Trumpeter, rally us, up to the heights of it!
            Sound for the City of God.




THE HEART OF CANADA

_July 1912_


  Because her heart is all too proud
    --_Canada! Canada! fair young Canada_--
  To breathe the might of her love aloud,
    Be quick, O Motherland!
  Because her soul is wholly free
    --_Canada kneels, thy daughter, Canada_--
  England, look in her eyes and see,
    Honour and understand.

  Because her pride at thy masthead shines,
    --_Canada! Canada!_--queenly Canada
  Bows with all her breathing pines,
    All her fragrant firs.
  Because our isle is little and old
    --_Canada! Canada!_--young-eyed Canada
  Gives thee, Mother, her hands to hold,
    And makes thy glory hers.

  Because thy Fleet is hers for aye,
    --_Canada! Canada!_--clear-souled Canada,
  Ere the war-cloud roll this way,
    Bids the world beware.
  Her heart, her soul, her sword are thine
    --_Thine the guns, the guns of Canada!_--
  The ships are foaming into line,
    And Canada will be there.




THE RETURN OF THE HOME-BORN


  All along the white chalk coast
    The mist lifts clear.
  Wight is glimmering like a ghost.
    The ship draws near.
  Little inch-wide meadows
    Lost so many a day,
  The first time I knew you
    Was when I turned away.

  Island--little island--
    Lost so many a year,
  Mother of all I leave behind
    --_Draw me near!_--
  Mother of half the rolling world,
    And O, so little and gray,
  The first time I found you
    Was when I turned away.

  _Over yon green water
    Sussex lies.
  But the slow mists gather
    In our eyes.
  England, little island
    --God, how dear!--
  Fold me in your mighty arms,
    Draw me near._

  Little tawny roofs of home,
    Nestling in the gray,
  Where the smell of Sussex loam
    Blows across the bay ...
  Fold me, teach me, draw me close,
    Lest in death I say
  The first time I loved you
    Was when I turned away.




A SALUTE FROM THE FLEET


    I

    _The Guns of H.M.S. Royal Sovereign_

  Ocean-mother of England, thine is the crowning acclaim.
    Here, in the morning of battle, from over the world and beyond,
      Here, by our fleets of steel, silently foam into line
  Fleets of our glorious dead, thy shadowy oak-walled ships.
  Mother, for O, thy soul must speak thro' our iron lips!
      How should we speak to the ages, unless with a word of thine?
    Utter it, Victory! Let thy great signal flash thro' the flame!
      Answer, _Bellerophon_, _Marlborough_, _Thunderer_, _Condor_,
           respond!


    II

    _The Guns of H.M.S. Majestic_

  Out of the ages we speak unto you, O ye ages to be.
    Rocks of Sevastopol, echo our thunder-word, bruit it afar.
      Roll it, O Mediterranean, round by Gibraltar again.
  Buffet it, Porto Bello, back to the Nile once more.
  Answer it, great St. Vincent! Answer it, Elsinore,
      Buffet it back from your crags and roll it over the main!
    Heights of Quebec, O hear and re-echo it back to the Baltic Sea!
      Answer it, _Camperdown_! Answer it, answer it, _Trafalgar_!


    III

    _The Guns of H.M.S. Rainbow_

  How should we speak to the ages, if not with a word of thine,
    Maker of cloud and harvest, foam and the sea-bird's wing,
      Ocean-Mother of England and all things living and free?
  Deep that wast moved by the Spirit to bloom with the first white morn,
  Mother of Light and Freedom, mother of hopes unborn,
      Speak, O world-wide welder of nations, O Soul of the sea!
    Thine was the watchword that called us of old o'er the gray sky-line:
      Lift thy stormy salute. It is freedom and peace that we bring.


    IV

    _The Guns of H.M.S. Victory_

  Therefore on thee we call, O Mother, for we are thy sons.
    Speak, with thy world-wide voice, O wake us anew from our sleep!
      Speak, for the Light of the world still lives and grows on thy face.
  Give us the ancient Word once more, the unchangeable Word,--
  This that Nelson knew, this that Effingham heard,
      This that resounds for ever in all the hearts of our race,
    This that lives for a moment on the iron lips of our guns,
      This--that echoes for ever and ever--the Word of the Deep.


    V

    _The Guns of H.M.S. Dreadnought_

  How shall a king be saved by the multitude of an host?
    Was not the answer thine, when fleet upon fleet swept, hurled
      Blind thro' the dark North Sea, with all their invincible ships?
  Thine was the answer, O mother of all men born to be free!
  Witness again, Cape Wrath!--O thine, everlastingly,
      Thine as Freedom arose and rolled thy song from her lips,
    Thine when she 'stablished her throne in thy sight, on our rough
           rock-coast,
      Thine with thy lustral glory and thunder, washing the world.


    VI

    _The Guns of H.M.S. Temeraire_

  O for that ancient cry of the watch at the midnight bell,
    Under the unknown stars, from the decks that Frobisher trod.
      Hark, _Before the world?_--he questions a fleet in the dark!
  Answer it, friend or foe! And, ringing from mast to mast,
  Mother, hast thou forgotten what cry in the dark went past,
      Answering still as he questioned? _Before the world?_ O, hark,
    Ringing anear, _Before the world?_ ... _was God_ ... All's well!
      Dying afar ... _Before the world?_ ... All's well ... _was God!_


    VII

    _The Guns of H.M.S. Revenge_

  Raleigh and Grenville heard it, Knights of the Ocean-sea.
    Have we forgotten it only, we with our leagues of steel?
      Give us our watchword again, O mother, in this great hour!
  Here, in the morning of battle, here as we gather our might,
  Here, as the nations of earth in the light of thy freedom unite,
      Shake our hearts with thy Word, O 'stablish our peace on thy power!
    'Stablish our power on thy peace, thy glory, thy liberty,
      'Stablish on thy deep Word the throne of our Commonweal.


    VIII

    _The Guns of H.M.S. Leviathan_

  They that go down to the sea in ships--they heard it of old--
    They shall behold His wonders, alone on the Deep, the Deep!
      Have _we_ forgotten, we only? O, rend the heavens again,
  Voice of the Everlasting, shake the great hills with thy breath!
  Roll the Voice of our God thro' the valleys of doubt and death!
      Waken the fog-bound cities with the shout of the wind-swept main,
    Inland over the smouldering plains, till the mists unfold,
      Darkness die, and England, England arise from sleep.


  IX

  _The Guns of H.M.S. Triumph_

  Queen of the North and the South, Queen of our ocean-renown,
    England, England, England, O lift thine eyes to the sun!
      Wake, for the hope of the whole world yearns to thee, watches and
           waits!
  Now on the full flood-tide of the ages, the supreme hour
  Beacons thee onward in might to the purpose and crown of thy power.
      Hark, for the whole Atlantic thunders against thy gates,
    Take the Crown of all Time, all might, earth's crowning Crown,
      Throne thy children in peace and in freedom together, O weld them
           in one.


    X

    _The Guns of the Fleet_

  _Throne them in triumph together. Thine is the crowning cry!
    Thine the glory for ever in the nation born of thy womb!
      Thine the Sword and the Shield, and the shout that Salamis heard,
  Surging in Aeschylean splendour, earth-shaking acclaim!
  Ocean-mother of England, thine is the throne of her fame.
      Breaker of many fleets, O thine the victorious word,
    Thine the Sun and the Freedom, the God and the wind-swept sky,
      Thine the thunder and thine the lightning, thine the doom._




IN MEMORY OF A BRITISH AVIATOR


  On those young brows that knew no fear
    We lay the Roman athlete's crown,
  The laurel of the charioteer,
    The imperial garland of renown,
  While those young eyes, beyond the sun,
  See Drake, see Raleigh, smile "Well done."

  Their desert seas that knew no shore
    To-night with fleets like cities flare;
  But, frailer even than theirs of yore,
    His keel a new-found deep would dare:
  They watch, with thrice-experienced eyes
  What fleets shall follow through the skies.

  They would not scoff, though man should set
    To feebler wings a mightier task.
  They know what wonders wait us yet.
    Not all things in an hour they ask;
  But in each noble failure see
  The inevitable victory.

  A thousand years have borne us far
    From that dark isle the Saxon swayed,
  And star whispers to trembling star
    While Space and Time shrink back afraid,--
  "Ten thousand thousand years remain
  For man to dare our deep again."

  Thou, too, shalt hear across that deep
    Our thundering fleets of thought draw nigh,
  Round which the suns and systems sweep
    Like cloven foam from sky to sky,
  Till Death himself at last restore
  His captives to our eyes once more.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Feeble the wings, dauntless the soul!
    Take thou the conqueror's laurel crown;
  Take--for thy chariot grazed the goal--
    The imperial garland of renown;
  While those young eyes, beyond the sun,
  See Drake, see Raleigh, smile "Well done."




THE WAGGON


  Crimson and black on the sky, a waggon of clover
    Slowly goes rumbling, over the white chalk road;
  And I lie in the golden grass there, wondering why
          So little a thing
      As the jingle and ring of the harness,
          The hot creak of leather,
          The peace of the plodding,
      Should suddenly, stabbingly, make it
          Strange that men die.

  Only, perhaps, in the same blue summer weather,
    Hundreds of years ago, in this field where I lie,
  Caedmon, the Saxon, was caught by the self-same thing:
    The serf lying, black with the sun, on his beautiful wain-load,
          The jingle and clink of the harness,
          The hot creak of leather,
          The peace of the plodding;
    And wondered, O terribly wondered,
          That men must die.




THE SACRED OAK

(_A Song of Britain_)


    I

  Voice of the summer stars that, long ago,
    Sang thro' the old oak-forests of our isle,
  Enchanted voice, pure as her falling snow,
    Dark as her storms, bright as her sunniest smile,
  Taliessin, voice of Britain, the fierce flow
    Of fourteen hundred years has whelmed not thee!
      Still art thou singing, lavrock of her morn,
  Singing to heaven in that first golden glow,
    Singing above her mountains and her sea!
              Not older yet are grown
              Thy four winds in their moan
      For Urien. Still thy charlock blooms in the billowing corn.


    II

  Thy dew is bright upon this beechen spray!
    Spring wakes thy harp! I hear--I see--again,
  Thy wild steeds foaming thro' the crimson fray,
    The raven on the white breast of thy slain,
  The tumult of thy chariots, far away,
    The weeping in the glens, the lustrous hair
      Dishevelled over the stricken eagle's fall,
  And in thy Druid groves, at fall of day
    One gift that Britain gave her valorous there,
              One gift of lordlier pride
              Than aught--save to have died--
      One spray of the sacred oak, they coveted most of all.


    III

  I watch thy nested brambles growing green:
    O strange, across that misty waste of years,
  To glimpse the shadowy thrush that thou hast seen,
    To touch, across the ages, touch with tears
  The ferns that hide thee with their fairy screen,
    Or only hear them rustling in the dawn;
      And--as a dreamer waking--in thy words,
  For all the golden clouds that drowse between,
    To feel the veil of centuries withdrawn,
              To feel thy sun re-risen
              Unbuild our shadowy prison
      And hear on thy fresh boughs the carol of waking birds.


    IV

  O, happy voice, born in that far, clear time,
    Over thy single harp thy simple strain
  Attuned all life for Britain to the chime
    Of viking oars and the sea's dark refrain,
  And thine own beating heart, and the sublime
    Measure to which the moons and stars revolve
      Untroubled by the storms that, year by year,
  In ever-swelling symphonies still climb
    To embrace our growing world and to resolve
              Discords unknown to thee,
              In the infinite harmony
      Which still transcends our strife and leaves us darkling here.

         *       *       *       *       *


    V

  For, now, one sings of heaven and one of hell,
    One soars with hope, one plunges to despair!
  This, trembling, doubts if aught be ill or well;
    And that cries, "Fair is foul and foul is fair;"
  And this cries, "Forward, though I cannot tell
    Whither, and all too surely all things die;"
      And that sighs, "Rest, then, sleep and take thine ease."
  One sings his country and one rings its knell,
    One hymns mankind, one dwarfs them with the sky.
              O, Britain, let thy soul
              Once more command the whole,
      Once more command the strings of the world-wide harmony.


    VI

  For hark! One sings, _The gods, the gods are dead!_
    _Man triumphs!_ And hark--_Blind Space his funeral urn._
  And hark, one whispers with reverted head
    To the old dead gods--_Bring back our heaven, return!_
  And hark, one moans--_The ancient order is fled,
    We are children of blind chance and vacant dreams.
      Heed not mine utterance--that was chance-born, too._
  And hark, the answer of Science--_All they said,
    Your fathers, in that old time, lit by gleams
              Of what their hearts could feel,
              The rolling years reveal
      As fragments of one law, one covenant, simply true._


    VII

  _I find_, she cries, _in all this march of time
    And space, no gulf, no break, nothing that mars
  Its unity. I watch the primal slime
    Lift Athens like a flower to greet the stars!
  I flash my messages from clime to clime,
    I link the increasing world from depth to height!
      Not yet ye see the wonder that draws nigh,
  When at some sudden contact, some sublime
  Touch, as of memory, all this boundless night
                Wherein ye grope entombed
                Shall, by that touch illumed,
      Like one electric City shine from sky to sky._


    VIII

  _No longer then the memories that ye hold
    Dark in your brain shall slumber. Ye shall see
  That City whose gates are more than pearl or gold
    And all its towers firm as Eternity.
  The stones of the earth have cried to it from of old!
    Why will ye turn from Him who reigns above
      Because your highest words fall short?
          Kneel--call
  On Him whose Name--I AM--doth still enfold
    Past, present, future, memory, hope and love.
                No seed falls fruitless there._
                Beyond your Father's care--
      _The old covenant still holds fast_--no bird, no leaf can fall.


    IX

  O Time, thou mask of the ever-living Soul,
    Thou veil to shield us from that blinding Face,
  Thou art wearing thin! We are nearer to the goal
    When man no more shall need thy saving grace,
  But all the folded years like one great scroll
    Shall be unrolled in the omnipresent Now,
      And He that saith _I am_ unseal the tomb:
  Nearer His thunders and His trumpets roll,
    I catch the gleam that lit thy lifted brow,
                O singer whose wild eyes
                Possess these April skies,
      I touch--I clasp thy hands thro' all the clouds of doom.


    X

  Teach thou our living choirs amid the sound
    Of their tempestuous chords once more to hear
  That harmony wherewith the whole is crowned,
    The singing heavens that sphere by choral sphere
  Break open, height o'er height, to the utmost bound
    Of passionate thought! O, as this glorious land,
      This sacred country shining on the sea,
  Grows mightier, let not her clear voice be drowned
    In the fierce waves of faction. Let her stand
                A beacon to the blind,
                A signal to mankind,
      A witness to the heavens' profoundest unity.


    XI

  Her altars are forgotten and her creeds
    Dust, and her soul foregoes the lesser Cross.
  O, point her to the greater! Her heart bleeds
    Still, where men simply feel some vague deep loss.
  Their hands grope earthward, knowing not what she needs.
    We would not call her back in this great hour!
      Nay, upward, onward, to the heights untrod
  Signal us, living voices, by those deeds
    Of all her deathless heroes, by the Power
                That still, still walks her waves,
                Still chastens her, still saves,
      Signal us, not to the dead, but to the living God.


    XII

  Signal us with that watchword of the deep,
    The watchword that her boldest seamen gave
  The winds of the unknown ocean-sea to keep,
    When round their oaken walls the midnight wave
  Heaved and subsided in gigantic sleep,
    And they plunged Westward with her flag unfurled.
      Hark, o'er their cloudy sails and glimmering spars,
  The watch cries, as they proudly onward sweep,--
    _Before the world ... All's well!... Before the world_ ...
                From mast to calling mast
                The counter-cry goes past--
      _Before the world was God!_--it rings against the stars.


    XIII

  Signal us o'er the little heavens of gold
    With that heroic signal Nelson knew
  When, thro' the thunder and flame that round him rolled,
    He pointed to the dream that still held true.
  Cry o'er the warring nations, cry as of old
    _A little child shall lead them! they shall be
      One people under the shadow of God's wing!
  There shall be no more weeping!_ Let it be told
    That Britain set one foot upon the sea,
                One foot on the earth. Her eyes
                Burned thro' the conquered skies,
      And, as the angel of God, she bade the whole world sing.


    XIV

  A dream? Nay, have ye heard or have ye known
    That the everlasting God who made the ends
  Of all creation wearieth? His worlds groan
    Together in travail still. Still He descends
  From heaven. The increasing worlds are still His throne
    And His creative Calvary and His tomb
      Through which He sinks, dies, triumphs with each and all,
  And ascends, multitudinous and at one
    With all the hosts of His evolving doom,
                His vast redeeming strife,
                His everlasting life,
      His love, beyond which not one bird, one leaf can fall.


    XV

  And hark, His whispers thro' creation flow,
    _Lovest thou me?_ His nations answer "yea!"
  And--_Feed My lambs_, His voice as long ago
    Steals from that highest heaven, how far away!
  And yet again saith--_Lovest thou Me?_ and "O,
    Thou knowest we love Thee," passionately we cry:
    But, heeding not our tumult, out of the deep
  The great grave whisper, pitiful and low,
    Breathes--_Feed My sheep_; and yet once more the sky
                Thrills with that deep strange plea,
                _Lovest thou, lovest thou Me?_
    And our lips answer "yea"; but our God--_Feed My sheep._


    XVI

  O sink not yet beneath the exceeding weight
    Of splendour, thou still single-hearted voice
  Of Britain. Droop not earthward now to freight
    Thy soul with fragments of the song, rejoice
  In no faint flights of music that create
    Low heavens o'er-arched by skies without a star,
      Nor sink in the easier gulfs of shallower pain!
  Sing thou in the whole majesty of thy fate,
    Teach us thro' joy, thro' grief, thro' peace, thro' war,
                With single heart and soul
                Still, still to seek the goal,
    And thro' our perishing heavens, point us to Heaven again.


    XVII

  Voice of the summer stars that long ago
    Sang thro' the old oak-forests of our isle,
  An ocean-music that thou ne'er couldst know
    Storms Heaven--O, keep us steadfast all the while;
  Not idly swayed by tides that ebb and flow,
    But strong to embrace the whole vast symphony
      Wherein no note (no bird, no leaf) can fall
  Beyond His care, to enfold it all as though
    Thy single harp were ours, its unity
                In battle like one sword,
                And O, its one reward
    One spray of the sacred oak, still coveted most of all.




THE WORLD'S WEDDING

"Et quid curae nobis de generibus et speciebus? Ex uno Verbo omnia, et
unum loquuntur omnia. Cui omnia unum sunt, quique ad unum omnia trahit
et omnia in uno videt, potest stabilis corde esse."--THOMAS A KEMPIS.


    I

      When poppies fired the nut-brown wheat,
      My love went by with sun-stained feet:
  I followed her laughter, followed her, followed her, all a summer's
           morn!
      But O, from an elfin palace of air,
      A wild bird sang a song so rare,
      I stayed to listen and--lost my Fair,
        And walked the world forlorn.


    II

      When chalk shone white between the sheaves,
      My love went by as one that grieves;
  I followed her weeping, followed her, followed her, all an autumn noon!
      The sunset flamed so fierce a red
      From North to South--I turned my head
      To wonder--and my Fair was fled
        Beyond the dawning moon.


    III

      When bare black boughs were choked with snow,
      My love went by, as long ago;
  I followed her dreaming, followed her, followed her, all a winter's
           night!
      But O, along that snow-white track
      With thorny shadows printed black,
      I saw three kings come riding back,
        And--lost my life's delight.


    IV

      They are so many, and she but One;
      And I and she, like moon and sun
  So separate ever! Ah yet, I follow her, follow her, faint and far;
      For what if all this diverse bliss
      Should run together in one kiss!
      Swift, Spring, with the sweet clue I miss
      Between these several instances,--
        The kings, that inn, that star.


    V

      Between the hawk's and the wood-dove's wing,
      My love, my love flashed by like Spring!
      The year had finished its golden ring!
      Earth, the Gipsy, and Heaven, the King,
      Were married like notes in the song I sing,
  And O, I followed her, followed her, followed her over the hills of
           Time,
      Never to lose her now I know,
      For whom the sun was clasped in snow,
      The heights linked to the depths below,
      The rose's flush to the planet's glow,
      Death the friend to life the foe,
      The Winter's joy to the Spring's woe,
        And the world made one in a rhyme.




IN MEMORIAM: SAMUEL COLERIDGE-TAYLOR


  _Farewell!_ The soft mists of the sunset-sky
    Slowly enfold his fading birch-canoe!
  _Farewell!_ His dark, his desolate forests cry,
    Moved to their vast, their sorrowful depths anew.

  Fading! Nay, lifted thro' a heaven of light,
    His proud sails brightening thro' that crimson flame,
  Leaving us lonely on the shores of night,
    Home to Ponemah take his deathless fame.

  Generous as a child, so wholly free
    From all base pride that fools forgot his crown,
  He adored Beauty, in pure ecstasy,
    And waived the mere rewards of his renown.

  The spark that falls from heaven not oft on earth
    To human hearts this vital splendour gives;
  His was the simple, true, immortal birth.
    Scholars compose; but--_this man's music lives_!

  Greater than England or than Earth discerned,
    He never paltered with his art for gain:
  When many a vaunted crown to dust is turned,
    This uncrowned king shall take his throne and reign.

  Nations unborn shall hear his forests moan;
    Ages unscanned shall hear his winds lament,
  Hear the strange grief that deepened through his own
    The vast cry of a buried continent.

  Through him, his race a moment lifted up
    Forests of hands to Beauty as in prayer;
  Touched through his lips the sacramental Cup,
    And then sank back--benumbed in our bleak air.

  Through him, through him, a lost world hailed the light!
    The tragedy of that triumph none can tell,--
  So great, so brief, so quickly snatched from sight;
    And yet--O hail, great comrade, not farewell!




INSCRIPTION

(_For the Grave of Coleridge-Taylor_)


  Sleep, crowned with fame; fearless of change or time.
    Sleep, like remembered music in the soul,
  Silent, immortal; while our discords climb
    To that great chord which shall resolve the whole.

  Silent with Mozart on that solemn shore;
    Secure where neither waves nor hearts can break;
  Sleep--till the Master of the World, once more,
    Touch the remembered strings, and bid thee wake....

  Touch the remembered strings, and bid thee wake.




VALUES


  The moon that sways the rhythmic seas,
    The wheeling earth, the marching sky,--
      I ask not whence the order came
        That moves them all as one.

  These are your chariots. Nor shall these
    Appal me with immensity;
      I know they carry one heart of flame
        More precious than the sun.




THE HEROIC DEAD

(_On the loss of the Titanic_)


  If in the noon they doubted, in the night
    They never swerved. Death had no power to appal.
  There was one Way, one Truth, one Life, one Light,
    One Love that shone triumphant over all.

  If in the noon they doubted, at the last
    There was no Way to part, no Way but One
  That rolled the waves of Nature back and cast
    In ancient days a shadow across the sun.

  If in the noon they doubted, their last breath
    Saluted once again the eternal goal,
  Chanted a love-song in the face of Death
    And rent the veil of darkness from the soul.

  If in the noon they doubted, in the night
    They waved the shadowy world of strife aside,
  Flooded high heaven with an immortal light,
    And taught the deep how its Creator died.




THE CRY IN THE NIGHT


  It tears at the heart in the night, that moan of the wind,
         That desolate moan.
  It is worse than the cry of a child. I can hardly bear
         To hear it, alone.

  It is worse than the sobbing of love, when love is estranged:
         For this is a cry
  Out of the desolate ages. It never has changed.
         It never can die.

  A cry over numberless graves, dark, helpless and blind,
         From the measureless past,
  To the measureless future, a sobbing before the first laughter,
         And after the last!

         *       *       *       *       *

  From the height of creation, in passion eternal, the Word
         Rushes forth, the loud cry,
  _Forsaken! Forsaken!_ It cuts through the night like a sword!
         Shall it win no reply?

  Not of earth is that height of all sorrow, past time, out of space,
         Therefore here, here and now,
  Universal, a Calvary, crowned with Thy passionate face,
         Thy thorn-wounded brow.

  Ah, could I shrink if Thy heart for each heart upon earth
         Must break like a sea?
  Could I hear, could I bear it at all, if I were not a part
         Of this labour in Thee?

  Shall I accuse Thee, then? God, I account it my own
         All the grief I can bear,
  On Thy Cross of Creation, to balance earth's bliss and atone,
         Atone for life there.

  If this be the One Way for ever, which not Thine all-might
         Could change, if it would,
  Till the truth be untrue, till the dark be the same as the light,
         And till evil be good,

  Shall I who took part in Thine April, shrink now from my part
         In Thine anguish to be?
  If Thy goal be the One goal of all, shall not even man's heart
         Endure this, with Thee;

  Die with Thee, balancing life, or help Thee to pay
         For our hope with our pain?...
  _O, the voice of the wind in the night! Is it day, then, broad day,
         On the blind earth again?_




ASTRID

(_An Experiment in Initial Rhymes_)


  White-armed Astrid,--ah, but she was beautiful!--
  Nightly wandered weeping thro' the ferns in the moon,
  Slowly, weaving her strange garland in the forest,
  Crowned with white violets,
  Gowned in green.
  Holy was that glen where she glided,
  Making her wild garland as Merlin had bidden her,
  Breaking off the milk-white horns of the honey-suckle,
  Sweetly dripped the dew upon her small white
  Feet.

  White-throated Astrid,--ah, but she was beautiful!--
  Nightly sought the answer to that riddle in the moon.
  She must weave her garland, ere she save her soul.
  Three long years she has wandered there in vain.
  Always, always, the blossom that would finish it
  Falls to her feet, and the garland breaks and vanishes,
  Breaks like a dream in the dawn when the dreamer
  Wakes.

  White-bosomed Astrid,--ah, but she was beautiful!--
  Nightly tastes the sorrow of the world in the moon.
  Will it be this little white miracle, she wonders.
  How shall she know it, the star that will save her?
  Still, ah still, in the moonlight she crouches
  Bowing her head, for the garland has crumbled!
  All the wild petals for the thousand and second time
  Fall.

  White-footed Astrid,--ah, but she is beautiful!--
  Nightly seeks the secret of the world in the moon.
  She will find the secret. She will find the golden
  Key to the riddle, on the night when she has numbered them,
  Marshalled all her wild flowers, ordered them as music,
  Star by star, note by note, changing them and ranging them,
  Suddenly, as at a kiss, all will flash together,
  Flooding like the dawn thro' the arches of the woodland,
  Fern and thyme and violet, maiden-hair and primrose
  Turn to the Rose of the World, and He shall fold her,
  Kiss her on the mouth, saying, all the world is one now,
  This is the secret of the music that the soul hears,--
  This.




THE INIMITABLE LOVERS


  They tell this proud tale of the Queen--Cleopatra,
    Subtlest of women that the world has ever seen,
  How that, on the night when she parted with her lover
    Anthony, tearless, dry-throated, and sick-hearted,
  A strange thing befell them in the darkness where they stood.

    Bitter as blood was that darkness.
  And they stood in a deep window, looking to the west.
    Her white breast was brighter than the moon upon the sea,
  And it moved in her agony (because it was the end!)
    Like a deep sea, where many had been drowned.
  Proud ships that were crowned with an Emperor's eagles
    Were sunken there forgotten, with their emeralds and gold.
  They had drunken of that glory, and their tale was told, utterly,
    Told.

  There, as they parted, heart from heart, mouth from mouth,
    They stared upon each other. They listened.
      For the South-wind
  Brought them a rumour from afar; and she said,
    Lifting her head, too beautiful for anguish,
            Too proud for pity,--
  _It is the gods that leave the City! O, Anthony,
    Anthony, the gods have forsaken us;
  Because it is the end! They leave us to our doom.
    Hear it!_ And unshaken in the darkness,
  Dull as dropping earth upon a tomb in the distance,
    They heard, as when across a wood a low wind comes,
  A muttering of drums, drawing nearer,
    Then louder and clearer, as when a trumpet sings
  To battle, it came rushing on the wings of the wind,
    A sound of sacked cities, a sound of lamentation,
  A cry of desolation, as when a conquered nation
    Is weeping in the darkness, because its tale is told;
  And then--a sound of chariots that rolled thro' that sorrow
    Trampled like a storm of wild stallions, tossing nearer,
  Trampled louder, clearer, triumphantly as music,
    Till lo! in that great darkness, along that vacant street,
  A red light beat like a furnace on the walls,
    Then--like the blast when the North-wind calls to battle,
  Blaring thro' the blood-red tumult and the flame,
    Shaking the proud City as they came, an hundred elephants,
  Cream-white and bronze, and splashed with bitter crimson,
    Trumpeting for battle as they trod, an hundred elephants,
  Bronze and cream-white, and trapped with gold and purple,
    Towered like tusked castles, every thunder-laden footfall
  Dreadful as the shattering of a City. Yet they trod,
    Rocking like an earthquake, to a great triumphant music,
  And, swinging like the stars, black planets, white moons,
    Thro' the stream of the torches, they brought the red chariot,
  The chariot of the battle-god--Mars.
    While the tall spears of Sparta tossed clashing in his train,
  And a host of ghostly warriors cried aloud
    _All hail!_ to those twain, and went rushing to the darkness
  Like a pageantry of cloud, for their tale was told--utterly--
    Told.

  And following, in the fury of the vine, rushing down
    Like a many-visaged torrent, with ivy-rod and thyrse,
  And many a wild and foaming crown of roses,
    Crowded the Bacchanals, the brown-limbed shepherds,
  The red-tongued leopards, and the glory of the god!
    _Iacchus! Iacchus!_ without dance, without song,
  They cried and swept along to the darkness.
    Only for a breath when the tumult of their torches
  Crimsoned the deep window where that dark warrior stood
    With the blood upon his mail, and the Queen--Cleopatra,
  Frozen to white marble--the Maenads raised their timbrels,
    Tossed their white arms, with a clash--_All hail!_
  Like wild swimmers, pale, in a sea of blood and wine,
    _All hail! All hail!_ Then they swept into the darkness
  And the darkness buried them. Their tale was told--utterly--
    Told.

  And following them, O softer than the moon upon the sea,
    Aphrodite, implacably, shone.
  Like a furnace of white roses, Aphrodite and her train
    Lifted their white arms to those twain in the silence
  Once, and were gone into the darkness;
    Once, and away into the darkness they were swept
  Like a pageantry of cloud, without praise, without pity.
    Then the dark City slept. And the Queen--Cleopatra--
  Subtlest of women that this earth has ever seen,
    Turning to her lover in the darkness where he stood,
  With the blood upon his mail,
    Bowing her head upon that iron in the darkness,
    Wept.




THE CRAGS

(_In memory of Thomas Bailey Aldrich_)


  Falernian, first! What other wine
  Should brim the cup or tint the line
    That would recall my days
    Among your creeks and bays;

  Where, founded on a rock, your house
  Between the pines' unfading boughs
    Watches through sun and rain
    That lonelier coast of Maine;

  And the Atlantic's mounded blue
  Breaks on your crags the summer through,
    A long pine's length below,
    In rainbow-tossing snow.

  While on your railed verandah there
  As on a deck you sail through air,
    And sea and cloud and sky
    Go softly streaming by.

  Like delicate oils at set of sun
  Smoothing the waves the colours run--
    Around the enchanted hull,
    Anchored and beautiful,--

  Restoring to that sun-dried star
  You brought from coral isles afar--
    With shells that mock the moon--
    The tints of their lagoon;

  Till, from within, your lamps declare
  Your harbours by the colours there,
    An Indian god, a fan
    Painted in Old Japan.

  But, best of all, I think at night,
  The moon that makes a road of light
    Across the whispering sea,
    A road--for memory.

  When the blue dusk has filled the pane,
  And the great pine-logs burn again,
    And books are good to read.
    --For his were books indeed.--

  Their silken shadows, rustling, dim,
  May sing no more of Spain for him;
    No shadows of old France
    Renew their courtly dance.

  He walks no more where shadows are
  But left their ivory gates ajar,
    That shadows might prolong
    The dance, the tale, the song.

  His was no narrow test or rule.
  He chose the best of every school,--
    Stendhal and Keats and Donne,
    Balzac and Stevenson;

  Wordsworth and Flaubert filled their place.
  Dumas met Hawthorne face to face.
    There were both new and old
    In his good realm of gold.

  The title-pages bore his name;
  And, nightly, by the dancing flame,
    Following him, I found
    That all was haunted ground;

  Until a friendlier shadow fell
  Upon the leaves he loved so well,
    And I no longer read,
    But talked with him instead.




THE GHOST OF SHAKESPEARE

1914


  Crimson was the twilight, under that crab-tree,
  Where--old tales tell us--all a midsummer's night,
  A mad young poacher, drunk with mead of elfin-land,
  Lodged with the fern-owl, and looked at the stars.

  There, from the dusk where the dream of Piers Plowman
  Darkens on the sunset, to this dusk of our own,
  I read, in a history, the record of our world.

  The hawk-moth, the currant-moth, the red-striped tiger-moth
  Shimmered all around me, so white shone those pages;
  And, in among the blue boughs, the bats flew low.

  I slumbered, the history slipped from my hand.
  Then I saw a dead man, dreadful in the moon-dawn,
  The ghost of the master, bowed upon that book.
  He muttered as he searched it,--_what vast convulsion
  Mocks my sexton's curse now, shakes our English clay?_
  Whereupon I told him, and asked him in turn
  Whether he espied any light in those pages
  Which painted an epoch later than his own.
  _I am a shadow_, he said, _and I see none_....

  _I am a shadow_, he said, _and I see none_.

  Then, O then he murmured to himself (while the moon hung
  Crimson as a lanthorn of Cathay in that crab-tree),
  Laughing at his work and the world, as I thought,
  Yet with some bitterness, yet with some beauty,
  Mocking his own music, these wraiths of his rhymes:


    I

  God, when I turn the leaves of that dark book
    Wherein our wisest teach us to recall
  Those glorious flags which in old tempests shook
    And those proud thrones which held my youth in thrall;

  When I see clear what seemed to childish eyes
    The gorgeous colouring of each pictured age;
  And for their dominant tints now recognise
    Those prints of innocent blood on every page;

  O, then I know this world is fast asleep,
    Bound in Time's womb, till some far morning break;
  And, though light grows upon the dreadful deep,
    We are dungeoned in thick night. We are not awake.

  The world's unborn, for all our hopes and schemes;
  And all its myriads only move in dreams.


    II

  Read what our wisest chroniclers record:--
    A king betrayed both foes and friends to death,
  Delivered his own country to the sword,
    And lied, and lied, and lied to his last breath.

  He died, the martyred anarch of his time.
    What balm is this that consecrates his dust?
  The self-same history shudders at the "crime"
    Which shed a blood so fragrant, so "august."

  Yes. Let our sons by thousands, millions, die;
    And when the crowned assassin of to-day
  Stands in the Judgment Hall of Liberty
    What shall your desolate nations rise and say?

  Honour the dog. He's vanquished! He's a king!
  So--for our dead--he's too "august" a thing.


    III

    _It was a crimson twilight, under that crab-tree.
    Moths beat about me, and bats flew low.
    I read, in a history, the record of our world.
    If there be light, said the Master,
    I am a shadow, and I see none....
    I am a shadow, and I see none._




THE WHITE CLIFFS


  Woden made the red cliffs, the red walls of England.
    Round the South of Devonshire, they burn against the blue.
  Green is the water there; and, clear as liquid sunlight,
    Blue-green as mackerel, the bays that Raleigh knew.

  Thor made the black cliffs, the battlements of England,
    Climbing to Tintagel where the white gulls wheel.
  Cold are the caverns there, and sullen as a cannon-mouth,
    Booming back the grey swell that gleams like steel.

  Balder made the white cliffs, the white shield of England
    (Crowned with thyme and violet where Sussex wheatears fly),
  White as the White Ensign are the bouldered heights of Dover,
    Beautiful the scutcheon that they bare against the sky.

  _So the world shall sing of them--the white cliffs of England,
    White, the glory of her sails, the banner of her pride.
  One and all,--their seamen met and broke the dread Armada.
    Only white may show the world the shield for which they died._




ON THE SOUTH COAST


  Come away into the sun and see
  All the heavens that used to be,
  Daily, hourly, brought to birth
  Out of the deep remembering earth.

  _This is England, this is the land
  That holds my heart in her sweet hand.
  This is she whose turf, I pray,
  Will hide me, on her breast, one day._

  Cast you down on the close-cropped turf,
  See how the white cliff spreads the surf,
  On green-eyed seas that glitter and trail
  Into the south like a peacock's tail.

  Then, come away over the hills of thyme,
  Where folds like elfin belfries chime
  Till Eve, in a cloud of her dusky hair,
  Makes it Elf-land everywhere.

  You shall pity the king on his throne.
  You shall know what never was known.
  All the glory of all the skies
  Utterly yours in your true love's eyes;

  All the bloom to the world's end
  And all the heavens that over it bend,
  Compacted in one garden white,
  The garden of your love's delight.

  _This is England, this is the land
  That holds my soul in her sweet hand.
  This is she whose turf, I pray,
  Will hide me on her heart one day._




OLDER THAN THE HILLS


  Older than the hills, older than the sea,
    Older than the heart of the Spring,
  O, what is this that breaks
  From the blind shell, wakes,
    Wakes, and is gone like a wing?

  Older than the sea, older than the moon,
    Older than the heart of the May,
  What is this blind refrain
  Of a song that shall remain
    When the singer is long gone away?

  Older than the moon, older than the stars,
    Older than the wind in the night,--
  Though the young dews are sweet
  On the heather at our feet
    And the blue hills laughing back the light,--

  Till the stars grow young, till the hills grow young,
    O, Love, we shall walk through Time,
  Till we round the world at last,
  And the future be the past,
    And the winds of Eden greet us from the prime.




THE TORCH

(_Sussex Landscape_)


  Is it your watch-fire, elves, where the down with its darkening shoulder
    Lifts on the death of the sun, out of the valley of thyme?
  Dropt on the broad chalk path and, cresting the ridge of it, smoulder
    Crimson as blood on the white, halting my feet as they climb,

  Clusters of clover-bloom, spilled from what negligent arms in the tender
    Dusk of the great grey world, last of the tints of the day;
  Beautiful, sorrowful, strange last stain of that perishing splendour.
    Elves, from what torn white feet trickled that red on the way?

  No--from the sun-burnt hands of what lovers that fade in the distance?
    Here, was it here that they paused, here that the legend was told?
  Even a kiss would be heard in this hush; but, with mocking insistence,
    Now thro' the valley resound--only the bells of the fold.

  Dropt--from the hands of what beautiful throng? Did they cry "_follow
           after_"?
    Dancing into the west, leaving this token for me,
  _Memory dead on the path, and the sunset to bury their laughter?_
    Youth--is it youth that has flown? Darkness covers the sea.

  Darkness covers the earth; but the path is here! I assay it.
    Let the bloom fall like a flake--dropt from the torch of a friend!
  Beautiful revellers, happy companions, I see and obey it;
    Follow your torch in the night, follow your path to the end.




THE OUTLAW


  Deep in the greenwood of my heart
    My wild hounds race.
  I cloak my soul at feast and mart,
    I mask my face;

  Outlawed, but not alone, for Truth
    Is outlawed, too.
  Proud world, you cannot banish us.
    _We_ banish _you_.

  Go by, go by, with all your din,
    Your dust, your greed, your guile,
  Your gold, your thrones can never win--
    From Her--one smile.

  She sings to me in a lonely place,
    She takes my hand.
  I look into her lovely face
    And understand....

  Outlawed, but not alone, for Love
    Is outlawed, too.
  You cannot banish us, proud world.
    _We_ banish _you_.

  Now which is outlawed, which alone?
    Around us fall and rise
  Murmurs of leaf and fern, the moan
    Of Paradise.

  Outlawed? Then hills and woods and streams
    Are outlawed, too!
  Proud world, from our immortal dreams,
    We banish you.




THE YOUNG FRIAR


  When leaves broke out on the wild briar,
    And bells for matins rung,
  Sorrow came to the old friar
    --Hundreds of years ago it was!--
  And May came to the young.

  The old was ripening for the sky,
    The young was twenty-four.
  The Franklin's daughter passed him by,
    Reading a painted missal-book,
  Beside the chapel door.

  With brown cassock and sandalled feet,
    And red Spring wine for blood;
  The very next noon he chanced to meet
    The Franklin's daughter, in a green May twilight,
  Walking through the wood.

  _Pax vobiscum_--to a maid
    The crosiered ferns among!
  But hers was only the Saxon,
    And his the Norman tongue;
  And the Latin taught by the old friar
    Made music for the young.

  And never a better deed was done
    By Mother Church below
  Than when she made old England one,
    --Hundreds of years ago it was!--
  Hundreds of years ago.

  Rich was the painted page they read
    Before that sunset died;
  Nut-brown hood by golden head,
    Murmuring _Rosa Mystica_,
  While nesting thrushes cried.

  A Saxon maid with flaxen hair,
    And eyes of Sussex grey;
  A young monk out of Normandy:--
    "May is our Lady's month," he said,
  "And O, my love, my May!"

  Then over the fallen missal-book
    The missel-thrushes sung
  Till--_Domus Aurea_--rose the moon
    And bells for vespers rung.
  It was gold and blue for the old friar,
    But hawthorn for the young.

  For gown of green and brown hood,
    Before that curfew tolled,
  Had flown for ever through the wood
    --Hundreds of years ago it was!--
  But twenty summers old.

  And empty stood his chapel stall,
    Empty his thin grey cell,
  Empty her seat in the Franklin's hall;
    And there were swords that searched for them
  Before the matin bell.

  And, crowders tell, a sword that night
    Wrought them an evil turn,
  And that the may was not more white
    Than those white bones the robin found
  Among the roots of fern.

  But others tell of stranger things
    Half-heard on Whitsun eves,
  Of sweet and ghostly whisperings--
    Though hundreds of years ago it was--
  Among the ghostly leaves:--

      _Sero te amavi_--
        Grey eyes of sun-lit dew!--
      _Tam antiqua, Tam nova_--
        Augustine heard it, too.
      Late have I loved that May, Lady,
        So ancient, and so new!

  And no man knows where they were flown,
    For the wind takes the may:
  But white and fresh the may was blown
    --Though hundreds of years ago it was--
  As this that blooms to-day.

  And the leaves break out on the wild briar,
    And bells must still be rung;
  But sorrow comes to the old friar,
    For he remembers a May, a May,
  When his old heart was young.




A FOREST SONG


  Who would be a king
  That can sit in the sun and sing?
  Nay, I have a kingdom of mine own.
  A fallen oak-tree is my throne.
      _Then, pluck the strings, and tell me true
      If Caesar in his glory knew
      The worlds he lost in sun and dew._

  Who would be a queen
  That sees what my love hath seen?--
  The blood of little children shed
  To make one royal ruby red!
      _Then, tell me, music, why the great
      For quarrelling trumpets abdicate
      This quick, this absolute estate._

  Nay, who would sing in heaven,
  Among the choral Seven
  That hears--as Love and I have heard,
  The whole sky listening to one bird?
      _And where's the ruby, tell me where,
      Whose crimsons for one breath compare
      With this wild rose that all may share?_




THE TRUMPET OF THE LAW

(_Phi Beta Kappa Poem, Harvard, 1915_)


  Music is dead. An age, an age is dying.
  Shreds of Uranian song, wild symphonies
  Tortured with moans of butchered innocents,
  Blow past us on the wind. Chaos resumes
  His kingdom. All the visions of the world,
  The visions that were music, being shaped
  By law, moving in measure, treading the road
  That suns and systems tread, O who can hear
  Their music now? Urania bows her head.
  Only the feet that move in order dance.
  Only the mind attuned to that dread pulse
  Of law throughout the universe can sing.
  Only the soul that plays its rhythmic part
  In that great measure of the tides and suns
  Terrestrial and celestial, till it soar
  Into the supreme melodies of heaven,
  Only that soul, climbing the splendid road
  Of law from height to height, may walk with God,
  Shape its own sphere from chaos, conquer death,
  Lay hold on life and liberty, and sing.

  Yet, since, at least, the fleshly heart must beat
  In measure, and no new rebellion breaks
  That old restriction, murmurs reach it still,
  Rumours of that vast music which resolves
  Our discords, and to this, to this attuned,
  Though blindly, it responds, in notes like these:

    There was a song in heaven of old,
      A song the choral seven began,
    When God with all his chariots rolled
      The tides of chaos back for man;
    When suns revolved and planets wheeled,
      And the great oceans ebbed and flowed,
    There is one way of life, it pealed,
      The road of law, the unchanging road.

    The trumpet of the law resounds,
      And we behold, from depth to height,
    What glittering sentries walk their rounds,
      What ordered hosts patrol the night,
    While wheeling worlds proclaim to us,
      Captained by Thee thro' nights unknown,--
    _Glory that would be glorious
      Must keep Thy law to find its own._

    Beyond rebellion, past caprice,
      From heavens that comprehend all change,
    All space, all time, till time shall cease,
      The trumpet rings to souls that range,
    To souls that in wild dreams annul
      Thy word, confessed by wood and stone,--
    _Beauty that would be beautiful
      Must keep Thy law to find its own._

    He that can shake it, will he thrust
      His careless hands into the fire?
    He that would break it, shall we trust
      The sun to rise at his desire?
    Constant above our discontent,
      The trumpet peals in sterner tone,--
    _Might that would be omnipotent
      Must keep Thy law to find its own._

    Ah, though beneath unpitying spheres
      Unreckoned seems our human cry,
    In Thy deep law, beyond the years,
      Abides the Eternal memory.
    Thy law is light, to eyes grown dull
      Dreaming of worlds like bubbles blown;
    _And Mercy that is merciful
      Shall keep Thy law and find its own._

    Unchanging God, by that one Light
      Through which we grope to Truth and Thee,
    Confound not yet our day with night,
      Break not the measures of Thy sea.
    Hear not, though grief for chaos cry
      Or rail at Thine unanswering throne.
    _Thy law, Thy law, is liberty,
      And in Thy law we find our own._

  So, to Uranian music, rose our world.
  The boughs put forth, the young leaves groped for light.
  The wild flower spread its petals as in prayer.
  Then, for terrestrial ears, vast discords rose,
  The struggle in the jungle, clashing themes
  That strove for mastery; but above them all,
  Ever the mightier measure of the suns
  Resolved them into broader harmonies,
  That fought again for mastery. The night
  Buried the mastodon. The warring tribes
  Of men were merged in nations. Wider laws
  Embraced them. Man no longer fought with man,
  Though nation warred with nation. Hatred fell
  Before the gaze of love. For in an hour
  When, by the law of might, mankind could rise
  No higher, into the deepening music stole
  A loftier theme, a law that gathered all
  The laws of earth into its broadening breast
  And moved like one full river to the sea,
  The law of Love.
  The sun stood dark at noon;
  Dark as the moon before this mightier Power,
  And a Voice rang across the blood-stained earth:
  _I am the Way, the Truth, the Life, the Light._
  We heard it, and we did not hear. In dreams
  We caught a thousand fragments of the strain,
  But never wholly heard it. We moved on
  Obeying it a little, till our world
  Became so vast, that we could only hear
  Stray notes, a golden phrase, a sorrowful cry,
  Never the rounded glory of the whole.
  So one would sing of death, one of despair,
  And some, knowing that God was more than man,
  Knowing that the Eternal Power behind
  Our universe was more than man, would shrink
  From crowning Him with human attributes,
  Though these remained the highest that we knew;
  And therefore, falling back on lower signs,
  Bereft of love, thought, personality,
  They made Him less than man; made Him a blind
  Unweeting force, less than the best in man,
  Less than the best that He Himself had made.

  Yet, though from earth we could no longer hear
  As from a central throne, the harmonies
  Of the revolving whole; yet though from earth,
  And from earth's Calvary, the central scene
  Withdrew to dreadful depths beyond our ken;
  Withdrew to some deep Calvary at the heart
  Of all creation; yet, O yet, we heard,
  Echoes that murmured from Eternity,
  _I am the Way, the Truth, the Life, the Light._
  And still the eternal passion undiscerned
  Moved like a purple shadow through our world,
  While we, in intellectual chaos, raised
  The ancient cry, _Not this man, but Barabbas._
  Then Might grew Right once more, for who could hold
  The Right, when the rebellious hearts of men
  Finding the Law too hard in life, thought, art,
  Proclaimed that Right itself was born of chance,
  Born out of nothingness and doomed, at last,
  To nothingness; while all that men have held
  Better than dust--love, honour, justice, truth--
  Was less than dust, for the blind dust endures?
  But love, they said, and the proud soul of man,
  Die with the breath, before the flesh decays.
  And still, amidst the chaos, Love was born,
  Suffered and died; and in a myriad forms
  A myriad parables of the Eternal Christ
  Unfolded their deep message to mankind.
  So, on this last wild winter of his birth,
  Though cannon rocked his cradle, heaven might hear,
  Once more, the Mother and her infant Child.

    _Will the Five Clock-Towers chime tonight?_
      --Child, the red earth would shake with scorn.--
    _But will the Emperors laugh outright
      If Roland rings that Christ is born?_

    No belfries pealed for that pure birth.
      There were no high-stalled choirs to sing.
    The blood of children smoked on earth;
      For Herod, in those days, was king.--

    _O, then the Mother and her Son
      Were refugees that Christmas, too?_--
    Through all the ages, little one,
      That strange old story still comes true.--

    _Was there no peace in Bethlehem?_--
      Yes. There was Love in one poor Inn;
    And, while His wings were over them,
      They heard those deeper songs begin.--

    _What songs were they? What songs were they?
      Did stars of shrapnel shed their light?_--
    O, little child, I have lost the way.
      I cannot find that Inn tonight.--

    _Is there no peace, then, anywhere?_--
      Perhaps, where some poor soldier lies
    With all his wounds in front, out there.--
      _You weep?_--He had your innocent eyes.--

    _Then is it true that Christ's a slave,
      Whom all these wrongs can never rouse?_--
    They said it. But His anger drave
      The money-changers from His House.--

    _Yet He forgave and turned away._--
      Yes, unto seventy times and seven.
    But they forget. He comes one day
      In power, among the clouds of heaven.--

    _Then Roland rings?_--Yes, little son!
      With iron hammers they dare not scorn,
    Roland is breaking them, gun by gun,
      Roland is ringing. Christ is born.

  Born and re-born; for though the Christ we knew
  On earth be dead for ever, who shall kill
  The Eternal Christ whose law is in our hearts,
  Christ, who in this dark hour descends to hell,
  And ascends into heaven, and sits beside
  The right hand of the Father. If for men
  This law be dead, it lives for children still.
  Children that men have butchered see His face,
  Rest in His arms, and strike our mockery dumb.
  So shall the trumpet of the law resound
  Through all the ages, telling of that child
  Whose outstretched arms in Belgium speak for God.

    They crucified a Man of old,
      The thorns are shrivelled on His brow.
    Prophet or fool or God, behold,
      They crucify Thy children now.
    They doubted evil, doubted good,
      And the eternal heavens as well,
    Behold, the iron and the blood,
      The visible handiwork of Hell.

    Fast to the cross they found it there,
      They found it in the village street,
    A naked child, with sunkissed hair.
      The nails were through its hands and feet.
    For Christ was dead, yes, Christ was dead!
      O Lamb of God, O little one,
    I kneel before your cross instead
      And the same shadow veils the sun....

      And the same shadow veils the sun....

  But you, O land, O beautiful land of Freedom,
  Hold fast the faith which made and keeps you great.
  With you, with you abide the faith and hope,
  In this dark hour, of agonised mankind.
  Hold to that law whereby the warring tribes
  Were merged in nations, hold to that wide law
  Which bids you merge the nations, here and now,
  Into one people. Hold to that deep law
  Whereby we reach the peace which is not death
  But the triumphant harmony of Life,
  Eternal Life, immortal Love, the Peace
  Of worlds that sing around the throne of God.




THRICE-ARMED


  Thus only should it come, if come it must--
    Not with a riot of flags and a mob-born cry,
    But with a noble faith, a conscience high
  That, if we fail, we failed not in our trust.
  We fought for peace. We dared the bitter thrust
    Of calumny for peace, and watched her die,
    Her scutcheons rent from sky to outraged sky
  By felon hands and trampled into the dust.

  We proffered justice, and we saw the law
    Cancelled by stroke on stroke of those deft hands
      Which still retain the imperial forger's pen.
  They must have blood--Then, at this last, we draw
    The sword, not with a riot of flags and bands,
      But silence, and a mustering of men.

  They challenge Truth. A people makes reply,
    East, West, North, South, one honour and one might,
    From sea to sea, from height to war-worn height,
  The old word rings out--to conquer or to die.
  And we shall conquer! Though their eagles fly
    Through heaven, around this ancient isle unite
    Powers that were never vanquished in the fight,
  The unconquerable Powers that cannot lie.

  Though fire destroy her flesh, and many a year
    This land forgot the faith that made her great,
      Now, as her fleets cast off the North Sea foam,
  Casting aside all faction and all fear,
    Thrice-armed in all the majesty of her fate,
      Britain remembers, and her sword strikes home.




THE SONG-TREE


  Grow, my song, like a tree,
    As thou hast ever grown,
  Since first, a wondering child,
    Long since, I cherished thee.
  It was at break of day,
    Well I remember it,--
  The first note that I heard,
    A magical undertone,
  Sweeter than any bird
    --Or so it seemed to me--
  And my tears ran wild.
    This tale, this tale is true.
  The light was growing gray;
    And the rhymes ran so sweet
  (For I was only a child)
    That I knelt down to pray.

  Grow, my song, like a tree.
    Since then I have forgot
    A thousand friends, but not
  The song that set me free,
    So that to thee I gave
  My hopes and my despairs,
    My boyhood's ecstasy,
  My manhood's prayers.
    In dreams I have watched thee grow,
  A ladder of sweet boughs,
    Where angels come and go,
  And birds keep house.
    In dreams, I have seen thee wave
  Over a distant land,
    And watched thy roots expand,
  And given my life to thee,
    As I would give my grave.

  Grow, my song, like a tree,
    And when I am grown old,
  Let me die under thee,
    Die to enrich thy mould;
  Die at thy roots, and so
    Help thee to grow.
  Make of this body and blood
    Thy sempiternal food.
  Then let some little child,
    Some friend I shall not see,
  When the great dawn is gray,
    Some lover I have not known,
  In summers far away,
    Sit listening under thee.
  And in thy rustling hear
    That mystical undertone,
  Which made my tears run wild,
    And made thee, O, how dear.

  In the great years to be?
    I am proud then? Ah, not so.
  I have lived and died for thee.
    Be patient Grow.

  Grow, my song, like a tree.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LORD OF MISRULE***


******* This file should be named 30687.txt or 30687.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/0/6/8/30687



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

