The Project Gutenberg EBook of Campaign of Battery D, First Rhode Island
light artillery., by Ezra Knight Parker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Campaign of Battery D, First Rhode Island light artillery.

Author: Ezra Knight Parker

Release Date: January 1, 2010 [EBook #30822]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPAIGN OF BATTERY D ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  [Illustration: FIRST LIEUT. EZRA K. PARKER
  (Picture taken June, 1908)]




  PERSONAL NARRATIVES
  OF EVENTS IN THE
  WAR OF THE REBELLION,

  BEING PAPERS READ BEFORE THE
  RHODE ISLAND SOLDIERS AND SAILORS
  HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

  Seventh Series No. 6.

  PROVIDENCE:
  PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY.
  1913.


  SNOW & FARNHAM CO., PRINTERS.


  Campaign of Battery D, First Rhode
  Island Light Artillery, in Kentucky
  and East Tennessee.

  BY
  EZRA K. PARKER,
  [Late First Lieutenant Battery E, First Rhode Island
   Light Artillery.]

  PROVIDENCE:
  PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY.
  1913.




CAMPAIGN OF BATTERY D, FIRST RHODE ISLAND LIGHT ARTILLERY, IN KENTUCKY
AND EAST TENNESSEE.


In March, 1863, Gen. A. E. Burnside, having been relieved at his own
request of the command of the Army of the Potomac, was soon afterwards
assigned to the Department of the Ohio. Upon his special request, the
Ninth Army Corps was also detailed for service in this department, and
at once preparations were made for the transportation of the corps from
Virginia to Kentucky. Battery D, First Rhode Island Light Artillery,
Capt. William W. Buckley, was at that time attached to the Ninth Corps
and was sent with its corps to the west. This battery had been at the
beginning of its service attached to the first division of the Army of
the Potomac, and when the army was divided into army corps, this battery
was included in the first corps commanded by General McDowell. Its first
active service was in the short and successful campaign to
Fredericksburg, in April and May, 1862. Then it went through the
campaign of the Army of Virginia, under Gen. John Pope, losing heavily
at the battle of the second Manassas, then again under General
McClellan, in his successful campaign of South Mountain and Antietam.
Meantime, General McDowell had been succeeded by General Hooker in the
command of the First Army Corps. It was in the Fredericksburg campaign
under Burnside, and was by his order transferred from the First to the
Ninth Army Corps. After a not unpleasant march, both by rail and
steamboat, the battery reached Lexington, Ky., on March 30th, 1863, and
went into camp on the Fair grounds. Here it remained but a week, and
then the line of march was taken up for camp Dick Robinson. On the 26th,
the battery began its march from camp Dick Robinson to Somerset, near
the Cumberland river, completing it on the 7th of May, 1863, and there
it remained until the 7th of June. It was now expected that within a few
days the march for East Tennessee would commence. Although we, members
of the battery, well knew that the campaign would be arduous and full of
dangers, still we were all anxious to advance. In consequence of orders
to General Burnside to send a part of his command to Vicksburg to assist
General Grant, and in consequence of the raid of Gen. John Morgan, it
was not until the 21st of August, 1863, that the expedition started. The
Twenty-third Army Corps was the only corps that commenced at that date
the march over the Cumberland river and mountains. General Hartzuff
commanded the corps, consisting of three divisions commanded by Generals
White, Hascall and Carter, respectively. We were attached to Gen.
Hascall's division, and marched with our division by way of Stanford,
Crab Orchard and Cub Creek to the Cumberland river. The Ninth Corps was
reported to be at Cincinnati and to follow close upon the tracks of the
Twenty-third Corps. The strength of the Twenty-third Corps was, perhaps,
15,000 or 20,000 men of all arms.

The march over the Cumberland mountains was full of adventures and
labors. It would require a much longer paper than this to describe the
many incidents that befell us on that famous march. We had no snow nor
ice to encounter, but otherwise I doubt whether or not Napoleon's
crossing of the Alps was more fraught with dangers and hardships than
was this crossing of the Cumberland mountains by the Army of the Ohio.
On the 4th of September, 1863, we arrived upon the bluffs of the
Tennessee river, opposite Loudon. Here we remained, recuperating, until
the 15th of September. The enemy had hurriedly retreated upon our
arrival at Loudon, leaving horses, mules and beef cattle, which we duly
appropriated to our own use. A large amount of wheat and corn was found
in the possession of the farmers, which was seized by the
quartermasters. A steam flour-mill was found in good condition and was
employed in grinding up the wheat and corn. We supplemented our rations
with chicken and fresh pork while we were encamped at Loudon. We were on
the main line of railway from Virginia to the Southwestern states. In
their retreat from Loudon, the enemy had burned the bridge across the
Tennessee at that point. It was several days before we were able to
place across the river a pontoon bridge. From the south, in the
direction of Chattanooga, Gen. N. B. Forrest often threatened us. From
the north, a General Jones was daily reported to be advancing down the
valley of the Holston upon Knoxville. About the time that our battery
arrived at Loudon, Gen. Burnside made a public entry into Knoxville.
General Burnside was not a little disappointed in not having with him
the Ninth Army Corps as early as he expected. The corps had been
transported from Vicksburg (after having done excellent service before
that city and also at Jackson) to Cincinnati, Ohio. In consequence of
the great heat at Vicksburg and of the arduous service required of the
corps, nearly 50 per cent of the men were sick with dysentery and ague.
They were sent into Kentucky as soon as possible to find a healthy camp
for a few weeks. Crab Orchard was the place selected for the camp on
account of its medicinal springs and salubrious surroundings.

On Sept. 25th, 1863, the first division of the Ninth Army Corps arrived
at Knoxville, after being subjected to long, fatiguing marches over bad
roads by way of Cumberland Gap and Morristown. Our repose at Loudon was
broken by orders to place knapsacks and the ammunition chests of the
caissons upon flat cars in order to expedite a contemplated forced
march. The railroad from Loudon was in operation to a point up the
Holston valley beyond Knoxville. The order to move was received upon the
15th inst. We made camp on the night of the 15th near Knoxville, about
thirty miles from Loudon. On the 16th we advanced to Strawberry Plains,
and on the 17th to New Market. We remained in New Market two days, and
then received orders to countermarch to Loudon. We had been absent about
a week, and had covered in all about 200 miles. The cause of this rapid
movement from Loudon to New Market was a rumored attack by the enemy
upon our forces in southwestern Virginia. The cause of our return was a
dispatch from General Halleck to General Burnside, notifying him that
two divisions of General Lee's Army of Northern Virginia had been sent
to reinforce General Bragg, and he desired him, General Burnside, to go
to General Rosecrans' aid as soon as possible.

On the 23rd of September our battery crossed the Tennessee at Loudon by
the aid of a single flat boat large enough to take over only one team
and carriage at a time. It took all day and most of the night to effect
the crossing. Soon after crossing, we took up the march for Sweetwater,
a station sixteen miles south from Loudon, on the east Tennessee and
Georgia railroad. We had no sooner arrived at Sweetwater than we were
ordered to countermarch, and away we went back to Loudon. On our arrival
there, we were ordered into a rebel fort to the right of the village
facing south. This hill was in a bend of the river. A pontoon bridge had
been laid across the river and troops of all arms were continually
crossing to the south bank. There strong lines of battle were formed,
and in expectation of a severe conflict, we awaited the approach of
General Forrest, who was steadily driving back our cavalry and mounted
infantry upon Loudon. We were all anxious for a brush with the famous
General Forrest, and had he assailed our position he would have met with
a hot reception. This was the 28th of September, 1863.

Forrest was reported to be advancing with a large mounted force,
estimated by citizens and negroes from 3,000 to 15,000 men. We supposed
that on the morning of the 29th we would have a royal battle on the
banks of the Tennessee. But day dawned and no attack was delivered, and
soon word came from our mounted force that Forrest had commenced his
retreat down the valley during the night, while we were watering and
feeding our horses and mules and inspecting ammunition. From October 1st
to the 5th, we were busy collecting forage. In our wagons, and carefully
covered by the forage, were carcasses of hogs and sheep. Our company
cooks served up rations which could only be fully appreciated by eating.
Men, horses and mules were growing fat, sleek and handsome.

On the 6th of October, we received orders to report to our first
division of the Ninth Army Corps at Blue Springs, in the valley of the
Holston, distant about ninety-eight miles from Loudon. The enemy were
reported to be threatening our communications with Cumberland Gap, and
the Ninth Corps had been ordered to prevent all interference with this
line. The infantry were transported by rail, but the battery was sent
forward on foot. In order that the battery should arrive as soon as
possible after the infantry it was forced along at the rate of about
thirty miles per day. We found the roads in very fair condition. At
dark, on the 9th, we arrived at Bull Gap, a gorge in one of those spur
ranges of mountains that extend out from the main chain, and which, at a
distance, resembles somewhat a large windrow of hay. On the next day we
passed through the gap and soon came up with our division, posted in
lines of battle along Lick Creek.

Our arrival was duly reported and we were ordered to hold ourselves
ready to take position and open upon the enemy. Here we found General
Burnside, and he gave us a hearty greeting, calling us his Rhode Island
boys. We responded sincerely and vociferously. Soon after this the
general gave the order for our line to advance, as the enemy made no
diversion against us. Someone facetiously said that probably the general
had waited for our battery before he ordered the attack. We replied to
such remarks by retorting that this showed the general's good judgment.
A Colonel Foster was in command of a brigade of cavalry, and General
Burnside sent him around by the enemy's right flank to seize and hold
his lines of retreat. As soon as it was probable that Colonel Foster had
reached the desired position, a charge was made upon the enemy's
position. A sharp and hotly contested fight ensued. We drove the enemy
from his position about dark. We here formed a new line and lay upon our
arms for a renewal of the fight at dawn. The advance was duly made, but
the enemy had fled, and Colonel Foster, as it usually happens in such
cases, had not got into position to intercept them. Our battery had been
in position all day, but was not called upon at all until about dark to
fire a few shots at a battery of the enemy that soon withdrew. We
pursued the enemy twenty miles up the valley. At noon, we passed through
the village of Greenville, and read the sign over a building, with the
simple legend, "A. Johnson, Tailor." A mile beyond Rhea Town we went
into camp. On the 12th, the cavalry reported the enemy to be so
scattered that further pursuit was useless. On the next day, we started
back for Knoxville, and arrived there on the 16th of October, 1863. From
Loudon to Rhea Town, and from Rhea Town to Knoxville, made a distance of
226 miles, a daily average of a little more than 22 miles. For two days
we lay at Knoxville.

On the 20th, we marched again for Loudon. We camped that night at
Campbell's Station, seventeen miles from Knoxville. We next encamped at
Lenoir's Station. This was a very large plantation owned by a Dr.
Lenoir. Its lands were very extensive and beautifully situated. The
village consisted of a railroad station, the owner's mansion, large farm
buildings, yarn factory, houses for overseers and a hundred or more
cabins for his slaves. He, the doctor, was a large slave owner, and a
violent rebel. He had extensive fields of maize; one of which was
estimated to be four miles in length. The width was considerably less.
Most of the corn was as high as a man could reach on horseback.

On October 22nd, we marched to Loudon and crossed the river. The village
of Loudon is on the left bank of the Tennessee. Soon after the retreat
of General Forrest, referred to above, the writer was detailed to open a
recruiting office in the village of Loudon, as our several batteries
were all short of men. I duly opened the office in a small building
contiguous to a hotel owned by a Mr. Hoss, called by our men "The old
hoss." I had two men with me, one a corporal, I appointed clerk; the
other man acted as guard and orderly. Handbills were printed and
distributed in the vicinity, and on the morning of the second day, as I
looked out of the office, I had an idea that a large squadron of cavalry
was drawn up before the hotel. The men were thin and lanky, also their
horses were the same. All carried guns, some double barrel shotguns;
some ancient rifles, and a few modern carbines. I remained in my office,
and soon two of the riders dismounted and presented themselves before
the guard, who, with drawn saber and revolver in belt, upheld the
dignity of the United States Government in the eyes of these horsemen.
The United States flag was duly floating in the morning air, and all
around were nailed the handbills asking for recruits for the U. S.
Volunteer Military service. The men who dismounted represented the whole
squad. They inquired of the guard if they could "jine" the Union army,
and the guard referred them to me for an answer. They came inside and
said "Howdy." I responded by a dignified nod of the head. I at once
entered upon business, and told them the conditions upon which they
could become Uncle Samuel's volunteer soldiers. I stated that I would
call a surgeon in order to ascertain if they were physically qualified
to enlist. I asked them what they proposed to do with their horses,
suggesting that if they were serviceable, they would be bought for our
service. They then said that they came from the mountains that lay
partly in North Carolina and partly in Tennessee; that they wanted to
keep their horses and go home upon them once a week. I explained that if
they enlisted in our service they could go home only at times when
furloughs might be granted them, and that meantime they would be
expected to be in camp or with their commands at all times, day and
night. This they said they could not agree to. They would be ready at
any time to a fight, if their services were required, and this they
thought was all that should be required of them. Under such conditions,
it is evident that the fifty or more mountaineers did not enlist. This
ceremony took place on each of the two or three following days, and I
tired of this service.

I did not secure a single recruit, and when our battery was ordered to
Blue Springs, I was only too pleased to turn over the office to a
captain of infantry, who was as successful recruiting as I had been.
Another little episode happened to me just before I entered upon the
recruiting service. It became necessary for Captain Buckley to send to
Knoxville a commissioned officer to report to General Burnside. Our
pickets extended about two miles out from Loudon towards Knoxville, and
from Knoxville toward Loudon about the same distance. The railroad was
not in use at that time, so it was necessary to make the twenty-six
miles outside of our lines.

It was about four P. M., when I learned from the captain that I was the
favored officer to report at Knoxville. It was suggested that I need not
start until dawn next morning, still I was at liberty to leave at once.
I considered the matter a moment and decided to leave that day at dark.
There was no moon, but it had all the indications of a bright starlight
night. I had my best horse, a thoroughbred Kentuckian, fed at once. I
took my sabre and revolver, with a light lunch, and at dark I quietly
left camp for my ride to Knoxville. The road to Knoxville was direct
and plain. Nearly half the distance it passed through woodland, with but
little underbrush. I decided, as the country outside of our lines was
infested with rebel scouts and guerillas, to ride rapidly through the
open country, but to walk through the wooded part, as it was so dark
there that I could not see. If I walked, I could use the sense of
hearing, and so be warned of the approach of either friend or foe.
Should I hear advancing steps, I could easily ride out of the road into
the woods out of sight, as there were no fences that bordered the road.
I met with little adventure. Once, just as I was passing a farmhouse, a
voice in the rear, near the house, called out in a loud tone, "halt." I
did not obey the order, but touched lightly the flank of my thoroughbred
with my spur and he left the house behind like the wind. Two or three
times I thought I heard approaching footsteps in the woodland, and I
rode a few rods out of the road and waited for a few minutes in
expectation, but it proved to be all imagination, and I returned to the
road, scratching my face more or less in the branches of the trees.

I had calculated that I could make the ride of thirty miles in about
four hours, but in consequence of the slow progress through the woods,
it took me much longer, and it was some time after midnight that I
discovered several hundred yards ahead of me a fire just outside of the
road, partly screened by bushes. I knew that it ought to be a Union
picket thrown out by our troops in Knoxville, but I deemed it best to
make sure. Most of the way on this road there were few stones, large or
small. It was generally a dry loam, and hence a horse though shod, upon
the walk would make but little noise. I walked along slowly upon one
side of the road towards the fire, ready to turn and race down the road
if it should be necessary for my safety. Some additional fuel was cast
upon the fire, and it lighted up so that I could distinguish a soldier
in our uniform, and I at once went boldly forward. I soon was observed
by our picket and duly challenged. After I had given the countersign and
shown my pass to the officer in command, I was taken to the picket
station and well entertained. Early in the day I reported to General
Burnside. When I was about to leave, he questioned me about my journey
from Loudon, and instructed me to return with a column that would leave
for Loudon that afternoon. I returned to our camp the next day about 2
P. M., in fair condition.

On October 29th, our battery was parked near Lenoir's Station, on the
edge of a fine grove of pine trees. Here we were informed that our
winter quarters would be. Our men at once entered upon the construction
of log cabins for the command, as well as stables for our animals. This
work went rapidly forward, as the pine woods furnished ready and ample
material. We also utilized a large barn built of weather beaten boards
which stood near our camp. The boards furnished floors for the cabins
and roofs for our stables. The roofs of the cabins were covered with
paulines. By the 13th of November, the camp was completed and we all
looked forward for a pleasant time during the approaching winter.

The scientists of the battery had captured a still on one of their
foraging expeditions, and in a week or so more the intention was to
furnish a liberal supply of pure whiskey at moderate prices. But "man
proposes and God disposes," and on the morning of the 14th, our short,
sweet dream of cosy winter quarters was broken. Soon after reveille,
before the men had fallen into line for roll call, there was the sound
of heavy artillery firing at Loudon. We proceeded with the regular camp
duties and at the usual time ate our breakfast. Soon we learned the
news. General Longstreet, of the Army of Northern Virginia, with his
famous corps which had done good service for the rebel arms at
Chickamauga, had been sent by General Bragg from Chattanooga to capture
Burnside and to clean out the Tennessee and Holston valleys from
Southern Tennessee to the southern boundary of Virginia. The veterans of
Longstreet had been told that some 15,000 raw troops were scattered from
Loudon to Knoxville, who would retreat in confusion at the first
appearance of General Longstreet.

It seems that it was not generally known that the Ninth Corps had
arrived in the valley. The rebels attempted to lay down a pontoon bridge
at Hough's Ferry, a short distance below Loudon. The troops sent to
oppose the crossing were from both the Ninth and Twenty-third Corps. The
enemy was not a little surprised at the successful resistance which our
troops made to his advance. He was held all day from advancing from the
river, and the opinion was that Longstreet would be defeated on the
morrow. General Grant had requested General Burnside to maintain himself
for a short time, until he, Grant, could fight the battle of Missionary
Ridge; then he would promptly send him assistance. General Burnside, it
seems, was so confident that he could hold his own with Longstreet, that
he proposed to allow Longstreet to cross the Tennessee so that it would
not be possible for him to return to General Bragg in time to aid him in
the coming fight.

So, on the night of the 14th, it was decided to fall back, and on the
15th General Burnside gave orders to retreat slowly as far as Lenoir's.
Our battery remained in camp all this time, ready to move. It was not
until 5 P. M., on the 15th, that we began to move on the main road to
Campbell's station. This night march was the most horrid of all my
nearly four years' experience in the United States Army. Language will
fail to do it justice. I was chief of the left section and brought up
the rear, or was supposed to. It had rained for twenty-four hours and
the frost was about all out of the ground. The soil was a rich clay, two
or three feet in depth. Our horses were not very strong, and after they
had dragged the guns and caissons about a mile, their strength was gone.

I was instructed to retreat slowly and in case our rear guard, composed
of infantry and cavalry, should find it necessary to make a stand, I was
to go into battery. The right and center sections had gone far ahead of
me, as the road was not cut up so bad for them, and it literally seemed,
in the language of the poet Horace, that the "Devil would take the
hindmost." After the first mile we came to a long, deep bed of sticky
mud. I rode in advance, and found that about a half mile ahead there was
a little knoll of cleared land, comparatively dry, and skirted by a
high, worm fence of good oak rails. So I went back and ordered an
advance. By pushing hard, we were able to move our tired teams. Before
we had made 200 yards, we were stalled. Then we all, non-commissioned
officers, privates and myself, put our shoulders to the wheels and made
another 200 yards. We were all wet inside by sweat and outside by mud
and water. Never have I seen men do better. At last, somehow, near
morning, we reached the knoll, a mile and a half from camp, physically
used up. The caissons in front with guns to the rear, we drew up by the
roadside and replenished the smouldering fires with rails. Our horses,
poor things, were reeling, scarcely able to stand under the weight of
their harness.

One of the buglers had been detailed to accompany me, and I sent him
forward to report to the captain our condition and to ask for orders.
Meantime, the colonel in command of the rear guard sent word that the
rebel skirmishers were pressing him hard, and that he could not hold
them back much longer. I roused the weary men and sent a sergeant to
select an easier way through the fields. Before he reported, the bugler
returned with orders from the captain to destroy and throw away my
ammunition. I had never disobeyed an order, but in this case I knew that
we had a short supply of ammunition for our 12-pound Napoleons in all
the Tennessee valley; that guns without ammunition were useless, and so
I hesitated. One round was thrown into the mud by a corporal, who heard
the report of the bugler to me. I immediately stopped further
destruction and proceeded to place my pieces in battery for opening upon
the advancing rebel lines, and I had asked our infantry to unmask our
front so that we could have a clear field. I gave the order to "load
with solid shot," and immediately my men were as active as ever under
the excitement of a fight. Before the order was executed I heard my name
called, and an officer reported to me with four fresh, 6-mule teams.

General Burnside had burned a large quartermaster's train in order to
save his artillery and its ammunition. The arrival of the mules
prevented the destruction of our ammunition and the skirmish which I had
arranged. I was informed that I should make all haste, as General McLaw
had been sent by the Kingston road to cut off our retreat. The two
roads, one from Kingston and one from Loudon, intersected a mile south
from Campbell's Station. The drivers unhitched their horses and were
sent on ahead in order to be out of our way. As soon as the mules were
attached to our guns and caissons, they were started, and away they
went, through the deep mud, up hill and down, until they passed safely
the Kingston road about 10 A. M., and we parked in the open field with
the rest of our battery.

A sharp fight took place at the junction of these roads, in which our
people more than held their own. We made some coffee, ate a little corn
bread, and all of us felt young again. My men and myself were still
covered with mud. While our battery and its division were halted,
columns of troops were rapidly moving forward and deploying north of the
village of Campbell's Station. The position was this: Here was an
opening in the woods about three miles long from north to south, and
from a mile to a mile and a half in width. The south end was higher than
the middle. From the middle to the north was quite a rise of from fifty
to 100 feet, where was spread out a broad plateau, which commanded the
whole open tract of land. The village was in the lowest part of the
tract. Upon the plateau at the north, General Burnside was placing a
portion of his troops, including three or four light batteries.

Our battery soon had orders to move, and on we went, followed closely by
our rear guard, which itself was closely pursued by the rebels. Our
front line of battle was partially in the village of Campbell's Station,
protected very well by the buildings. Our battery did not halt until we
arrived upon the plateau. Soon we were assigned a position to protect
our extreme right and right flank. After getting into position, we had
nothing to do but to observe the movement of the enemy. We soon beheld a
splendid exhibition of war. The rebel skirmishers first appeared in the
open, carefully examining the ground to find if we had a concealed line
of battle near. They soon advanced a half mile or less and found no
opposition. There they rested, and we soon saw the rebel columns debouch
from both the Loudon and the Kingston roads. At last there came a
battery of 20-pounder rifled guns, with several white horses, and went
into position on the right of the road.

This battery we had often met in the East. It was one of the batteries
of the Washington corps of artillery of New Orleans. This was an
excellent battery. The enemy soon formed two strong lines of battle
clear across the open country, about 200 yards apart. Light batteries
came forward, halting in front, and took positions between the
brigades. On the flanks the cavalry was seen in the open woodland. This
scene was all spread out before us. In all our great battles, such as
Manassas and Antietam, we rarely saw more than a fourth of a mile of our
enemy's line.

About 12 M., the signal was given, and the rebel lines, with flags
flying and batteries firing, advanced against us. The fighting for the
last forty-eight hours had evidently convinced Longstreet's veterans
that they had worthy foes to meet. Four rifled batteries planted upon
the brow of the hill, under General Burnside's personal directions,
opened rapidly upon the enemy's lines of infantry, paying no attention
apparently to the enemy's artillery fire. The very first discharge sent
havoc into their first line and killed a color bearer. In five minutes
their heavy lines were fearfully torn, but still closing up and keeping
up a wonderful alignment they moved right on. To us spectators, it
seemed that they would overwhelm our own lines of battle. The enemy had
not stopped to fire a rifle, neither had our infantry discharged a
piece. Suddenly a change came over the wonderful scene. The Twenty-third
Corps opened with terrific volleys, followed closely by the Ninth. The
lines of the rebels halted, opened fire and sought such cover as the
surface of the ground afforded them.

Soon the smoke of battle shut in the grand scene and we looked to our
own commands. The Washington artillery began throwing over our way its
twenty-pounder compliments. As the flank of our battery was nearly in
line with the fire from the rebel battery, it seemed sometimes as if
they would rake our whole front. Fortunately for us, they did little
damage. Lieutenant Benjamin, chief of artillery, paid his special
attention to the Washingtonians, and the result was that they were
satisfied to keep quiet, one of their guns burst in full view, and this
seemed to take their attention away from us.

Soon a regiment or two of the enemy were seen to pass to our extreme
right under cover of the skirting woodland and into the wood. At once we
were ordered to open fire upon this piece of woodland with shell and
shrapnel. We sent twenty-five or thirty shells in rapid succession into
the wood, and soon we saw the rebels going to their rear upon the run.
It seems that a portion of the Ninth Corps was in position to enfilade
the rebel line, and after they had received a few volleys and our shells
they beat a hasty retreat. During the remainder of the battle there was
no further trouble on our right flank. This affair on our right flank
convinced us that however strong mules were for drawing over heavy roads
our artillery, they were not at all well behaved in battle. Of course,
as soon as we opened upon the flanking rebels, several batteries of the
enemy gave us special attention. The shells burst fast and furious all
around us, but it did not interfere with our shelling the woods. I heard
deep and loud profanity, and turning around saw my two mule teams start
towards each other, and when they met they began to climb up each other.

We had extra men detailed from the infantry to help us manage the mules,
and it was from our infantry friends that the loud talk came. After
getting up in the air a good distance, the leading pairs of each team
fell over. Underneath each was thrown a man. When the rebels retreated
from the wood, we ceased firing and our cannoneers went to the
assistance of the mule guards. One man was severely bruised, though no
bones were broken. We had the mules taken out of the line of the enemy's
fire and they soon quieted down. General Longstreet was present in
command of his forces, reported to be 20,000 strong. Various assaults
were made by him against our lines that November afternoon, but we
repulsed them all with heavy loss to him. It was now nearly dark. The
plan of General Burnside was to withdraw to Knoxville as soon as he
could leave his lines in safety, under cover of night.

All the batteries went to the rear, except Benjamin's, and one section
of Buckley's under my command. I was instructed to take orders from
Lieutenant Benjamin and not withdraw until he so ordered. His battery
was slowly and accurately firing and much annoying the rebel batteries.
When it was so dark that one could not see twenty-five yards, he ordered
me to withdraw and proceed as fast as possible to Knoxville, not waiting
for him. I directed that my right or fifth piece should be first
limbered up. The men in charge of the mules that hauled this piece
attempted to drive them round to the trail, but they made only a few
steps and then planted their forward feet in the soft ground and stood
firm as Gibraltar. The guns were about 100 yards front of them, and I
soon decided that it would be easier to run our pieces back by hand than
to attempt to move the mules. Men from our division came to our
assistance, and we soon had the guns ready for marching.

My caissons, after having supplied from them the expended rounds of
ammunition from my gun limbers, had been sent back with the rest of the
battery, so that I had only my two guns to care for on my night retreat.
My cannoneers were so tired that I allowed them to take turns in riding
upon the limbers. This was our second night out and we were all
thoroughly exhausted. For thirty hours the men had not slept and had
partaken of but little food, mostly a small ration of corn bread. We
were preceded by the rest of our battery in Knoxville. I reached
Knoxville about 5 o'clock in the morning, and was directed to camp on
the right of our two sections just in the rear of Fort Saunders.

There was an Ohio battery attached to the Twenty-third Army Corps. We
made the march with them from Kentucky, and we were not a little
chagrined at the way these sons of Ohio overlapped us in foraging. We
had no serious difficulty with this command, still we all felt that it
was composed principally of the porcine element. When we went to the
Ninth Corps we parted company with this battery with regrets, for we
felt that we had not been able thus far to even up our accounts with
them. This Ohio institution had seen no service except marching and
camping. At Campbell's Station, it was in the front line of artillery,
first on the left of the Knoxville road in a very prominent position.
For a while it was rare fun for these men to rake the rebel lines, but
when the rebel artillery opened upon this first line of our batteries,
there was a most sudden change in the situation. The Ohioans had a man
or two wounded and a caisson blown up. When the explosion occurred, the
zeal of the men vanished, from officers and all. The captain limbered
his battery to the rear, hauled out into the road and advanced toward
Knoxville upon the trot. Whether he had orders to do so or not, we never
knew. As they passed along the road by our battery in position, our men
joked them to their hearts' content. It was loudly said that they were
after hogs, poultry and sheep. We all felt that Ohio had been settled
with, and just as we wanted it to be done. Had this battery seen as much
service as the Ninth Army Corps, they never would have done as they did.

We placed our guns in position, as before stated, in the rear and to the
right of Fort Saunders. The drivers took care of the mules, and the
cannoneers at once dropped upon the ground and slept until aroused to
assist in fortifying our position. We were on a commanding ridge looking
to the southwest. A section of our battery was to occupy embrasures in
the fort. The other two sections were outside and to the right of the
fort. This fort was an unfinished rebel earthwork, which commanded the
Loudon road, and was named by them Fort Loudon. Col. Orlando Poe was the
engineer in charge, and we soon had staked out for us works to be raised
to protect our guns. As our men were so wearied out, it was difficult
for them to accomplish much in the digging on this 17th of November,
1863, the day of our arrival. Late in the day details of citizens came
upon the ground, and before light the next morning we had excellent
protection for our guns. It was reported that General Burnside had taken
all males, irrespective of color or politics, and set them to work upon
the fortifications around the city.

Knoxville then rested entirely upon an elevated plateau, skirting along
the right bank of the Holston river, which is the main branch of the
Tennessee. This plateau was divided into three portions by two creeks,
named first and second creeks, respectively, from the north. Third creek
was just south of our position at Fort Saunders. This name was given the
fort about the 20th of November, in honor of Colonel Saunders, who was
killed at Armstrong's House. This division of the plateau gave one the
impression that the city was built upon three hills. On all prominent
points strong works were erected, some of them enclosed. These forts
were joined by strong rifle pits. Also there was an inner line of
enclosed works. On the left or south bank were several knobs 200 or 300
feet in height. The river was crossed by a pontoon bridge. We had
possession of the most commanding knob, had a good road to its summit
and it was well fortified.

We had a large mounted force which operated principally on the left bank
of the river. Forage and other supplies were sent down the French Broad
and Holston rivers. In fact, during the whole siege, we were never very
much interfered with on the south side of the river opposite and above
Knoxville. Our force was about 15,000, and that of General Longstreet's
20,000 men. On the 18th we, from Fort Saunders, witnessed a gallant
fight for the possession of the Armstrong House, on the Loudon road,
about a mile and a half from Saunders. This position was held by 2,000
or 3,000 of our mounted men, and it required the whole force of McLaw to
capture the house.

As soon as our forces retreated down the road under cover of our works,
the rebels immediately took possession of the house. Lieutenant Benjamin
then made a beautiful shot, sending at the first trial a 20-pound shell
into the house, setting it on fire. Had the rebels not extinguished the
fire the house would have been burned down. On the 20th we erected a
flagstaff and sent up a flag in the fort. This created much enthusiasm
all along our line. Our fortifications were greatly strengthened by
bales of cotton, covered with green cattle hides. We felt by this time
that we could easily hold our own against the enemy.

A house on the north side of the Loudon road, from which its owners had
fled, was taken possession of by the enemy's sharpshooters. It was
outside of our lines, but was near enough to our fort to cause us much
annoyance. General Ferrero, who commanded this portion of the line,
decided to capture the house in a night attack. This was made in the
evening at 8 o'clock, so quietly and quickly that the enemy were
surprised, and some surrendered and some ran away. The house was
destroyed.

A little incident occurred in the fort at this time that I have never
forgotten. I had held the view, with most others, that it is a matter of
instinct for a person to jump or dodge if anything unexpected comes upon
him through any one of the senses. Lieutenant S. N. Benjamin, the chief
of artillery of the army, often reprimanded his men for dodging, and so
did General Ferrero, and General Ferrero told a story how a soldier was
hit when he dodged; had he gone right along the bullet would have missed
him. I had noticed Lieutenant Benjamin on several occasions under a warm
fire, and he paid no attention to the whistling balls. On the night in
question General Ferrero and staff and about every commissioned officer
in the fort were standing inside Fort Saunders awaiting the advance of
our Seventeenth Michigan regiment upon the house. We had waited several
minutes after 8 o'clock, and began to wonder why the attack had not been
made. Suddenly there came right at us a heavy volley from the house.
This was so unexpected that down went General Ferrero, and Lieutenant
Benjamin was almost prone upon the ground. My opinion is that all
present dodged more or less, but none so low as the officers named.

On the 21st, Saturday, the work upon the fortifications still went
steadily on. The garrison of Fort Saunders consisted principally of the
Seventy-ninth New York Highlanders and Benjamin's and Buckley's
batteries. Other infantry was close at hand, which could be called upon
in an emergency. From the 21st to the 28th nothing unusual occurred.
The enemy seemed to be busy on the south side of the Holston occupying
a high knob with artillery, but so far off that we gave it but little
attention. With 24-pound howitzers they could nearly reach our own main
line. Had he been able to capture the knob which our people had strongly
fortified, it would have been very disastrous to us.

Nov. 28, 1863, opened cold and rainy. The outside of the parapet of Fort
Saunders was coated with ice. From indications that all observed, it
seemed that the assault upon our line was near at hand. The enemy seemed
to be pushing troops toward the right of Fort Saunders, and were
constantly attempting to force back our pickets in that locality. The
location of the several guns of Battery D at 10 P. M., on the 28th, was
as follows: the second and sixth pieces were in Battery Galpin, on
second creek, enfilading the creek and railroad; the third, fourth and
fifth in Fort Saunders, and the first in Battery Noble, on the left of
the Loudon road. At 11 P. M., the rebels made a determined attack upon
our lines from Battery Galpin to the river, and our battery did
considerable firing. This movement of the enemy was to drive in our
pickets and to get as near our main line as possible.

We all knew that by daylight we should be attacked with all the fury
which General Longstreet could command. Ammunition was brought up in
extra rounds, ready for use. Nobody slept. General Burnside was visiting
his troops, especially those in Fort Saunders. Two companies of the
Twenty-ninth Massachusetts had been added to the infantry. His staff
were all busy directing and encouraging the men. It was not until half
past six o'clock on Sunday morning, Nov. 29, 1863, that a signal gun was
fired from the enemy's battery on Armstrong's Hill. There was then a
lively artillery fire opened from all the enemy's guns in position on
both sides of the river. Our artillery made no reply. When the rebel
artillery stopped firing we all knew that the assault would promptly
follow. We were peering through the fog and smoke and darkness to see
the advancing gray lines of the rebel infantry. We well knew that in a
minute they might be upon us, as they had crowded up to within 200 yards
of Fort Saunders.

In front of the fort telegraph wires had been wound round the stumps of
trees lately cut down, and this wire, not being known to the enemy,
threw them into much confusion. Lieutenant Benjamin's 20-pounders were
not well adapted to the short range required to repel the assault,
although they were as well served as any men could serve them, so that
it devolved upon the three brass Napoleons of Battery D to do the
effective work. As soon as the charging "columns by division closed en
masse" of the enemy appeared, Battery D sent in to the columns double
rounds of canister at fifty yards. The veterans of Fredericksburg,
Chancellorsville, and Chickamauga began to quail. It was not possible
for them to stand such an onslaught from big guns and rifles. Many fell
from the deadly fire and others on account of contact with the
entangling wire, but then in the fog and smoke, it was not possible to
tell why it was that nearly every man in the first rank fell.

To those brave men it seemed death to advance or retreat, and by force
of numbers they pushed on, and some got into the ditch in front of the
fort, it being some eight feet deep and twelve feet wide; to the top of
the parapet was at least twenty feet, and the outside of the parapet was
covered with smooth ice. When they gained the ditch they were sheltered
from our fire. It was not an agreeable duty for our infantry to peer
over the top of the parapet to shoot the rebels below, so Lieutenant
Benjamin took a number of his shells, lighted the fuses and rolled them
over the parapet into the ditch among the enemy. A half dozen explosions
of these shells brought them to terms, and soon something as white as
anything they had, was raised upon a ramrod. They were told to enter by
a certain embrasure, leaving their arms in the ditch. They came along
rapidly, about 300 of them, and were marched into Knoxville. The rest of
the charging columns fell back, and the battle was at an end. Four
brigades, consisting of nineteen regiments, from 4,000 to 6,000 men,
were sent forward against Fort Saunders.

News soon came that General Grant had won a decisive victory at
Chattanooga, and that General Sherman was rapidly coming to our relief.
Joy reigned in Knoxville, and in all the hearts of the thousands of
loyal people in East Tennessee.




APPENDIX.

INCIDENTS (PERSONAL).


At Campbell's Station Sergeant Gideon Spencer, of the fourth piece, had
a close call. He was taking his piece from its position and passing
along the Knoxville road. A high worm fence was standing by the side of
the road and one of the slanting stakes in it hung out over the road so
that the sergeant on horseback had to turn his head over to the right in
order to avoid a collision. Just as he turned the head, a 20-pound shell
came from the Washington artillery and cut off the stake, opposite the
sergeant's head. In this case, dodging paid.

During the siege of Knoxville Private William Oakes was down in a ravine
near the teams. A bullet fired from the rebel lines came over and passed
through his head just above the tongue, carrying away two or three of
his teeth. He was in a hospital a short distance away, and the next day
after he was wounded I went to see him. I found him with his cheeks
swollen to an enormous size. I shook his hand and expressed my regret at
his misfortune, and hoped that he would soon be out of the hospital,
etc. I did not think that he could articulate. I saw that he was about
to speak, or to attempt it, and so I leaned over to catch his words. He
managed to say in a distressed voice that he was unable to eat popcorn.
I thought that he would get back to Rhode Island, and told him so.

While lying with my section on the right of Fort Saunders, on a cold,
wet day, the colonel commanding the brigade to which I was attached
directed his quartermaster to furnish me with a tent. There was sent
round an old sibley tent and my men pitched it a short distance in rear
of the line, on a slightly elevated dry patch of ground. I went inside,
but found that as the top of the tent was above our parapet, the rebels
were shooting bullets through the top in a lively manner. I went outside
and estimated about how low the shots could come through the tent. I
made a mark on the inside, and those who happened to be in the tent kept
heads below the line. The colonel referred to this line as the dead
line. A soldier brought to me a beautiful copy of the works of the Latin
poet, Virgil, and I spent the time in reading his poetic account of the
siege of "Lofty Ilium."

On the morning of the great assault upon our lines, Sergeant Charles C.
Gray was in charge of the fourth piece of our battery. He often loaded
his piece with double canister and fired with terrible effect, for the
range was only from fifteen yards to fifty yards. He moved his piece
from its first position en barbette on the right of the fort, to an
embrasure that more effectually commanded the rebel advance. Here he
fired with great rapidity, until the enemy appeared to recoil. He had
his gun loaded with double canister and ceased firing. At this time a
rebel officer climbed out of the ditch, and standing at the muzzle of
the cannon placed his sword upon it and said: "Surrender this gun." The
man who held the lanyard was ready to fire, and asked for the order.
Sergeant Gray replied: "Don't waste double canister on one man." At this
juncture, three other rebels came into the embrasure at the muzzle of
the gun, and then the order was given to "fire." Of these four men,
nothing was left but atoms. The brave sergeant was publicly thanked and
congratulated by General Burnside a few hours later. The Governor of
Rhode Island, at the general's request, sent him a commission as second
lieutenant. This case is unique. Nothing but the stout heart of Sergeant
Gray made him a commissioned officer. He owed his promotion to no
political or personal influence with the Governor of Rhode Island.

Sergeant Frank Tucker, of Battery D, was a cool, brave man, and the best
shot in the whole battery. Some 600 or 700 yards from our lines, just in
the edge of a piece of woodland, a rebel sharpshooter, with a big target
rifle that sent explosive bullets, had secreted himself in a pine tree.
A number of men had been killed by him. General Ferrero had barely
escaped a bullet through his head. The general sent for me, as my
section was in position nearly opposite the sharpshooter, and requested
me to open fire upon him. I stated that nothing would please me better,
but as Lieutenant Benjamin had ordered me to waste no ammunition, I did
not feel that he would permit me to open fire on one man. He gave me a
written order to proceed, and so I went back to my section to carry out
the order. We placed a cap upon a ramrod and slowly raised it above our
parapet. I looked through a field glass while the men looked with naked
eyes. The cap had no sooner come above the parapet than a ball was put
through it. We all saw the smoke about ten or fifteen feet from the
ground. I directed Sergeant Tucker to load with solid shot, to take his
time about computing distance, elevation of piece, and aiming it. When
he had the gun ready, we once more raised the cap, and promptly the
bullet came. The sergeant had his piece ready aimed and he quickly said
"fire." The next I saw the pine tree break off and topple over, and down
fell a man with his gun in his hand. Our men sent up a great shout.
General Ferrero was delighted with such an exhibition of marksmanship. I
noticed that as soon as the reb. struck the ground he jumped up and ran
into the thicket to the rear of his tree. I said nothing about this, and
it was understood that Tucker had dropped his man at the first fire.




  CONFEDERATE LOSS IN ASSAULT UPON FORT LOUDON,
  _ALIAS_ SAUNDERS ON NOVEMBER 29, 1863.


  Killed,  129.   Wounded,   458.
  Missing, 226.   Aggregate, 813.

  See War of the Rebellion, Official Records, Vol. 31, Part I, page 475.

  General Burnside makes Confederate total loss about 500.

  See _Ibid_ page 270.

  Union entire loss about 20, _Ibid_ page.

  In the assault _upon_ Fort Saunders, November 29, 1863, I
  do not find that Battery "D" suffered any loss.

  E. K. PARKER.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Campaign of Battery D, First Rhode
Island light artillery., by Ezra Knight Parker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPAIGN OF BATTERY D ***

***** This file should be named 30822.txt or 30822.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/8/2/30822/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
