The Project Gutenberg EBook of Two Little Women, by Carolyn Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Two Little Women

Author: Carolyn Wells

Release Date: January 7, 2010 [EBook #30881]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO LITTLE WOMEN ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








Two Little Women


Carolyn Wells




BY THE SAME AUTHOR

       *       *       *       *       *

PATTY SERIES

  PATTY FAIRFIELD
  PATTY AT HOME
  PATTY IN THE CITY
  PATTY'S SUMMER DAYS
  PATTY IN PARIS
  PATTY'S FRIENDS
  PATTY'S PLEASURE TRIP
  PATTY'S SUCCESS
  PATTY'S MOTOR CAR
  PATTY'S BUTTERFLY DAYS
  PATTY'S SOCIAL SEASON
  PATTY'S SUITORS
  PATTY'S ROMANCE


MARJORIE SERIES

  MARJORIE'S VACATION
  MARJORIE'S BUSY DAYS
  MARJORIE'S NEW FRIEND
  MARJORIE IN COMMAND
  MARJORIE'S MAYTIME
  MARJORIE AT SEACOTE

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: IT TOOK A LONG TIME TO SATISFY THE BOYS'
APPETITES.--_Page_ 199]




TWO LITTLE WOMEN


BY
CAROLYN WELLS

AUTHOR OF
THE PATTY BOOKS,
THE MARJORIE BOOKS, ETC.


ILLUSTRATIONS BY
E. C. CASWELL


GROSSET & DUNLAP
PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK


COPYRIGHT, 1915
BY DODD, MEAD & COMPANY




CONTENTS


       CHAPTER                                                      PAGE

    I  THE GIRL NEXT DOOR                                              1
   II  DOTTY ROSE AND DOLLY FAYRE                                     15
  III  THE NEW ROOMS                                                  29
   IV  THE BIRTHDAY MORNING                                           43
    V  THE DOUBLE PARTY                                               57
   VI  ROLLER SKATING                                                 71
  VII  TWO BIG BROTHERS                                               87
 VIII  CROSSTREES CAMP                                               103
   IX  DOLLY'S ESCAPE                                                118
    X  HIDDEN TREASURE                                               133
   XI  A THRILLING EXPERIENCE                                        150
  XII  WHO WAS THE TALL PHANTOM?                                     167
 XIII  THAT LUNCHEON                                                 186
  XIV  THE CAKE CONTEST                                              201
   XV  WHO WON THE PRIZE?                                            215
  XVI  A WALK IN THE WOODS                                           231
 XVII  SURFWOOD                                                      250
XVIII  DOLL OVERBOARD!                                               260
  XIX  SPENDING THE PRIZE MONEY                                      276
   XX  GOOD-BYE, SUMMER!                                             288




CHAPTER I

THE GIRL NEXT DOOR


Summit Avenue was the prettiest street in Berwick. Spacious and
comfortable-looking homes stood on either side of it, each in its
setting of lawn and shade trees. Most of these showed no dividing fences
or hedges, and boundaries were indiscernible in the green velvety sward
that swept in a gentle slope to the sidewalk.

Of two neighbouring houses, the side windows faced each other across two
hundred feet of intervening turf. The windows of one house were duly
fitted with window-screens, holland shades and clean, fresh white
curtains; for it was May, and Berwick ladies were rarely dilatory with
their "Spring-cleaning." But the other house showed no window dressings,
and the sashes were flung open to the sunny breeze, which, entering,
found rugless floors and pictureless walls.

But at the open front doors other things were entering; beds, chairs,
tables, boxes and barrels, all the contents of the great moving vans
that stood out at the curb. Strong men carried incredibly heavy burdens
of furniture, or carefully manoeuvred glass cabinets or potted palms.

From behind the lace curtains of the other house people were watching.
This was in no way a breach of good manners, for in Berwick the
unwritten law of neighbours' rights freely permitted the inspection of
the arriving household gods of a new family. But etiquette demanded that
the observers discreetly veil themselves behind the sheltering films of
their own curtains.

And so the Fayres, mother and two daughters, watched with interest the
coming of the Roses.

"Rose! what a funny name," commented Dolly Fayre, the younger of the
sisters; "do you s'pose they name the children Moss, and Tea and things
like that?"

"Yes, and Killarney and Sunburst and Prince Camille de Rohan," said
Trudy, who had been studying Florists' catalogues of late.

"Their library furniture is mission; there goes the table," and Mrs.
Fayre noted details with a housekeeper's eye. "And here comes the piano.
I can't bear to see men move a piano; I always think it's going to fall
on them."

"I'm tired of seeing furniture go in, anyway," and Dolly jumped up from
her kneeling position. "I'd rather see the people. Do you s'pose
there's anybody 'bout my age, Mums?"

"I don't know, Dolly. Your father only said their name was Rose, and not
another word about them."

"There's a little girl, anyway," asserted Trudy; "they took in a big
doll's carriage some time ago."

Trudy was nineteen and Dolly not quite fifteen, so the girls, while
chummy as sisters, had few interests in common. Dolly wandered away,
leaving the other two to continue their appraisal of the new neighbours.
She went to her own room, which also looked out toward the Roses' house.
Idly glancing that way from her window, she saw a girl's face in a
window next door. She seemed about Dolly's age, and she had a pretty
bright face with a mop of curly black hair.

She wore a red dress and a red hair-ribbon, and she made a vivid
picture, framed in the open window.

Dolly looked through the scrim of her bedroom curtain, and then to see
better, moved the curtain aside, and watched the black-haired girl.

Dolly, herself, could not be seen, because of the dark wire window
screen, and she looked at the stranger with increasing interest.

At last the new girl put one foot over the window sill and then the
other, and sat with her feet crossed and kicking against the side of the
house. It was a first floor window, and there was little danger of her
falling out, but she stretched out her arms and held the window frame on
either side.

Dolly judged the girl must be about her own age, for she looked so, and
too, her dress came nearly but not quite to her shoetops, which was the
prescribed length of Dolly's own.

It was a pleasant outlook. If this new neighbour should be a nice girl,
Dolly foresaw lots of good times. For most of her girl friends lived at
some distance; the nearest, several blocks away. And to have a chum next
door would be fine!

But was she a nice girl? Dolly had been punctiliously brought up, and a
girl who sat in a window, and swung her feet over the sill, was a bit
unconventional in Berwick.

Dolly was seized with a strong desire to meet this girl, to see her
nearer by and to talk with her. But Dolly was timid. Beside her careful
education in deportment, she was naturally shy and reticent. She was
sure she never could make any advances to become acquainted with this
new girl, and yet, she did want to know her.

She went back to her mother and sister.

"There's an awful big picture," Trudy was saying; "it's all burlapped
up, so you can't tell what it is. It's easy to judge people from their
pictures."

Trudy had graduated the year before from a large and fine girls' school
and she knew all about pictures.

"I think you can tell more by chairs," Mrs. Fayre said; "their easy
chairs are very good ones. I think they're very nice people."

"Have you seen the girl in the window?" asked Dolly. "She's just about
my size."

"So she is," said Mrs. Fayre, glancing at Dolly, and then returning to
her study of the chairs.

"When can I go to see her, Mother?"

"Oh, Trudy and I will call there in a fortnight or so, and after that
you can go to see the little girl or I'll ask her mother to bring her
over here. You children needn't be formal."

"But can't I go over there to-day?"

"Mercy, no, child! Not the day they arrive! They'd think we were crazy!"

Dolly went out on the side verandah. The black-haired girl still sat in
the window. She was frankly staring, and so, every time Dolly caught her
eye, the straightforward gaze was so disconcerting that Dolly looked
away quickly and pretended to be engrossed in something else.

But at last with a determined effort to overcome her timidity, she
concluded she would look over at the girl and smile. It couldn't be
wrong merely to smile at a new girl, if it was the very day she arrived.
They couldn't think her "crazy" for that. But to conclude to do this and
to do it, were two very different matters for Dolly Fayre.

Half a dozen times she almost raised her eyes, her smile all ready to
break out, and then, it would seem too much to dare, and with a deep
blush, she would turn again toward her own house.

But it was nearing luncheon time, and Dolly made a last desperate effort
to screw her courage to the sticking point. With a determined jerk she
wheeled around and smiled broadly at the new girl.

To her amazement, the pretty face scowled at her! Definitely and
distinctly scowled! Dolly could scarcely believe her eyes. Why should
this stranger scowl at her, when she didn't know her at all?

Dolly quickly looked away, and pondered over the matter. She felt less
shy now, because she was angry. Then the bell rang for luncheon.

Dolly started for the house, but unable to resist a final impulse, she
glanced again at the girl in the window.

The girl shook her head at her! It was a quick, saucy, sideways shake,
as if Dolly had asked her something and she had refused. The pretty face
looked pettish, and the black eyes snapped as she vigorously shook her
curly head.

"Pooh!" said Dolly to herself; "wait till you're asked, miss! I don't
want anything of you!"

Dolly went into the house and at the lunch table, she told her mother
and Trudy of the girl's actions.

"I thought she looked saucy," said Trudy, and the subject was dropped.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the meantime the girl next door had drawn in her feet and jumped down
from the window.

"What a funny lunch!" she exclaimed, as she ran into the dining-room.
"Looks good, though," and she sat down on a packing-box, and took the
plate her mother offered.

"Yes, it's a sort of picnic," said Mrs. Rose; "everything's cold, but it
does taste good!"

The dining-room was unfurnished; though the table and chairs were in it,
they were still burlapped, and the barrels of dishes were not yet
unpacked. Mrs. Rose and her sister, Mrs. Bayliss, sat on packing-boxes
too, and made merry at their own discomfort.

"Seems 'sif we'd never get straightened out," said Mrs. Rose, taking
another sandwich on her plate, "but I s'pose we will. It's always like
this when you move. Thank goodness, George is coming home early,--he's
such a help."

"Yes, he is," agreed Mrs. Bayliss; "what lovely fresh radishes! I'll
take some more. Do you know any one at all in Berwick, Molly?"

"No one at all. George liked the place, and he bought this house from an
agent. But I shan't hasten to make acquaintances. I believe in going
slow in such matters. The neighbours will probably call after a few
weeks, and then we'll see what they're like. The people next door have
lovely curtains. I think you can judge a lot by curtains. And their
whole place has a well-kept air. Perhaps they'll prove pleasant
neighbours. Their name is Fayre."

"I saw the little girl out on the verandah," said Dotty Rose, between
two bites of her sandwich. "She has yellow hair and blue eyes. But I
don't like her."

"Why, Dotty, how you talk!" exclaimed her aunt; "how can you like her or
dislike her, when you don't know her?"

"She's a prig; I can see that, Aunt Clara. I can tell by the way she
walks and moves around. She hasn't any _go_ to her."

"Well, you've go enough for the whole neighbourhood! Probably you'll
find she's a nice, well-behaved little girl."

"All right, have it just as you like, Aunt Clara. When are you going to
fix my room, Mother?"

"As soon as your things come; not till to-morrow, most likely. If we can
get beds to sleep on to-night, that's all I'll ask."

"I think it's fun," and Dotty danced around on one toe; "I'd like to
live this way, always,--nothing in its place and all higgledy-piggledy!"

"I believe you would," returned her mother, laughing. "Now, if you've
finished your lunch, dearie, run away and play, for you only bother
around here."

Dotty ran away but she didn't play. She went from one room to another,
trying to learn the details of her new home; but ever and anon her
glance would stray to the house next door, and she would wonder what the
yellow-haired girl was doing.

Dotty had been allowed to choose her own room from two that her mother
designated. One was on the side of the house that faced the Fayres', the
other wasn't. Dotty hesitated between them. She went in one and then the
other.

"If I _should_ like that prim-faced thing," she said to her Aunt Clara,
"I'd rather have this room, that looks toward their house. But if I
_don't_ like her,--and I'm just about sure I _won't_,--I'd rather have
my room on the other side."

"Oh, you'll like her, after you know her," said Aunt Clara, carelessly.
"But don't mind that, take the room you think pleasanter."

So Dotty considered them both again. The room not facing the Fayres' was
without doubt the more attractive of the two, though not much so. It had
a large bay window, which was delightful; but then on the other hand the
other room had an open fireplace, and Dotty loved a wood fire.

She stood in the room with the fireplace, looking toward the next house.
It was Saturday afternoon, and as she watched she saw the yellow-haired
girl and two ladies come out and get in a motor car.

"I don't like her!" Dotty declared again, though as there was no one
else present, she talked to herself. "She walks like a prig, she gets in
the car like a prig and she sits down on the seat like a prig! I don't
like her, and I'm going to take the other room!"

So, when her own furniture arrived it was put in the room with the bay
window and which did not overlook the Fayre house. The house that she
could see from her newly chosen room, was so hemmed in by trees as to
be almost invisible.

Dotty spent a pleasant afternoon, after her furniture was in place,
arranging her little trinkets and pictures, and putting away things in
her cupboards and bureau drawers.

But every little while some errand seemed to call her across the hall,
and she couldn't help looking out to see if "that girl" had returned
yet.

The next day was Sunday, and Mr. Rose was at home.

"Well, Chick-a-dotty, you'll have a nice playmate in that little girl
next door," he said, as his daughter followed him round the house
looking after various matters.

"'Deed I won't, Daddy; she's horrid!"

"Why, why! what sort of talk is this? Do you know her?"

"No, but I've seen her, and she isn't nice a bit."

"Oh, I guess she is. I came out in the train last night with a man I
know, and he knows the Fayres and he says they're about the nicest
people in Berwick."

"Pooh! I don't think so. She's a prim old thing, and doesn't know B from
broomstick."

"There, there, Dotty Doodle, don't be hasty in your judgment. Give the
little lady a chance."

Later, Dotty and her father walked round the outdoors part of their new
domain.

"Isn't it pretty, Daddy!" exclaimed Dotty; "I'm so glad there are a lot
of flower-beds and nice big shrubs, and lovely blue spruce trees and
lots of things that look like a farm."

The Roses had always lived in the city, and to Dotty's eyes the two
acres of ground seemed like a large estate. It was attractively laid out
and in good cultivation, and Mr. Rose looked forward with pleasure to
the restful life of a suburban town after his city habits.

"There's that girl now!" and Dotty suddenly spied her neighbour walking
with _her_ father around _their_ lawn.

"So it is. I shall speak to him; it's only right, as we are next-door
neighbours, and we men needn't be so formal as the ladies of the
houses."

"I don't want to speak to her," and Dotty drew back. "_Don't_ do it,
Daddy, _please_ don't!"

"Nonsense, child! of course I shall. Don't be so foolish."

"But I don't want to; she'll think I'm crazy to meet her, and I'm not! I
don't want to, Father."

"What a silly! Well, if you don't want to see the girl now, run away.
I'm certainly going to chat with Mr. Fayre, and get acquainted."

       *       *       *       *       *

Now the other pair of neighbours had, not unnaturally, been talking
about the newcomers.

"You see, Father," said Dolly as she took her usual Sunday morning
stroll around the place with him, "that new girl isn't nice at all. When
I smiled at her, she scowled and shook her head at me."

"Oh, Dolly, I imagine she's all right. Mr. Forrest told me about them.
He knows them and he says they're charming people."

"Well, they may be, but I don't want to meet her. Don't walk over that
way."

"Yes, I shall. Mr. Rose seems to be coming this way, and I shall do the
neighbourly thing and have a chat with him."

"Why, Father, you don't know him."

"That doesn't matter between next-door neighbours, at least between the
men of the houses. Come along, and scrape acquaintance with the little
girl. I think she looks pretty."

Dolly started, then a sudden fit of shyness seized her, and she stood
stock-still.

"I can't," she murmured; "oh, Father, please don't ask me to!"

"All right, dear; don't if you don't want to. Run back to the house. I'm
going to speak to Mr. Rose."

And that's how it happened that as the two men neared each other, with
greeting smiles, the two girls, started simultaneously, and ran like
frightened rabbits away from each other, and to their respective homes.




CHAPTER II

DOTTY ROSE AND DOLLY FAYRE


A few days passed without communication between the two houses.

Mr. Fayre expressed a decided approval of his new neighbour, and advised
his wife to call on Mrs. Rose. Mrs. Fayre said she would do so as soon
as the proper time came.

"I'm not going," said Dolly. "I don't like that girl, and I never
shall."

"Why, Dorinda," said her father, who only used her full name when he was
serious, "I've never known you to act so before. I've thought you were a
nice, sweet-tempered little girl, and here you are acting like a
cantankerous catamaran!"

"What is the matter with you, Doll?" asked Trudy; "you are unreasonable
about the little Rose girl."

"Let her alone," said Dolly's mother; "she'll get over it."

"I'll never get over it," declared Dolly; "I don't want to know a girl
as big as I am, who plays with dolls."

"How do you know she plays with dolls?"

"Well, a dolls' carriage went in there the day they moved in."

"Perhaps it's one she used to have, and she has kept it, for old
associations."

"Maybe. Anyhow, I don't like her. She made faces at me."

"Really?" and her mother smiled.

"Well, she scowled at me, and shook her head like a--like a--"

"Like a little girl shaking her head," said Mr. Fayre, to help her out.

But Dolly didn't smile. She was a queer nature, was Dolly. Usually sunny
and happy-hearted, she liked almost everything and everybody, but if she
did take a dislike, it became a prejudice, and very hard to remove.

Dolly was pretty, with the bluest of blue eyes and the pinkest of pink
cheeks and the yellowest of yellow hair. She was inclined to be plump,
and Trudy was always beseeching her not to eat so much candy and sweet
desserts. But Dolly loved these things and had small concern about her
increasing weight. She didn't care much for outdoor play, and would
rather sit in the hammock and read a story-book than run after tennis
balls.

Her mother called her a dreamer, and often came upon her, sitting in the
twilight, her thoughts far away in a fairyland of her own imagination,
enjoying wonderful adventures and thrilling scenes.

Dolly was in the grammar school and next year would be in the high
school. She didn't like study, particularly, except history and
literature, but she studied conscientiously and always knew her lessons.

This morning, she kissed her mother good-bye, and started off for
school. She wore a blue and white gingham, and a fawn-coloured coat.
Swinging her bag of books, she marched past the Rose house, and though
she didn't look at her, she could see the Rose girl on the front steps.

"I wonder if she'll go to our school," thought Dolly; and for a moment
the impulse seized her to stop and "scrape acquaintance." Then she
remembered that shaking head, and fearing a rebuff, she walked on by.

"Do you know that new girl next door to you?" Celia Ferris asked her as
she entered the school yard.

"No; do you?" and Dolly looked indifferent.

"No, I don't; but my mother knows a lady, who knows them and she says
Dorothy,--that's her name,--is a wonder."

"A wonder! How?"

"Oh, she's so smart and so clever, and she can do everything so well."

This was enough for Dolly Fayre. To think that disagreeable new
neighbour of hers, must be a paragon of all the virtues!

But Dolly was never unjust. She knew she had no real reason to dislike
Dorothy Rose, so she only said, "I haven't met her yet. My mother is
going to call there this week, and then I s'pose I'll get acquainted
with her."

"How funny," said Celia, who was chummy by nature. "I should think you'd
go in and play with her without waiting for your mother to call,--and
all that. Anybody'd think you were as old as Trudy."

"Oh, I could do that if I wanted to, but I don't want to."

"Well, I think I'll go to see her, anyway. If she's so smart it would be
nice to have her in the Closing Day exercises. I s'pose she'll come to
school here."

"Of course, you can do as you like, Celia, but I think it's too late to
get any new girls in now."

Dolly went on to the schoolroom, her heart full of resentment at this
"smart" interloper. It was a little bit a feeling of jealousy, for Dolly
Fayre was head and front of everything that went on at the Berwick
Grammar School, and it jarred a little to think of having a wonder-girl
come in with a lot of new ideas and plans and mix everything all up at
the last minute.

But don't get any mistaken idea that Dolly Fayre was a mean-minded or
small-natured girl. On the contrary, she was generosity itself in all
her dealings with her schoolmates. Every one liked her, and with good
reason, for she never quarrelled, and was always happy and smiling.

But the Rose girl had acted queer from the first, and Dolly couldn't
admit the desirability of bringing her into their already arranged
"Closing Exercises." These were so important as to be almost sacred
rites, and as usual Dolly was at the head of all the committees, and her
word was law.

She went home from school that afternoon, thinking about it, and her
pretty face looked very sober as she went in the house and put her
school-books neatly away in their place.

"There's some lemonade and cookies on the sideboard," said her mother as
Dolly went through the hall.

"All right, Mumsie," and somehow, after these refreshments had been
absorbed, Dolly felt better, and life seemed to have a brighter outlook.

She took an unfinished story-book and picked up her white kitten, and
went out to the side verandah, her favourite spot of a warm afternoon.

"You see, Flossy," she whispered, addressing the kitten, "I want you
with me, 'cause I'm buffled to-day." Dolly was in the habit of making up
words, if she couldn't think of any to suit her, and just at the moment
_buffled_ seemed to her to mean a general state of being ruffled, and
buffeted and rebuffed and generally huffy.

"And you well know, Floss, that when I feel mixy-up, there's nothing so
comforting and soothing as a nice little, soft little, cuddly little
kitty-cat."

Flossy blinked her eyes, and purred gently, and was just as comforting
as she could be, which is saying a good deal.

There was a big, wide swing on the side verandah, one of those cushioned
settee affairs that are so cosy to snuggle into, and read.

And it was without a glance at the house next door, that Dolly snuggled
herself in among the red cushions and opened her book, while Flossy
cuddled in the hollow of her arm; and concluding that she would be
quite as comforting asleep as awake, the kitten promptly fell into a
doze.

Meantime there were arrivals at the Rose house.

Eugenia, the eleven year old girl, had been staying with a cousin until
the house should be put in order, and now she had come to the new home.

She was a black-haired witch, and of exceeding vivacious and volatile
disposition.

"OO!--ee!" she exclaimed; "isn't it great! Take me everywhere, Dot! Show
me all the rooms and all the outdoorses and everything! I didn't know it
was such a big house. Which is my room?"

Even as she talked, Eugenia was flying upstairs, only to turn right
around and fly down again. She danced from room to room, sometimes
followed or preceded by Dotty and sometimes not. Her own room delighted
her. It faced the Fayres' house, being the one Dorothy had rejected in
favour of the other.

"Where's Blot?" asked Dotty; "didn't you bring him?"

"Oh, yes; he's down with Thomas. He's crazy. He barked all the way
here."

But Dotty was already flying down stairs to find her beloved puppy.

"Here he is, Miss Dorothy," and the chauffeur, Thomas, gave the black
poodle into her arms.

"Oh, you blessed Blotty-boy! Oh, you cunnin' Blotsy-wotsy! Does him love
hims Dotty?"

The love was manifested by some moist caresses and then Blot was all for
a scamper. Dotty took him out on the lawn and set him down, herself all
ready for a romp.

Now only a minute before, Flossy, the white kitten, had waked from her
nap, and seeing that Dolly was absorbed in her story-book, inferred that
kitten comfort was not at the moment needed, and decided to go after a
very yellow butterfly out on the Fayre lawn.

Stealthily across the grass, Flossy went butterflywards, on tippy-toe.
Each white paw was daintily lifted and softly set down on the thick
turf, as her progress continued. From the Rose lawn Blot spied the
advancing Flossy. He didn't then know her name, but he had liberal ideas
on the subject of introductions, and he made a wild dash toward the
oncoming kitten.

When Floss saw the small black whirlwind hurling itself at her, she was
either too brave or too frightened to retreat, so she put her white back
up as high as possible and stood her ground. She expressed her opinion
of the performance in a series of sputtering yowls that drew Dolly's
attention from her book to the impending battle.

She sprang out of the swing, and rushed toward Flossy just as the two
belligerents met in the grassy arena.

Dorothy Rose, on her side of the lawn was shaking with laughter, and
this sight was the last straw to Dorinda Fayre's overburdened soul.

"Don't you let your dog eat up my cat!" she cried out, angrily, to the
black-haired girl opposite.

"Don't you let your cat eat up my dog, then!" was the immediate
response, delivered with enthusiasm equalling Dolly's own.

"Cats don't eat dogs!"

"Neither do dogs eat cats!"

"Well, these will eat each other! Oh! look, we _must_ get them apart!"

The battle was of the pitched variety, whatever that may mean. But it is
a phrase used to describe the most intense and desperate battles of
history, and surely this was one of them. Dolly Fayre had no idea that
gentle little Flossy had so much fight in her small white body, and
Dotty Rose never dreamed that Blot was such a fire-eater under his curly
black coat.

Really alarmed for their pets, the two girls went nearer to the agile
warriors, who now looked like an indistinct moving-picture film that was
going too fast.

"Come here, Blot!" Dotty cried, in most commanding tones.

"Come here, Flossy!" Dolly called, in coaxing accents.

Insubordination ensued on both sides.

"We'll have to grab them!" declared Dotty Rose; dancing about the war
zone.

"We can't!" wailed Dolly Fayre, wringing her hands as she edged away
from the seat of battle.

"Well, I just guess we will!" and Dotty Rose seized Blot by the scruff
of his black neck and shook him loose from the white kitten.

With a little cry of rejoicing, Dolly Fayre picked up Flossy and plumped
herself down on the grass to make sure the kitten was intact.

Dotty sat down too, and felt of Blot's small and well-hidden bones.

As neither animal gave any cry of pain and as each glared at its late
opponent, the respective owners of the combatants drew sighs of relief
and held on tightly to their pets, lest a fresh attack should begin.

Now it stands to reason that after a scene like that just described,
the two girls couldn't get up and walk off home without a word.

So they sat on the grass and looked at each other.

And when the troubled blue eyes of Dolly Fayre saw the big brown eyes of
Dotty Rose twinkle and saw her red lips smile, she discovered that the
scowl she had objected to was not permanent, and she smiled back.

But somehow, they could think of nothing to say. The smile broke the ice
a little, but Dolly Fayre was timid, and Dotty Rose was absorbed in
looking at the other's blue eyes and yellow hair.

But it was Dotty who spoke first. "Well," she said, "how do you like
me?"

It was an unfortunate question. For Dolly Fayre hadn't a single definite
notion regarding Dotty Rose except that she didn't like her. However, it
would hardly do to tell her that, so she said, slowly: "I don't know
yet; how do you like me?"

"Well, I think you're awfully pretty, to begin with."

"So do I you," put in Dolly, glad to find a favourable report that she
could make truthfully.

"Aren't we different," went on the other thoughtfully; "you're so blonde
and I'm so dark."

"Yes; I just hate my hair,--towhead, Bert calls me."

"Who's Bert?"

"He's my brother; he's away at school. He's seventeen years old." Dolly
spoke proudly, as if she had said, "he's captain of the Fleet."

"Why, I've got a brother away at school, too."

"Have you? What's his name?"

"Bob; of course it's Robert, but we always call him Bob. He's eighteen."

"What else have you got?"

Dotty knew the question referred to family connections, and answered: "A
little sister, Genie, 'leven years old."

"That all?"

"Yep. 'Cept Aunt Clara, who lives with us, she's a widow. And of course,
Mother and Dad."

"I've got a grown-up sister, Trudy. She's in s'ciety now, and she's
awful pretty."

"Look like you?"

"Some. But she's all fluffy-haired and dimply-smiled, you know."

"What funny words you use."

"Do I? Well, I only do when I can't think of the real ones. Are you
going to the Grammar School?"

"Mother says it's too late to begin this year. Here it is May,--and it
closes in June. So she says for me to wait till next year."

This was comforting. If the girl didn't go to school this year she
couldn't make any bother with the Closing Exercises. Beside, maybe she
was not such a dislikable girl as she had seemed at first. Dolly sat and
regarded her. At last she said: "Then the doll-carriage belongs to your
little sister."

"To Genie, yes. How did you know she had one?"

"Saw it come with your things, the day you moved in."

"How old are you?"

"Fourteen, but I'll be fifteen next month,--June."

"Why, so will I! Isn't that funny! What day is your birthday?"

"The tenth."

"Mine's the twentieth. We're almost twins. And our names are quite
alike, too. Mine's Dorothy, really, but they all call me Dotty."

"And mine's Dorinda, but I'm called Dolly."

"And we both have brothers at school, and we each have a sister."

"But mine is a big sister and yours is a little sister."

"Yes, but we have as many differences as we have likenesses. You're so
fair, and--why, your name is Fayre!"

Dolly laughed. "Yes, and you're so rosy and your name is Rose!"

"Dotty Rose and Dolly Fayre! We ought to be friends. Shall we?"

Dolly hesitated. She was too honest to pretend to a liking she didn't
quite feel. She looked squarely at Dotty Rose, and said,
straightforwardly, "What made you scowl at me that first day you came?"

"I didn't!" and Dotty Rose opened her brown eyes in astonishment.

"Yes, you did; and you shook your head at me when I smiled to you. You
were sitting in a window, with your legs hanging out."

"Sitting where! Oh, I remember! Why, I didn't scowl at _you_, it was
because Aunt Clara called me to come in out of that window. And I didn't
want to, so I scowled. I've a fearful temper. And then, she told me
again to come in, and I shook my head. I wasn't shaking it at _you_!
Why, I didn't know you then!"

Dolly drew a long breath. "Then that's all right! I thought you scowled
because I smiled at you, and it made me mad. All right, I'll be friends
with you. I'd like to. I think you're real nice."

"So do I you!"




CHAPTER III

THE NEW ROOMS


In the cushioned swing on the Fayres' verandah the two girls sat.

An artist would have stopped to admire the picture. Dorinda, her pink
and white face framed in its golden halo of curlilocks, her light blue
frock, neat and smooth, was calmly and daintily nibbling at a piece of
cake, catching the crumbs carefully as they fell.

Beside her, Dorothy was rapidly munching her cake as she talked, and
letting the crumbs fall where they might. Her black hair framed her rosy
cheeks and her eyes snapped and sparkled as she gesticulated with both
hands. It was Dorothy's habit to emphasise her remarks with expressive
little motions, and her father often said that if her hands were tied
behind her, she couldn't say a word!

Her pink lawn dress was rather tumbled by reason of her wriggling and
jumping about, but Dorothy's frocks were rarely unrumpled after she had
had them on ten minutes.

"We've been friends more than a week now," she said, as she finished
her cake in one large bite and brushed a few stray bits out of her lap.
"And I think you're just fine! I'm _so_ glad we came to live in Berwick.
I like you better than any girl I ever knew." Dotty spread her hands
wide as if embracing all the girls who had figured in her previous
existence. "Do you like me as much as that?"

As she spoke, she touched her toes to the floor and sent the swing up in
the air with a mad jump.

"Oh!" gasped Dolly, as her cake flew out of her hand; "how--how sudden
you are!"

"Never mind! _Do_ you like me as much as I like you?"

"I don't know," and Dolly looked thoughtful; "I like you, of course, but
I wish you'd sit stiller."

"Can't; I'm always jumpy. But you _do_ like me, don't you, Dollyrinda?"

"Yes, but I can't hop into a liking the way you do. We're awfully
different, you know."

"'Course we are! That's what makes us like each other. Just think,
Dolly, we'll be fifteen soon. Don't you think we ought to be called by
our full names and not Dolly and Dotty any more?"

"I don't know. Why?"

"Oh, 'cause we're too big for baby names. I'm going to stop wearing
hair-ribbons."

"You are! How ever will you keep your hair back? And you've such a lot
of it."

"I know. So've you. Why, I'll just braid it, and let the end flutter.
But Mother says she won't let me till I'm sixteen. Well, we'll see. Do
you want to grow up, Doll?"

"I don't know."

"You don't know anything! I never saw such a girl! Well, what are you
going to do when you're fifteen?"

"I haven't thought about it. Do I have to do anything different from
when I'm fourteen?"

"You don't _have_ to! But don't you _want_ to? What do you want to be
when you're grown up?"

"Oh, _then_! Why, then I'm going to be an opera singer."

"Can you sing?"

"Not much yet. But Trudy says I have a nice voice and I'm going to
learn."

"Pooh! I don't believe you'll ever sing in opera. I'm going to be an
actress."

"Huh! Can you act?"

"Not yet; but I'm going to learn." Dotty smiled as she realised that
their ambitions were at least equally promising. "Wouldn't it be fun if
we did both get to be famous! Me an actress and you a singeress. But I
may change my mind about mine. I do sometimes. Last winter I was crazy
to be a trained nurse; but Mother wouldn't let me."

"Will she let you be an actress?"

"I haven't asked her yet. There's no hurry. I couldn't begin to study
for it till I'm out of school. What are you going to get for your
birthday?"

"I haven't decided yet. Mother said I could have my bedroom all done
over or have a gold watch."

"Oh, have the room things. And I'll do the same! Do you know, when we
moved into our house, I took a room on the other side, but I'm going to
move across so I can be on this side toward you. And Mother is going to
have the room done up for me, and I'm to choose the things. So you do
that too, and we'll have 'em alike!"

Dotty had jumped out of the swing in her excitement, and stood at one
side, her foot on the step, pushing it sideways.

"Don't do that, Dot, you'll break the swing."

"Well, will you? Will you choose the room fixings 'stead of the watch?"

"I don't know; I'll have to think."

"Fiddlesticks! Don't think! Jump at it, and say yes!"

"I believe I'd rather, anyway; it would be fun to have our things alike.
I'll ask Mother."

"But she said you could have your choice."

"Yes, but of course, I'll talk it over with her. And Dotty, we don't
want the same coloured things, you know."

"Why don't we?"

"Why, because we're so different. What colour do you want?"

"Oh, I've got it all picked out. I'm going to have rose and grey. It's
all the rage. Rose pink, you know, and French grey."

"Well, I don't want that. I want pale green and white."

"You do! Why rose and grey is ever so much more fashionable."

"I don't care. I know what I want. Now, see here,-- But do come and sit
down! Don't climb over the back of the swing!"

Dotty jumped down from the back of the swing, and came around and seated
herself beside Dolly. For nearly five minutes she sat quietly while they
discussed the colours.

"But, don't you see," said Dolly at last, "it will be nicer for us to
have our own colours and have the things alike. We can have just the
same shape furniture and everything, only each stick to our own colour."

Dotty was persuaded, and they agreed that the two mothers could easily
be brought to see the beauty of their plans.

And so it was. A neighbourly friendliness already existed between the
households, and as the two birthdays fell so near together, it seemed
fitting that the girls should have their gifts alike.

So the paperhanger was visited and Dolly chose a lovely paper of striped
pattern, but all white; to be crowned with a border design of hanging
vines and leaves in shades of green.

Dotty's paper was the same stripe, in soft greys; and her border was a
design of pink roses and rosebuds.

Dolly's woodwork was to be painted white and Dotty's light grey.

The two sets of furniture were exactly alike, except that one was
enamelled grey and one white.

Each room had a bay window, and the window seats were cushioned in green
or rose, and the numerous pillows that graced them were of harmonious
colouring.

The parents of the girls agreed that a fifteenth birthday was a
memorable occasion, and one not likely to occur again, so they made the
furnishings of the two rooms complete to the smallest detail.

Each had a large rug of plain velvet carpeting; Dotty's rose pink and
Dolly's moss green. Window curtains of Rajah silk fell over dainty white
ones, and pretty light-shades of green and pink, respectively, gave the
rooms a soft glow at night.

Trudy contributed wonderful _filet_ embroidered covers for
dressing-tables and stands, and dainty white couch pillows, with
monograms and ruffles.

Dotty's Aunt Clara gave each of the girls a picture, which they were
allowed to choose for themselves. They took a whole afternoon for this,
and at last Dolly made up her mind to take "Sir Galahad," and Dotty
chose, after long deliberation, a stunning photograph of the "Winged
Victory."

These, framed alike in dark, polished wood, were hung in similar
positions in the two rooms.

Altogether, the rooms were delightful. It was hard to say which was
prettier, but each best suited its happy owner.

There was quite a discussion as to when they would take possession, for
everything was in readiness by Dolly's birthday, which was on the tenth.

"I'll tell you!" cried Dotty, with a sudden inspiration; "let's average
up! Dolly's birthday is the tenth and mine the twentieth. Let's
celebrate both on the fifteenth, that's half way between, and as we're
fifteen anyway, it makes it just right!"

This was agreed to as a fine scheme, and then Mrs. Fayre electrified the
girls by proposing that they have a little party by way of further
celebration.

"Together, of course," she said, smiling; "not in either house, but an
outdoor party, on the lawn, half-way between."

"Oh, Mumsie!" and Dolly clasped her hands in ecstatic joy at the
prospect.

"Oh, Mrs. Fayre!" and Dotty flung her hands above her head, and danced
up and down the room where these plans were being talked over.

They were in the Fayre house, having just come down from an inspection
of Dolly's room, and these inspections were of almost daily occurrence
and usually participated in by several members of both families.

"Good idea!" said Mrs. Rose. "It will let Dotty get acquainted with the
young people here, and that's what I want. But let me make the party,
Mrs. Fayre, and you and Dolly invite the guests as we know so few people
as yet."

"No; the party must be half and half as to responsibility and expense.
If our two D's are to be so friendly, we must share and share alike in
their doings."

So it was agreed, and as there was but a week in which to get ready,
plans were hurried through.

They decided to ask thirty of the Berwick young people, fifteen girls
and fifteen boys.

"I wish Bob could be home!" sighed Dotty; and Dolly echoed the wish for
her own brother. But the boys of the two families were deep in school
exams and could not think of coming home for a party.

Of course the Fayres decided on the invitation list, but everything else
was mutually arranged.

It was to be entirely a lawn party; first because that seemed
pleasanter, and too, because then, it could take place on the adjoining
lawns and so be the party of both.

"Only,--if it rains!" said Dolly, with an anxious face.

"It won't rain!" declared Dotty; "it _can't_ rain on our double
birthday! It will be the beautifullest, clearest, sunshiniest day in the
world! I know it will!"

The girls decided to sleep in their new rooms for the first time the
night before the party.

"For," said Dolly, shaking her head sagely, "the night after the party,
we'll be so tired and thinky about it, that we can't enjoy our rooms so
much."

"All right," agreed Dotty, "I don't care. I'm crazy to get into mine;
the sooner the better, I say."

The two girls had a birthday present for each other, and though they
didn't know it, the two mothers had planned these so they should be
alike.

But they did know that the mothers had these gifts in readiness, and
that they would see them when they awoke on the birthday morning.

By common consent the real birthdays were ignored, and the fifteenth of
June accepted as the right anniversary for both.

Very formal were the rites preparatory to the occupancy of the new
rooms.

Dotty had planned them and after some discussion Dolly had agreed.

"You come over and wish me good-night in my room," Dotty said, "and then
I'll go over and wish you good-night in yours. And then, I'll go home
again, and when we're all ready for bed, we'll put out our lights and
stick our heads out of our windows and holler good-night across."

"Somebody might hear us," objected Dolly.

"Pooh! they won't. And what if they did? Neighbours have got a right to
say good-night to each other, I guess."

"But that's disturbing the peace, or something like that."

"Huh! the Peace must be awful easy disturbed! Well, you've got to do it,
anyhow."

"I haven't got to, either! Not just 'cause _you_ say so!"

Dotty was beginning to learn that mild-mannered Dolly had a will of her
own, and she said, placatingly: "Well, what do you want to do, then?"

"Let's do something like this. When we're all ready to hop into bed,
let's turn our lights up and down three times in succession; that'll
mean good-night."

"Oh, yes, I see; now, listen! we'll do it separately. You flash first
and then I will; and after three flashes, we'll leave the lights out and
jump into bed at the same minute!"

So it was settled, and the eventful occasion duly arrived.

The girls' bedtime hour was nine o'clock, but some time before that they
were in their new rooms, enjoying their beauty and freshness.

At quarter before nine, Dolly appeared at the Rose house, and said
solemnly, "I've come over to wish Dorothy good-night."

"Come in," said Mrs. Rose, trying not to smile at the ceremonial visit.
"You'll find her in her room; go right up."

Dolly went up, and found Dotty waiting for her.

"_Isn't_ it pretty!" Dolly exclaimed, seeing, as if for the first time
the beauties of the room. The bed was turned down, and a lovely new
nightdress, with a rose-coloured ribbon run through its lace edge, lay
in readiness for the sleeper.

"Oh, it's _lovely_!" returned Dotty; "I can hardly wait to go to bed! Go
on, say your piece."

Dolly stood a minute, her hands clasped, her eyes wandering about with a
thoughtful far away gaze.

"It's all gone," she said at last; "I can't remember it, only a line:

  "Sleep sweetly in this quiet room, oh, thou, whoe'er thou art;
  Nor let a troublous something or other disturb thy peaceful heart.

"Honest, that's all I can remember."

"Well, that's enough. Thank you, sweet friend and playmate, now go I
with thee!"

Grabbing Dolly by the arm, Dotty flew downstairs and across the lawn to
the other house; Dolly running by her side.

Up to Dolly's new room they went.

"Lovely!" exclaimed Dotty, as she saw almost the counterpart of her own
room, even to the new nightdress,--only Dolly's had a white ribbon.

"You might have had green," said Dotty, doubtfully.

"No, I don't like coloured ribbons in my underclothes. They're all right
for you," Dolly added politely, "but I never did like them."

"Now I'll say _my_ piece;" and Dotty bowed to her audience of one. "I
haven't forgotten it, but it's very short.

  "Early to bed and early to rise
  Makes a girl healthy and wealthy and wise.

"Thank you, sweet friend and playmate, now go I with thee."

"No; _you_ don't say that! You've _been_ with me. Now, I go home and we
both get ready for bed. When you're all ready, put out your light and--"

"Yes, I know."

Dotty scampered downstairs and over home, and fairly flew up to her
room.

In less than twenty minutes Dotty was all ready for bed; she put out
her light, and throwing a dressing-gown over her nightdress, she sat in
the window, watching the light in Dolly's room.

She waited and waited, but the light behind the pulled-down shade
remained.

"H'm!" said Dotty to herself, yawning, "she is the _slowest_ thing! I
could have undressed twice in this time!"

But at last, Dolly's light went out, and her shade was slowly raised.

Then, according to their plan, Dotty flashed her light on and off again.
Dolly's light repeated this manoeuvre. Then Dotty did it again, and
then Dolly did. The third time the flashes came and went, and then all
ceremonies over, the two girls went to their new pretty, inviting beds,
and were very soon asleep.




CHAPTER IV

THE BIRTHDAY MORNING


Dotty Rose woke early next morning, and, wide-awake on the instant,
sprang from her bed and flew to the window. But she could see nothing of
Dolly. The white shades were down and there was no sign of any one
stirring. Dotty turned back and began anew to look at her pretty
belongings. On the dressing-table she spied something she had not seen
there the night before. It was a lovely picture of Dolly in a beautiful
silver frame. Dotty laughed outright, for that was exactly what she had
given Dolly! A silver frame with her own picture in it. The two mothers
had been in the secret, and had seen to it that the frames were alike,
but neither of the girls knew that her gift was to be duplicated.

It was a perfect likeness, showing Dolly at her best; a dreamy
expression on her sweet face, and her soft hair in little waves at her
temples, and drawn back by an enormous ribbon bow.

It was almost too early to get dressed, so Dotty slipped on a
dressing-gown and bedroom slippers and dawdled about, keeping a watch
on the Fayre house, in hopes Dolly's shades would fly up.

Soon her little sister Eugenia came bounding in. She, too, was in a
kimono and she gave a jump and landed with a spring in the middle of
Dotty's carefully arranged couch pillows.

"Genie!" cried her sister, "get off of there!"

"Won't!" and Genie bounced up and down on the springs of the couch.

"Get off, I tell you!"

"Won't, I tell you!"

It _was_ trying, for the pretty pillows with their snowy white
embroidered covers were rumpled and tossed by Genie's mischievous play.

"Genie Rose! You go right straight out of my room! You're a naughty
little girl and you're spoiling my birthday things!"

  "Dorothy Rose,
  With a pug nose!"

chanted Genie, with the amiable intention of teasing her sister beyond
endurance.

And she did, for Dotty flung back:

  "Genie, Genie,
  You're a meany!"

and then she grabbed her and pulled her off the pillows and pushed her
out of the room and locked the door.

"It's a shame!" and poor Dotty nearly cried to see the havoc naughty
little Genie had wrought. One pillow cover was torn and another had a
black mark from the sole of Genie's slipper.

She heard a tap at the door, and her mother's voice said, "Let me in,
Dotty, dear."

Dotty opened the door, and exclaimed: "Mother! Isn't Genie the bad
little thing! Look at my pretty pillows!"

"Oh, what a shame! Why _do_ you two children quarrel so?"

"We didn't quarrel. Genie did it on purpose."

"But why can't you be loving, kind little sisters? You're always teasing
each other."

"But I didn't tease her, Mother."

"Well, you usually do. Now, Dotty, can't you make a birthday resolution
to be more patient with Genie? Remember she's only a little girl, while
you're getting grown up. Fifteen is almost a young lady, and you should
be kind and gentle with everybody."

"I s'pose I ought," and Dorothy sighed; "but it's hard to have my
birthday things upset. Aren't you going to punish her, Mother?"

"Oh, no; she didn't mean to be naughty. She was only mischievous. I'll
mend your pillow, and the soiled one can be laundered."

Dotty's anger was always quick to come and quick to go, and she smiled
brightly, as she said, "all right. I'll forgive her this time, but she's
got to stop that kind of teasing."

"I'll speak to her," said easy-going Mrs. Rose; "how do you like Dolly's
picture?"

"Lovely, isn't it? Did you and Mrs. Fayre know about the frames?"

"Yes; and we wanted them to be alike; but I had to urge you to take this
instead of that other pattern. Remember?"

"Yes, indeed," and Dotty smiled to think how determined she had been in
the matter, but had at last yielded to her mother's judgment.

"Oh, there's Dolly!" she cried, as she saw the shade go up in the
opposite window. "Hello. Happy Birthday!" she called out.

Dolly returned the greeting, and the two girls waved their respective
photographs at each other, and then both began to get dressed.

Dolly, too, had a morning visit from her sister.

Trudy looked in on her way down to breakfast.

"Happy Birthday, Doll!" she said; "shall I tie your hair-ribbon?"

She stepped into the new room, and while tying the big bow, looked
around admiringly.

"You're a lucky little kiddy to have such a lovely room. It's prettier
than mine."

"I know it is, Trudy," and Dolly looked regretful. "I'll change with
you, if you like. I think as you're the oldest you ought to have the
prettiest room."

"Not at all, you little goosy!" and Trudy kissed the troubled face.
"This is your fifteenth birthday, and I'm glad you have such a beautiful
gift to remember it by."

With their arms around each other, the two girls went downstairs.

"Whoop-de-doo! Dollykins," cried her father, throwing down his paper;
"why, you don't look a bit different from when you were fourteen! I
thought you'd be a foot taller, at least!"

"I don't feel any taller or any older, Father; and I don't s'pose I'll
act so. But Mumsie, mayn't I stop wearing hair-ribbons? Dotty's going
to."

"Are you sure?" and Mrs. Fayre looked quizzical, for she had discussed
this weighty matter with Mrs. Rose.

"No, not sure; but Dotty's going to ask her mother and she thinks she
can make her say yes."

"Well, let's wait and see what Mrs. Rose does say," and Mrs. Fayre took
her place at the breakfast table.

"It seems funny not to have a lot of presents at your place, Doll," said
Trudy, smiling.

"That's all right," and Dolly returned the smile; "I agreed that my room
fixings were to take the place of all other presents."

"And then you have the party, you know," said her father. "Mr. Rose has
a delightful surprise for it, and when I come home this afternoon I'll
bring something to add to the gaiety of nations."

"Oh, Father, what?"

"Never you mind, curiosity-box! You'll see soon enough."

"Will you come home early, Father?"

"As early as I can. By five, surely."

After breakfast, the two heroines of the occasion went out to their
respective side verandahs, and the usual morning programme was carried
out.

Each frantically waved her hand to the other, calling, "Come over!"

Then each vigorously shook her head, shouting: "No, you come over here!"

"No, you!"

"No, you!"

Then Dolly, coaxingly, "Aw, come on,--come on over."

Then Dotty, positively, "No, sir! it's your turn. Come on over here."

With slight variations this dialogue was repeated every morning. Not
that either cared much which went to the other's house, but it was one
of their habits. Perhaps Dolly oftenest gave in, and on this birthday
morning, the colloquy was short before she ran across the grass and the
two friends sat in the Roses' hammock, swinging vigorously as they
talked.

"How'd you like my present to you?" asked Dotty, with twinkling eyes.

"Lovely!" and Dolly smiled back. "How'd you like mine to you?"

"Beautiful! Truly, Dollyrinda, I'm awful glad to have that picture of
you."

"So am I of you. Did you get any plate presents?"

"No; I didn't expect any. All the family gave me things for my room, you
know. Bob sent me a dear little clock."

"How nice; Bert sent me a pair of candlesticks,--glass ones,--they're
awfully pretty."

"Isn't it funny we don't know each other's brothers."

"We will soon, though. Bert is coming home in about two weeks."

"Yes, so is Bob. As soon as school closes. Oh, here come the men to put
up the tent! Let's go and watch them."

Dolly had been allowed to stay at home from school for the day, and the
two girls, followed by Genie, ran out on the lawn to see what was going
on.

In order to make the party a truly joint affair, it had been decided to
set up a tent on the lawn exactly midway between the two houses, for the
party supper. It was a large tent, and gay with red trimmings and flags.
Inside, tables were set up, and the maids from both houses brought out
plates and glasses in abundance.

"Oh, isn't it just _grand_!" exclaimed Dotty, seizing Dolly round the
waist and making her dance about the lawn.

"Lovely; but don't rumple me so, Dotty! This is a clean frock."

"Oh, what an old fuss you are! Always thinking about your clothes!"

"I am not, any such thing! But what's the use of spoiling a clean dress
the minute you put it on?"

"All right, I'll keep away from you, if you're so afraid I'll muss you
up! Proudy!"

For some unknown reason, this epithet was the most scathing in the
girls' vocabulary, and either was quick to resent it.

"I am not a Proudy! And you'd look nicer if you took a little better
care of your own clothes,--so there now!"

"My clothes are all right! They're as good as yours! I wish we didn't
have a birthday together!"

Dotty flounced away, and Dolly walked home with an exaggerated dignity.

These little quarrels were very silly; but they often occurred between
these two who were really good friends, but who sometimes acted very
foolishly.

Dolly went in her own house, and as she ran upstairs, she sang so very
gaily, that Mrs. Fayre looked at Trudy, and said, "Another fuss!"

"Yes," and Trudy sighed. "I don't know as Dotty Rose is a very good
friend for Dolly; they quarrel a lot."

"Oh, well, they get over it right away. I think it is good for Dolly to
have some one to stir her up now and then. She's naturally so meek and
mild."

"Well, Dotty Rose stirs her up, all right!" and Trudy laughed.

It was about half an hour later, that Genie Rose appeared before Mrs.
Fayre.

"Where's Dolly?" she demanded.

"Can't you speak a little more politely, Genie?" and Mrs. Fayre smiled
pleasantly at the child.

"You ain't my mother to tell me what to say!"

"No; but this is my house and I like to have little girls act nicely
here, especially as I know that you have better manners if you choose to
use them."

Genie thought a moment, digging her toe into the rug, and at last said:

"Good-morning, Mrs. Fayre. Please may I see Dolly?"

"Why, what a little lady! Yes, indeed; you will find her in her room. Go
right up, Genie, dear."

The child trudged upstairs, and entered Dolly's room.

"What do you want?" and Dolly, with suspiciously bright eyes, looked up
from the book she was pretending to read.

"You're not so awful polite, either," and Genie's big, black eyes looked
sharply at Dolly. "But never mind. I've come over to tell you that Dot's
cryin' about you."

"Did she tell you to come?"

"Nope. She don't know I'm here. But I think you're two sillies to spoil
your nice birthday by crying about each other."

"I'm not crying!"

"Well, you have been. I can see the cry-marks in your eyes. Nice blue
eyes. C'mon over and make up."

"Get Dotty to come over here and make up."

"She won't come."

"Have you asked her?"

"No, but I just know she won't. So let's don't ask her, and you come
over there."

"You're a funny little thing, Genie! You know a lot, don't you?"

"'Course I do. Come on, Dolly," and the child pulled at Doily's sleeve.

"All right, I will," and the two went together over to the Rose house.

Dotty in her room, heard Dolly's voice below stairs and came running
down. Her anger was all past, and she was more than ready to be friends
again.

"Let's go out and see the tent," said Dolly, as the two met in the hall.

"All right, let's," and out they went.

"Did you fix it up, Genie?" said her mother, who had pretty much known
what was going on.

"Yes'm, I fixed it up," and Genie ran after the black puppy, who with
judicial foresight was running away from her.

"Tell me about the people who are coming, Dolly," said Dotty. "Who are
the nicest ones?"

"You may not like the same ones I do; but Clara Ferris is my most
intimate friend of the lot."

"As intimate as I am?"

"Well, of course, I've known her so much longer, you see, she seems more
intimate."

"But we're sort of twins, you know."

"Only sort of; we're not really. Well, anyway, there's Celia and then
there's Maisie May."

"Maisie May! What a funny name!"

"Well, it's her name all the same. And the two Rawlins girls, Grace and
Ethel."

"Are they nice?"

"Lovely. They live on the next block below us. Their brother is coming,
too. Clayton, his name is."

"What other boys?"

"Oh, Reggie Stuart and Lollie Henry--"

"Lollie! What a ridiculous name for a boy!"

"His real name is Lorillard. He's an awfully nice boy. He plays the
cornet in school sometimes for us to march by. Then there's Joe Collins.
He's the funniest thing! Makes you laugh all the time. And a lot of
others; I can't tell you about all of them."

"Never mind; I'll catch onto them as they come. Do you think they'll
like me, Dolly?"

"Of course they will; why wouldn't they?"

"I don't know; but with such a lot of them, I feel kind of shy."

"Pooh; Dot Rose, you couldn't be shy if you tried!"

"It isn't shy, exactly; but I'm afraid they won't think I'm nice."

"Oh, yes, they will; don't be silly. Anyway, some of them will. And
maybe you won't like all of them. Everybody can't like everybody,--you
know."

"No, I s'pose not. What do we do? Stand up to receive them?"

"Of course! Did you think we sat down? Haven't you ever had a party?"

"Not such a big one."

"Well, I've had lots of 'em. We stand side by side, and I'll introduce
everybody to you. Of course, Mumsie and Trude will be around, and your
mother and your aunt,--won't they? Don't try to remember all their
names, 'cause you can't, and you can pick them up later."

"What a lot you know!" and Dotty looked at Dolly with a thoughtful
admiration.

"I know why," said Dolly, with a sudden flash of enlightenment; "it's
'cause I have an older sister. Trudy is 'out,' you know, and I'm sort of
accustomed to comp'ny; but you have a _little_ sister, so you haven't
had so much experience."

"Yes, that's it," and Dotty comprehended. "All right, you can show me,
and I'll do whatever you say."




CHAPTER V

THE DOUBLE PARTY


The party was from four to seven. Before the hour the girls were in
readiness and waiting on the lawn, midway between the two houses, to
receive their guests.

Dolly Fayre wore a white organdie, all lacy with little ruffles and a
light blue sash with blue silk stockings and white slippers.

Dotty Rose had on a lovely white voile with pink ribbons and pink
stockings.

Both girls wore their hair in a long loose braid, with a big ribbon at
the top of the braid.

"Didn't leave off hair-ribbons, did you?" said Dolly, smiling.

"No, Mother wouldn't hear of it. She says we ought to wear them until
we're sixteen, anyway."

"I don't care much, do you?"

"No; only I'd rather leave them off. It didn't rain, you see."

"I should say not! It's a perfect day. Did you put a pink ribbon on
Blot?"

"Yes, he looks lovely! Oh, here's Flossy, in her blue bow. If they'll
only behave themselves!"

The puppy and the kitten had become fairly good friends, by reason of
their two young mistresses' training; and frequently met without
fighting, though this was not to be depended on.

"Oh, here comes somebody, Dolly! I feel as if I should run away!"

"Nonsense, Dot! don't be silly! It's only Joe Collins. Hello, Joe; this
is my new friend, Dorothy Rose. It's her party, same as mine."

Joe was far from bashful. "Hay-o, Dorothy," he said, gaily. "Aren't you
afraid you'll get off the line? My, but you girls are particular to
stand just so!"

Dorothy flashed a smile at him. Somehow her shyness vanished, and she
replied, "Oh, we only stood that way, waiting for somebody to come. Now,
we can move around," and she took a few jumpy skips around the lawn. "Do
you live near here?" she went on, by way of conversation.

"Couple o' blocks away. Hope we'll be friends."

"'Course we will. And I've got a brother about your size; you'll like
him."

"Is he here?"

"No; he's away at school. Be home in about two weeks. Come and see him
then."

"I will. Here come the Brown twins. Know 'em?"

"No, I don't know anybody. My! Aren't they alike?"

They certainly were, and when Dolly introduced Tod and Tad Brown, Dotty
frankly stared at them.

"I never saw such twinsy twins before," she said; "do you know
yourselves apart?"

"Not always," replied one of them. "But I think I'm Tod, and my brother
is Tad. Of course our Sunday names are Todhunter and Tadema, but Tod and
Tad are much better for every day use."

Then some girls came; Clara Ferris was among the first; and then Grace
and Ethel Rawlins, and Maisie May.

Dotty took a quick liking to the last named, for she was a bright,
pretty girl who seemed eager to be friends.

Clayton Rawlins came too, and Lollie Henry, and then they came in such
numbers that Dotty couldn't catch all the names nor remember those she
did catch.

The girls had laid off their hats and wraps in the Fayre house, and the
boys in the Rose house, as every means was used to have the party
equally divided.

At first they played games. The Fayres had a tennis court, and the Roses
a croquet ground. Also, Mr. Rose had contributed as his "surprise" to
the party a set of Lawn Bowls. This was a new sport to many of them and
all liked it, and took turns at the bowling. Others wandered about the
grounds or sat in the swings and hammocks, and at five o'clock they were
called to supper.

Little tables had been placed on the lawn and four or six young people
were seated at each. Then the good things were brought to them. Bouillon
and tiny sandwiches, ices, cakes, jellies, bon-bons, everything that
goes to make a delightful party supper.

The two hostesses did not sit together, and Dotty found herself with
Clara Ferris, Joe Collins and one of the Brown twins.

"How do you like Berwick?" asked Tad Brown, as he finished his bouillon.

"Ever so much!" returned Dotty enthusiastically; "and now I'm acquainted
with so many people I shall like it better than ever."

"Aren't you coming to school?"

"Not this term. It's so near closing, and Mother says next year I can go
right into High School with Dolly Fayre."

"We'll all be in High next year," said Clara. "We're all in the same
grade, you know. But I wish you would come to school now, and be in the
Closing Exercises. We need more girls."

"What for?"

"Oh, for the tableaux and things. We have a splendid program. Haven't
we, Tad?"

"How do you know he's Tad?" asked Dotty, laughing.

"I asked him," returned Clara. "It's the only way. Nobody can tell 'em
apart."

"'Cept Mother," said Tad, grinning. "She never makes a mistake. But the
teachers can't tell. I get kept in if Tod misses his lessons, and he
gets marked if I'm late."

"Don't you mind?"

"No; 'cause it evens up in the long run. Tod's better-natured than I am,
but I'm prettier."

"Why, how can you be?" cried Dotty; "you're exactly alike."

"Oh, _I_ can see it! I'm _much_ better-looking." Tad's honest, round,
freckled face was winsome but not handsome, and the girls laughed at
this make-believe vanity.

Dolly was at a table with the other Brown boy and Grace Rawlins and
Lollie Henry.

"Dotty Rose is pretty, isn't she?" said Grace.

"Awfully pretty," agreed Dolly, "and a nice girl, too. I like her lots."

"Some looker!" declared Lollie Henry, gazing with admiration over at
Dotty, who was laughing merrily.

"She's my sister," put in Genie, who was a restless spirit, and having
finished her supper, was roaming around among the tables talking to
different ones.

"So she is," and Dolly patted the glossy, black curls.

"Looks like a spitfire, though, if she should get mad," commented Tod
Brown, who was an outspoken boy.

"Oh, I don't think so," returned Dolly; and then she remembered the few
trifling quarrels they had already had. "No," she went on, "Dotty isn't
a spitfire; but when she gets mad she just flounces off and gets over
it."

"Just like a girl!" said Tod; "why don't you have it out, and done with
it?"

"That's what Bert always says," and Dolly laughed. "I guess girls and
boys are different about such things."

"I guess they are," said Grace, looking rueful. "Maisie May and I have
been 'mad' for two weeks now."

"Oh, how silly!" exclaimed Lollie Henry. "I'm going to get you two girls
together and make you make up!"

"Yes, let's," said Tad; "come on now; I've finished my ice cream,
haven't you, Dolly?"

They all had, and they followed Tad, who was ringleader in this game.
The others had mostly risen from the tables, and Tad told Dolly to get
Maisie and bring her over to their group.

Grace Rawlins looked a little uncertain. She honestly wanted to be
friends with Maisie but she was not sure she liked the way it was being
brought about.

Dolly came back, arm in arm with Maisie.

The two boys stood in front of Grace until the girls came up, and then
Tad, whisking aside, said, with a low bow: "Miss Maisie May, I want to
make you acquainted with Miss Grace Rawlins, the nicest girl in Berwick,
except the rest of them."

Maisie coloured and looked half-angry, half-amused, and Tad went on: "I
see by the papers that you two girls don't know each other to speak to,
so Dolly Fayre and us two boys are a committee of three to see that you
become acquainted immediately if not sooner. You two will therefore now
greet each other with a nice, sweet kiss."

Tad's manner was so funny and so like a kindly old gentleman, that the
girls had to laugh.

But though Grace looked willing to obey the order, Maisie did not.

"Don't be silly, Tad," she said; "I guess you don't know what Grace said
about me, or you wouldn't ask me to kiss her!"

"Tell me," said Tad, with the air of an impartial judge, "and I and my
wise colleague, Mr. Lorillard Henry, will size up the case and pronounce
judgment."

"Why, she said I was the meanest girl in Berwick, because I wouldn't
tell her the answer to an algebra example. And I couldn't, because Miss
Haskell had made us all promise not to tell the answers to anybody--she
wanted everybody to do them without help."

"Seems to me you did the right thing," and Tad looked at Grace.

"I didn't know that," said Grace. "I wasn't at school the day Miss
Haskell said that."

"Then you couldn't be expected to know," said Tad; "now, it's just as I
said, a boy would fight it out with another boy, and he might punch his
head, but the matter would be understood and straightened out, and not
sulk for two weeks over it."

"I didn't sulk," said Grace.

"Well, you two sillies didn't speak to each other,--it's about the same
thing. _Now_ will you be good! Will you kiss and make up?"

"I will," said Maisie May, heartily, and she flung her arms round Grace,
and gave her a most friendly kiss, which was as heartily returned.

"Bless you, my children!" said Tad, dramatically. "Now don't let me hear
of your quarrelling again! Are you mad at anybody, Dolly?"

"No, sir, thank you; but if I am, at any time, I'll come to you for a
peacemaker."

"Oh, _look_ who's here!" cried Lollie, spying a strange figure walking
across the lawn.

The group joined the others and found themselves invited to take a seat
in the rows of chairs which were lined up in front of an
interesting-looking table.

They did so, and soon all present were seated in breathless anticipation
of what might happen.

The tea tables had been whisked away, and at the door of the tent the
stranger stood,--a table in front of him.

He was a magician, and the tricks he did held his young auditors
spellbound.

Turning back his coat sleeves to prove he was concealing nothing, he
would take a large sheet of white paper, and with a swift movement
twirl it round into a cornucopia. This was, of course, empty, and
shaking it about to prove its emptiness, he then held it upright, and
invited Dolly to look into it. But he held it so high, that she had to
stand on tiptoe to peep in. However, she caught a glimpse, and it seemed
to her there were pink flowers in it.

Then the magician asked Dotty to peep in. She peered over the edge, and
just as she exclaimed, "Why, it's full of flowers!" he overturned it on
her head, and she was showered with lovely pink rosebuds made of tissue
paper!

"Where did they come from?" cried everybody, as they scrambled to pick
them up. "The cone was empty! Where did he get them?"

But the magician only smiled, and went on with his other tricks.

"Has any one a gold watch?" he asked.

Not many of the boys had gold watches, but Lollie Henry exhibited with
pride one that his grandfather had given him on his birthday.

"May I borrow it?" said the magician; "ah, thank you," and he took it
before Lollie had really consented.

"Now, a silk hat. Much obliged, sir," as Mr. Fayre provided the hat.

"Now, my young friends, we'll make an omelet. Two eggs,
somebody,--please?"

Nobody had any eggs, and the magician seemed nonplussed. "What, no eggs
in all this well-dressed crowd? Incredible! Ah, come here, little girl!"
He caught Genie, who was running about. "Why, here is an egg in the big
bow of your hair-ribbon! And here is another in the other bow! What a
strange place to carry eggs! Did Mother send you to the store for them?"

"No, sir," said Genie, looking in amazement at the unmistakable eggs the
man had evidently found in her ribbon. "I should think they would have
dropped out sooner!"

"I should think so too," returned the magician; "lucky for me they
didn't, or I could not have made the nice omelet I'm about to concoct."

He set the silk hat on the table, laid the watch and eggs beside it, and
then called for a cup of milk.

Somehow or other Mrs. Fayre had that all ready and handed it to him with
a smile.

"Good!" said the magician; "now we'll to work! I suppose many of you
girls know how to make an omelet, so you must look sharp and see that I
do it right. First, we'll break the eggs and whisk them up."

He broke the eggs right into the silk hat, and stirred them with a fork
and then poured in the milk slowly, stirring all the time.

"Something else goes to an omelet," he said, trying to think; "ah, yes,
some sort of an herb. Ah, I have it! Thyme! Well, well, Mr. Fayre, do
you raise thyme in your kitchen garden? No? What a pity! But, luckily, I
have time right here!" He took up Lollie's watch. "Ah, just, the thing!"

He threw the watch in the hat, and began to beat it with his heavy fork.

He looked anxiously in the hat. "Wants to be crushed," he said; "can't
get the flavour of time unless it's crushed. Ah, here we are!" and he
picked up a kitchen poker that had appeared from nowhere in particular.

With that he beat and pounded and banged the watch, and then with a big
spoon, he dipped up spoonfuls of the mixture and let it run back into
the hat. The children could distinctly see the bits of brass or steel
wheels and springs, and even fragments of the gold case.

Lollie looked a little sober, but said no word of fear for his watch's
safety.

"Now, we'll cook it," said the magician, and he poured the "omelet" into
a bright, clean frying-pan.

"Where's the fire?" he asked, holding the pan high aloft, and looking
all about.

"There isn't any," said Mr. Fayre; "you didn't tell me to provide a
fire."

"You should have known enough for that!" shouted the magician, as if in
anger. "Well, as we have no fire, of course, we can't make our omelet.
So take back your things."

From the frying-pan he poured a cup of clear milk, which he gave to Mrs.
Fayre. Then he took out of the same pan two eggs, which he handed to
Genie, intact and unbroken. Then he hesitated, saying, "What else did I
borrow?"

"A watch!" "A gold watch!" cried a dozen voices.

"Oh, yes, to be sure!" and the magician, smiling, passed the pan to
Lollie, and there on its clean, shining surface, lay the gold watch,
absolutely unharmed.

Such a clapping of applause! for many of the young audience had been
forced to believe that the watch was utterly ruined.

That closed the entertainment, and soon after that the young guests went
home.

"How do you s'pose he did it?" Dolly asked of Dotty, as they sat in the
swing, talking over the party.

"Oh, it's easy enough," returned Dotty. "They don't really break up the
watch, you know."

"Of course I know that! But how _do_ they do it? What becomes of the
broken eggs and all?"

"I don't know, but I've seen magic tricks before and they always bring
everything out right somehow!"




CHAPTER VI

ROLLER SKATING


The day after the party the two girls sat as usual in the big swing
talking things over.

"I like that boy with the funny name," said Dotty; "the one they call
Lollie. Such a silly name for a boy!"

"Yes; such a dignified name as Lorillard ought not to have such a silly
nickname. But he's always called Lollie. He is a nice boy, but I like
Joe Collins better."

"Yes, he's funny and makes you laugh all the time. But those twin boys
are the nicest of all. What funny names they all have. Tod and Tad!"

"How do you like the girls?"

"The Rawlins girls are nice and Celia Ferris. But I like you best,
Dolly, and except for parties I don't care so much about a crowd. Let's
go roller skating."

"Oh, no; let's sit here and swing; it's too hot to skate."

"Pshaw! come on. You're too lazy for anything. You just sit around and
do nothing and that's what makes you so fat. Get your skates and I'll
race you around the block. Really, Doll, you ought to take more exercise
or you'll get terribly fat."

"Well, you'd better not take so much then, for you're as thin as a
ping-wing now!"

"What's a ping-wing?"

"I don't know, but it's the thinnest thing there is. All right, I'll
skate around the block once or twice, and then we'll go and see if there
are any little cakes left over from yesterday."

In a short time the two girls had their skates on and started to roll
along the smooth, wide pavements of Summit Avenue.

"Let's do this," proposed Dotty. "Start right here in front of our
house; you go one way and I the other round the whole block and see if
we can come back and meet right straight here."

"All right, but I know I can't go as fast as you do. You skate like a
streak of lightning."

"Well, I'll go sort of slow for me, and you go as swift as you can, and
let's try to come together right here."

The two girls started in opposite directions, and turned their
respective corners on their way around the block. In due time they
passed each other in the street back of their own, and Dotty nodded
approval as she saw they were about half way round. They didn't pause to
exchange any words but, waving their hands, went on their way and
rounded again on Summit Avenue.

As they saw each other approach, they regulated their speed in a careful
attempt to meet exactly where they had started. Dotty had to curb her
speed and go a little more slowly or she would be ahead of time. But
Dolly saw that it would take a pretty strong spurt for her to reach the
goal, so when they were about ten feet apart Dolly made a special effort
and put all her strength into a last grand dash. Dotty hadn't looked for
this and as she rolled rather slowly to the appointed place Dolly came
along and with a fell swoop, unable to control her direction, she
crashed right into Dotty and the two girls went down in a heap. The
impact was so sudden and unexpected that neither had a chance to save
herself in any way and there was a tangle of waving arms and legs, and
skate-rollers as the crash occurred.

"I've broken myself," Dolly announced calmly, though her voice sounded
dazed and queer. Dotty opened her mouth to speak but changed her mind
and gave voice to the wildest kind of a shriek. She followed this up
with several others of increasing force and volume and looked at Dolly,
wondering why she didn't yell too. But the reason was that Dolly had
fainted and the white face and closed eyes of her friend made Dotty
scream louder than ever.

Various members of the two families ran to the scene, as well as several
neighbours.

Mrs. Fayre and Mrs. Rose looked on somewhat helplessly at the two girls,
but Aunt Clara went at once at the rescue. She and Trudy lifted Dotty to
her feet and found she could stand.

"Try to stop screaming, dearie," said Aunt Clara, "and tell me where
you're hurt."

"I don't know," cried Dotty; "I don't know and I don't care! But Dolly
is dead! My Dolly, my own Dollyrinda is dead! And it's all my fault
'cause I made her go skating, and my arm hurts awful! Ow!"

"Her arm is broken," said Mrs. Bayliss, gently lifting Dotty's right
hand, which caused more piercing shrieks. "What shall we do? Somebody
call a doctor quick!"

Meanwhile the strong arms of a neighbour's gardener had lifted Dolly and
was carrying her toward her own home.

"It's her leg that's bruk," he said, holding her as gently as possible.
"It's good luck she fainted; she'll come round all right, but she's bruk
a bone, the poor dear."

It seemed ages to the anxious mothers and friends, but it was really
only a short time before doctors arrived and the two little sufferers
were put to bed and their injuries attended to.

Sure enough Dolly's leg was broken, and Dotty had a fractured arm.

Both houses were in a tumult of confusion as surgeons and nurses took
possession and bones were set and splints and bandages applied.

Dolly Fayre took it quietly and seemed almost awestricken, when at last
she realised that she was in her bed to stay for several weeks.

"But it doesn't hurt much," she said wonderingly to Trudy. "Why does it
take so long to get well?"

"Because the bone has to knit, dear, and that is a slow process. I'm
glad it doesn't hurt, but it may at times. The worst, though, is that
you will get very tired lying still so long. But I know what a brave
little girl you are, and we will all do all we can to help and amuse
you."

"Did Dotty break anything?"

"Yes, she broke her left arm. That is not as bad as your breaking your
leg, for she can walk about sooner than you can. But hers is more
painful, so there's small choice in the two accidents."

"Is she yelling like fury?" inquired Dolly, who herself lay placid and
white-faced, though her blue eyes showed the strain she had undergone.

"Yes, she is," and Trudy smiled a little. "You two children are so
different. I wish you would yell a little and not look so patiently
miserable."

"What's Dolly yelling about? Because she hurts so?"

"Partly that; and partly because she's blaming herself for the whole
thing."

"How ridiculous! She isn't a bit more to blame than I am. She proposed
skating, but it was because I ran into her that we fell down. I tried to
steer out but I couldn't."

"Don't think about who is to blame; that doesn't matter. The only thing
to think about is to get well as quick as you can."

"But we can't do anything to help that along; the doctors have to do
that."

"Indeed you can help a lot. If you're patient and quiet and cheerful you
will get well sooner than if you fuss and fret and cry. That might cause
fever and inflammation and all sorts of things."

Trudy was sitting on the edge of Dolly's bed and she smiled lovingly
down at her little sister. "I'm going to take care of you," she went on;
"Mother wants to have a trained nurse, but I think you would like it
better to have me for a nurse, wouldn't you?"

"I'd like it better," and Dolly looked up wistfully, "but I don't want
to bother you too much, Trudy."

"Oh, it isn't any bother, and besides, Mother will do a great deal of
the nursing. Here she comes now with your luncheon."

Mrs. Fayre came in, bringing a dainty tray on which was a small bowl of
broth and some crackers.

"The nurse has gone," she announced, "and I'm glad of it. It was
necessary to have her here while the doctors set the broken bones, and
she will come in every morning as long as may be necessary. But it's
much nicer to be in charge of this case myself and have full
jurisdiction over my patient."

"Oh, ever so much nicer, Mother," and Dolly raised affectionate blue
eyes to her mother's face. "Can I sit up to eat?"

"No, honey; you'll have to learn to eat lying down. But Mother will feed
you and we'll pretend you're one of those grand Roman ladies who always
ate their meals reclining on a couch."

So, although not altogether a comfortable procedure, Dolly took her
first lesson in swallowing without raising her head.

Meantime somewhat different scenes were being enacted next door.

Dotty's more excitable nature had been thoroughly upset by the shock of
the accident, the pain of her injury and the remorse that she felt at
feeling herself responsible for the tragedy.

Her screams were hysterical and the efforts of her mother, her aunt and
the nurse to quiet her were alike unavailing.

"I've killed my Dolly! I've killed my Dolly!" she would cry over and
over, and though they told her that Dolly Fayre was resting quietly and
suffering very little pain, she would not believe it and insisted they
were deceiving her.

"You only say that to quiet me!" she cried. "I know it isn't true. I
know Dolly has broken most all her bones and I know she'll never walk
again. Why, I saw her myself, all limp and dead-looking. If she lives
she'll be a cripple. Oh, my arm! my arm! I wish they'd cut it off! I'd
rather not have it at all than have it hurt like this."

Impulsive Dotty tried to move her injured arm and then shrieked with the
pain it caused her.

"You mustn't do that!" said Nurse Johnson somewhat severely; "if you
try to move that arm it won't heal right and you'll have to have it
broken over again and re-set."

Dotty glared at the nurse and then screamed: "I hate you! You go right
straight out of this house! My mother can take care of me good enough
and I don't want you around."

"There, there, Dotty dear," said Mrs. Rose; "don't talk to nurse like
that. She has been very kind to you; and it's true if you move your arm
around like that or try to do so, you'll make your injury far worse."

"I don't care! I want to make it worse! I want to have it cut off! I
won't have a broken arm,-- I won't-- I won't!"

"Don't mind her, nurse; she's beside herself with pain and fright."

"Oh, that's all right, Mrs. Rose," and the white-capped nurse smiled; "I
don't blame little girls for being cantankerous when they're laid up
like this. It's awful hard on them and nobody knows it better than I do.
And I'm not going to stay long, Miss Dotty. Only a day or two till your
mother and aunt get the knack of taking care of you."

"I shall be head nurse," said Mrs. Bayliss, smiling at Dotty, "and your
mother shall be my assistant."

"I don't want you for my nurse, Aunt Clara, and I don't want Miss
Johnson, I just want Mother all the time."

"Yes, Dotty, dear, Mother will be here all the time," and Mrs. Rose
gently stroked the moist dark curls back from the little brow.

For a few moments Dotty was quieter, and then she screamed out again,
"Tell me about Dolly, tell me the truth about Dolly. Did she break both
her legs?"

"No, dear, only one. It has been set and she is doing nicely, although
she will be in bed for a long time. You will probably get up and go to
see her long before she can come in here."

"I want to go now!" and Dotty tried to rise; "I want to see Dolly! I
must see Dolly!"

Gently but firmly the nurse held Dotty down on the pillows. "Lie still,"
she commanded, for she saw that stern measures were necessary.

"I can't lie still, when I don't know how Dolly is! I don't believe what
you tell me about her. But I'll believe Genie. She always tells me the
truth. Come here, Genie!"

Dotty screamed her sister's name in a loud voice, and the little girl
came running into the sick room.

Genie looked scared and white-faced as she saw Dotty in splints and
bandages.

"Genie," said Dotty, and her black eyes burned like coals, "you go
straight over to Fayres and see Dolly. See for yourself and see just how
she is and come straight back and tell me."

"Let her go," said the nurse; "that's a good idea."

So Genie ran over to the next house and found Mrs. Fayre.

"Please let me see Dolly," she said earnestly, "'cause if I don't Dotty
thinks she's dead, and then Dotty will die too, so please let me see
her, Mrs. Fayre. Can't I?"

After some consideration Mrs. Fayre said Genie might go to Dolly's room
for a few moments.

"How are you, Dolly?" said the child, marching in and standing by the
bedside with the air of a Royal Messenger.

"I'm pretty good," and Dolly smiled wanly at her little visitor. "How's
Dotty?"

"Dotty's awful. But she'll be better when she knows how you are. So tell
me zactly."

"Well, tell Dotty my right leg is broken. One of the bones just above
the ankle. But tell her except for that, I'm all right and for her not
to worry about me and we'll see who can get well first. And give her my
love and--and--oh, that's all, good-bye, Genie!"

The little girl ran out of the room and as soon as she disappeared Dolly
burst into floods of weeping. That was her way of relieving her
overburdened nerves instead of screaming hysterically like Dotty.

Trudy tried to soothe her, but there was no staying the torrent of
tears, until at last they stopped because Dolly was exhausted.

"There," said Mrs. Fayre brightly as she wiped Dolly's eyes, "I'm just
glad you did that! There's nothing like a good cry to straighten things
out. Now I shouldn't be one bit surprised if you could take a nice
little nap." And Dolly did so.

Meantime Genie trotted home with her comforting news for Dotty.

"Dolly's all right," she announced. "'Cept one leg is broked. But that's
all. Only just one bone of one leg. And she says to see who'll get well
first."

"How did she look?" asked Dotty eagerly.

"Like a angel," replied Genie, enthusiastically. "Her face was all white
and her eyes were so blue and her hair was all goldy and braided in two
curly braids tickling around her ears. Oh, she looked lovely! Heaps
better than you do, Dot. Your face is all red and splotchy, and your
eyes are as big as saucers and your hair looks like the dickens."

"I don't care," said Dotty, crossly; "I don't care how I look."

"But I care how you feel," said her mother, "and now you know that Dolly
is very much alive, I'm sure you'll let nurse bathe your face and brush
your hair and then I'm going to sing you to sleep."

       *       *       *       *       *

As is usual in case of broken bones the first night proved a very trying
time for all concerned.

Dolly Fayre, though an unusually patient child, felt as if she could not
bear the pain and discomfort of her strapped and splinted leg. Her
mother and Trudy, and her father too, did all they could to alleviate
her sufferings, but the uncontrollable tears welled up in the blue eyes
and rolled over the fevered cheeks of the little sufferer.

"I try to be good, Father," she said, as Mr. Fayre bent over her, "but
it does hurt so awful."

"Does it, you dear blessed baby? Let Daddy cuddle your head in his arm,
so, and sing to you, maybe that will help."

But when Mr. Fayre gently put his arm under the golden head on the
pillow Dolly cried out that his coat sleeve was too scratchy.

"Well, now, we'll just fix that! Give me one of your dressing gowns,
Mother."

Dolly had to laugh a little when Mrs. Fayre brought a silk kimono of her
own and managed to get its loose folds draped around her stalwart
husband.

"_Now_ I rather guess we won't scratch our poor little fevery cheeks,"
and Mr. Fayre so deftly slipped his silk clad arm under Dolly's head,
that she rested in his strong clasp with a feeling of security and
comfort.

"That's lovely, Daddy; it just seems as if I had some of your big strong
strength and my pain doesn't hurt so much."

Then Mr. Fayre sang in soft low tones which greatly soothed the little
patient. But not for long. All through the night the paroxysms of agony
would recur and poor little Dolly cried like a baby, because she
couldn't possibly help it.

But the Rose family had even worse times to take care of Dotty. She,
too, suffered intensely and even made it worse because she wouldn't stay
still. With a sudden jerk she would sit up in bed and then scream with
the pain occasioned by wrenching her injured arm.

"You mustn't do that, dear," said Mr. Rose, who usually could calm Dotty
in her most wilful moments.

"I have to!" cried the little girl; "you would, too, if your arm was all
on fire, and shooting needles into you and not set right and has to be
broken over again and all twisted up and hanging by a thread, anyway!
Ow!--ow!--OW!!" Her voice rose in a shrill screech and she rocked back
and forth in her pain and anger.

"Now, Dotty dear," said her father, "you must realise that you make
matters a great deal worse by jumping around and moving your arm--"

"But I can't help it! I'm going to shake it till I shake it off!" and
Dotty gave a violent shake of her shoulders and then screamed with the
added pain she brought on herself.

She so disarranged the bandages that it was necessary to telephone for
the doctor at once to readjust them.

"This won't do, young lady," said Dr. Milton as he looked at the havoc
she had wrought in his careful work; "if you keep up these performances
you'll have to be strapped to the bed so tightly that you can't move
either arm. How would you like that?"

"I'd break loose somehow! you shan't strap me down!" Dotty's eyes
blazed and her black curls bobbed as she shook her head angrily at the
doctor.

But Dr. Milton paid little heed to her words. He redressed her arm and
then said in his firm yet pleasant way: "I don't know you very well,
Miss Dotty, but I perceive you have a strong will of your own. Now are
you going to use it rightly to help yourself get well, or wrongly to
make all the trouble possible for yourself and every one else?"

Dotty looked at him. She was not accustomed to this kind of talk, for
her parents were inclined to be over indulgent with her tantrums and her
temper.

"I do want to get well as soon as I can," she said, "and I will try to
be good,--but you don't know how it hurts."

"Yes, I do know," and the good doctor smiled down at her; "I know it
hurts like fury! like the very dickens and all! and I know it's just all
you can do to bear it. But if you can get through to-night, I'll promise
you it'll feel better to-morrow."

He went away and Dotty did try to be as good as she could, but the awful
twinges of pain frequently made her forget her resolutions and to
herself and the whole household it seemed as if the night would never
end.




CHAPTER VII

TWO BIG BROTHERS


"Whoop-oo! Whoop-ee! Hoo-ray!! Where are you? Hey! Hi!!"

With half a dozen steps, Bob Rose ran up the staircase of his new home
in Berwick, to Dotty's room.

As he had been at school when the family moved he had never seen the
house before, and now, the school term over, he had come home for
vacation and his first thought was for his broken-armed sister.

It was two weeks since the accident, but Dotty was still in bed. Her arm
was doing nicely, but she was such a nervous and excitable child that it
was thought best to keep her as quiet as possible. She was sitting up in
a nest of pillows and a rose coloured kimono was draped round her
bound-up arm. But she waved the other hand gaily as Bob dashed into the
room.

"Well, old girl," he cried, "this is the limit! The idea of your
smashing yourself like this! Here I've played every old kind of ball and
everything else and never broke one of my two hundred and eight blessed
bones! And you just go out on lady-like roller skates and come a
cropper. Fie upon you! does it hurt much?"

"You bet it hurts, Bob! Nothing like it did at first, but it hurts a
good deal, and it's awful uncomfortable. I can't move it, you know, and
I can't do hardly anything for myself."

"Pooh! pshaw! of course you can do things for yourself. What a chump you
are, Dot. Why it's your left arm, you ought to be able to do everything
in creation with your right arm alone, except maybe play the piano or
clap your hands. I'll show you how to do things. Is your right arm all
right?"

"Yes, I s'pose so, but I haven't used it any."

"Jiminy crickets, isn't that just like a girl! Honest, Dot, I thought
you'd have more spunk. But I'll put you through, with bells on!"

Bob Rose, just turned eighteen, was a boyish duplicate of Dotty. He had
the same snapping black eyes and his hair though short had a curly twist
to it which, though he hated it himself made a becoming frame for his
handsome face. He was overflowing with mischief and life and was devoted
to athletic or outdoor sports of all kinds. He was very fond of his
sister and the two had always been great chums, though frequently
indulging in spirited quarrels.

"What's this place like, anyway?" he inquired, as he sat on the edge of
Dotty's bed and draped his long arm over the footboard. "You've got a
jolly room all right," and he looked round admiringly at the pretty rose
and grey effects.

"Yes, isn't it lovely! It was my birthday present,--the furnishings, I
mean. I wrote you about it, you know. We were going to fix up a lovely
room for you, too, but after I broke my arm, Mother and Aunt Clara
didn't have time to do anything but tend to me."

"Well, they'll catch time now. I want a room fixed up for me as good as
yours,--but not so dinky-fussy. I'll pick out the things myself. You
needn't think you own the whole shooting-match, Miss Dotty-Doodles! I
just guess Brother Bob home on his vacation will come in for his share
of attention! You won't be neglected, I'll look out for that, but just
remember that I'm here, too. What's the town like?"

"I don't know myself much. You see we had our party and I met a lot of
the boys and girls and then the very next day I smashed myself and of
course I haven't seen any of them since."

"But you can pretty soon now. Why, it's only your arm, your legs are all
right, you can walk, can't you? Why don't you go downstairs and have
people come to see you?"

"I couldn't see people in a dressing-gown!"

"Well, Mother can rig you up a basque or a polonaise or something. Or
put on a raincoat or an Indian blanket,--but for goodness' sake get out
and around. I'll stir you up--"

"Here, here, what's going on?" and Mrs. Rose came in just in time to
hear Bob's last words. "You're not to stir Dotty up, Bob, we want to
keep her quiet."

"Quiet nothing! She'll dry up and blow away if she doesn't get a move
on! You're going to rig her up some sort of civilian dress Mother and
get her downstairs this very day. She's not sick or going into a
decline, is she?"

The influence of Bob's breezy chatter had wrought a change in Dotty.
During the two weeks that had just passed she had become peevish and
fretful from enforced inactivity and now the thought of getting up and
going downstairs had brought the smiles to her face and the light to her
eyes.

Moreover, Mrs. Rose was impressed also by the determination of her big
young son and began to think that perhaps his way might be right after
all.

"Now you've got to tend to me, Mumsie," Bob said in his wheedlesome
way, as he caressed his mother in a big bearish fashion. "You've got to
fix up a room for me, all just as I want it, and you've got to make me
chocolate cakes and all sorts of good things to eat, and you've got to
do lots of things for your prodigal son. Dotty has had her turn and now
it's mine, but while you're busy about me, I'll look after Dot, bless
her old heart!" And Bob blew a kiss from his finger tips to his pretty
sister who had already begun to take a new interest in life.

"Hello, Aunt Clara," Bob called out as Mrs. Bayliss passed through the
hall, "come in here and help us dressmakers. Can't you rig up a costume
for Dot that will be presentable to wear downstairs?"

"Downstairs!" exclaimed Aunt Clara; "did the doctor say she could go
down?"

"Dr. Bob said so!" and the boy laughed. "I know all about broken arms,
and there's no use giving in to them too much. The more you do for them,
the more you may. Now Dotty is going to forget hers and have just as
good a time as if she never broke it. I say, Dot, how's that chum of
yours, you wrote me about? Is this her picture? Wow! Ain't she the
peach!"

Bob picked up the picture of Dolly from Dotty's dressing-table and
admired it openly. "Does she really look like that?"

"Yes," and Dotty waxed enthusiastic; "she's beautiful. Just like a pinky
rose with blue eyes."

"She broke her leg didn't she, in your all-comers' scrap?"

"Yes; she can't move for six weeks."

"Well, two weeks are gone now, that's something. Can't I see her? I'd
like to sympathise."

"Oh, yes, Bob, of course you must see her, but I don't want you to go
over there till I can go with you."

"Oh, I'm not going to wait for that. I must have a peep at this
blue-eyed fairy for myself. Any go to her?"

"Not much," and Dotty smiled. "Dolly's a perfect dear, but she's slow."

"All right, we'll have to hurry her along a little. When does her
brother come home? Have you ever seen him? What's he like?"

"He's coming day after to-morrow. No, I've never seen him, but Dolly
thinks he just about made the world."

"Well, I'll reserve my opinion till I see the bunch. Honest, old girl,
I'm glad you're getting along as well as you are, but I'm going to do
wonders for you. It's going to be lucky for you that you've got Brother
on the job. Why, Dot, we were all going camping this summer, you know,
what about that?"

"We haven't planned for the summer yet, Bobs," said his mother. "Perhaps
by August, if Dotty is all right, we can go somewhere for awhile."

"You bet we will!" returned Bob. "Dotty will be all right!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day but one Mrs. Rose took her big boy over to call on Dolly
Fayre.

Though unable to leave her bed, Dolly could sit up and was allowed to
see a few visitors each day. It was her nature to be quiet, so she was a
much more tractable patient than Dotty and her broken bone had already
begun to knit and was getting along nicely. It was very monotonous to
sit or lie there day after day, but Dolly was patient and always took
things placidly. Her parents and Trudy read to her and played games with
her and entertained her in various ways and Dolly was as cheerful as any
little girl could be in such circumstances.

It was a bitter disappointment to her that she could not take part in
the Closing Exercises of her class. But she was reconciled to her fate
and made no complaints, though deeply regretting her enforced absence
from school. Her classmates came to see her occasionally, but they were
so busy preparing for the celebration that they had little time for
social calls.

Dotty looked forward eagerly to the homecoming of her brother Bert and
she also awaited with some curiosity the meeting with Bob Rose.

However, she had heard so much about Bob from Dotty, that she was not
surprised when the merry-faced boy appeared at her bedside with a gay
and cheery greeting.

"I'm Bob," he said, holding out his hand, and not waiting for his
mother's more formal introduction.

"I'm Dolly," and the blue eyes smiled at him as a little white hand
clasped his own.

"By Jove, you do look like your picture, only you're prettier!"
exclaimed Bob as he took the chair Mrs. Fayre offered him.

"It's my new cap," and Dolly smiled from beneath the lacy frills and
rosebud decorations of a dainty new cap that Trudy had just made for
her. She wore a Japanese kimono of pale green silk embroidered with
white cherry blossoms, and as she sat surrounded by embroidered pillows
and lace coverlets, Bob thought he had never seen a prettier picture.

"You look like a princess," he said. "Princess Dolly."

"I _am_ a princess," she smiled back; "Mother and Trudy are my ladies in
waiting and do just as I bid them. How much you look like Dotty."

"Glad you think so; I think Dot's a raving beauty. But I say, it's a
shame you two girls had to go and break each other up just when we were
going to have a perfectly good old summer time."

"I know it; isn't it a shame. But we'll have to wait till next summer
and have the fun then."

"'Deed we won't! You'll be outdoors by the first of August, won't you?"

"Yes," and Dolly made a wry face, "but that's about the same as saying
the first of Eternity!"

"Oh, not so bad as that. And anyhow I'm an inventive genius, and I'll
bet we can have some fun even before August."

A bustle and commotion was heard downstairs just then and Dolly's face
lighted up as she heard a familiar voice.

"Oh," she cried; "there's Bert! Come on up, Bert."

"Sure thing!" came the reply, and in another minute Bert Fayre stood in
the doorway.

He was a tall, slender boy of seventeen with brown hair and eyes and he
looked at Dolly with a pained expression.

"Poor old Doll!" he said softly; "I'm _so_ sorry for you!"

"Oh, it isn't very bad now, Bert," and Dolly smiled cheerfully. "Come on
in and meet Mrs. Rose and Bob. They're our next door neighbours."

Bert came in and greeted the visitors with an easy grace. Then going
over to Dolly he kissed her affectionately and sat down beside her.

The two boys silently sized each other up and each concluded that the
other seemed to be "A little bit of all right."

They attended different schools, and soon were deep in a discussion of
their school doings. Dolly lay back among her pillows and looked at
them. She adored her brother and she decided that Dotty's brother was
also worthy of consideration. She liked Bob's breezy offhand way which
was not at all like Bert's gentle, kindly manner. But they were two
awfully nice boys and she felt sure they were going to be friends. If
only she could be up and around and have good times with them! A slight
pang of envy swept over her, as she heard Bob enthusiastically declare
that he was going to have Dot out of bed and downstairs in short order.
For no amount of enthusiasm or energy could work that miracle for Dolly,
in less than a month. But she did not show this disappointment and
chatted gaily with the boys and with Mrs. Rose and her own mother.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the days went by the four young people became good friends. The boys
were chummy from the first and nearly every day they carried messages
back and forth for the girls. But there were long hours when the girls
were alone, and both patient Dolly and impatient Dotty deeply wished
they had never tried that roller-skate race.

"There's no use celebrating the Fourth of July," said Bert
disconsolately, a few days before the Fourth. "We don't want a
celebration that the girls can't see."

"Then let's have one that they can see," said Bob; "I'll tell you what
we'll do,--I've a brilliant idea."

His idea was a brilliant one, so much so that it required the
co-operation of both families with the exception of the two girls, from
whom it was kept a secret.

But the two D's were told that the evening of the Fourth would be a red
letter day for them and they looked forward eagerly to whatever it might
be.

About seven o'clock on Fourth of July evening, Mrs. Fayre came into
Dolly's room with her arms full of red, white and blue material. This
proved to be a voluminous robe-like drapery which transformed Dolly
into a goddess of liberty. A liberty cap was put upon her golden head
and a silk flag was presented to her.

"Stunning!" exclaimed Bert, who came in to view the effect. "Just you
wait, old girl, and we'll bring you something you'll like better yet!"

So Dolly waited and in a few moments she could hear out in the hall much
giggling and many footsteps. Then Trudy came in and arranged a screen so
that the doorway from the hall was hidden. Dolly watched breathlessly
and soon heard people coming in behind the screen and recognised the
boys' voices as well as those of her father and Mr. Rose.

"I know you're there, Bob and Bert," she called out. "Come here Bob and
see the goddess of liberty."

"Wait a minute," said Bert, and there was more giggling and whispering.

"Now!" said somebody and then the screen was whisked away and Dolly saw
standing before her,--Dotty!

It really was Dotty, smiling with eagerness and dressed like Dolly in
red, white and blue.

"Oh, Dotty!" and "Oh, Dolly!" rang out at the same moment and the two
girls stared hard at each other, for they had not seen one another's
faces since that fatal moment when they came together on their roller
skates.

"I'm just crazy to run over there and grab you!" cried Dotty, "but I
promised I wouldn't touch you, or I might break us up all over again."

"Well, do come over here and sit beside me, so I can be sure it's really
you. How is your arm? Does it hurt you now? Oh, what a beautiful sling!"

Dotty's left arm was in a large sling made of dark blue studded with
silver stars and her whole dress was of red and white stripe. Her
liberty cap was just like Dolly's own, and she wore white stockings and
red slippers.

"You poor dear," she said as she came over and sat down by Dolly's side;
"to think I can dress and go outdoors while you're still tied to your
bed."

"But I can wave both arms about, and you can't," said Dolly as she waved
her flag above her head.

"I think you're six of one and half a dozen of the other," said Bert.
"Now look here, Doll, we're going to push your bed up to the window so
you can see out."

"Why?" asked Dolly; "it's almost dark now."

"Never you mind. Little girls shouldn't ask questions. Grab that other
bed-post, Bob. Here, Dad, take hold of the head-board."

Propelled by willing arms the bed was rolled over to the big bay window
and arranged so that Dolly had full view of the lawn between the houses.

Then a big easy chair was arranged for Dotty and the two girls were
advised that if they would stay there they would see something worth
while.

"Oh, it's so good to see you again," said Dotty, as the others all left
the room; "do you hurt terribly?"

"Not so much now, but it was awful at first. Wasn't yours?"

"Oh, terrible. Let's not talk about it. How do you like Bob?"

"He's splendid. How do you like Bert?"

"I think he's great. Oh, Dolly, what fun we could have if we were only
well."

"You are. You can go outdoors."

"Not much. This is a special dispensation to-night. And I have to have
my arm in a sling four weeks longer. It's in splints you know. I can't
do hardly anything with one hand. Bob tries to teach me, but I'm as
awkward as a cow. I'm so used to flying at everything with both hands
that I can't seem to manage."

"It must be awful. Oh, Dot, there's a sky rocket!"

Dotty turned quickly and looked out of the window. The skyrocket was
only the beginning of a fine display of fireworks. Mr. Rose and Mr.
Fayre had concluded that was the only sort of celebration the girls
could enjoy, so they had bought far more than their usual supply and
they made a fine showing.

Bob had asked a number of the young people to come and see them and
Dolly and Dotty recognised many from their post of observation in the
window.

But the mothers of the two girls would not let any of the young people
go up to Dotty's room lest the excitement be too much for her.

After the usual quota of rockets and Roman candles there were more
elaborate pieces which flamed into fire pictures against the summer sky.

When the fireworks were all over and the young people gone away the
girls were told that there was a little more celebration yet to come.

Dolly's bed was pushed back to its place and Dotty was enthroned beside
it in her easy chair, when the two boys appeared, each bearing a tray of
good things.

"This is your Fourth of July party," said Trudy, who followed. "No one
can come to it except the three Roses and the three Fayres."

Genie came in then, and the six brothers and sisters of the two families
had a merry feast while their elders remained downstairs.

"It's been a beautiful holiday," said Dolly, leaning back into her
pillows as she finished her ice cream. "I never dreamed I'd have any
Fourth of July celebration. The fireworks were beautiful and the party
things were lovely, but best of all is seeing Dotty again."

"Yes," said Dotty, "I don't know how I've managed to live through the
last three weeks. But I expect I can come over to see you every day
now."

"We'll see about that," said Mrs. Rose, coming in. "But this party must
break up now, and if it doesn't do any harm to our wounded soldiers we
may allow more of them. So say good-night, you two D's, and I'll take
_my_ little goddess of liberty home."




CHAPTER VIII

CROSSTREES CAMP


The summer plans of the two families were decidedly changed by the
accidents to the two little girls.

It was the custom of the Fayres to spend the summer at a hotel in the
mountains or at the seashore, for Mrs. Fayre declared she needed a
yearly rest from housekeeping duties.

The Rose family, preferring a different sort of enjoyment, spent their
summers at their camp in the Adirondacks, for they loved the informal
out of door life and the freedom from all conventionalities.

The doctor had said that the two girls would be entirely restored to
health and strength and quite ready to go anywhere by the first of
August, but not much before that date. So during July the question was
discussed frequently and at length as to where Dotty and Dolly would go,
for they begged and besought their parents that they might be together.

Now Mrs. Rose was more than willing to take Dolly to camp with her
family, and Mrs. Fayre would have been very glad to have Dotty with them
at the hotel, but neither mother wanted her own little girl to go away
from her. The question seemed very difficult of decision, for the two
families could not agree upon a summer resort that would please them
both.

But after many long talks and various suggested plans it was finally
decided that Dolly Fayre should go with the Roses for the first two
weeks of August and that Dotty Rose should spend the last two weeks of
the month with the Fayre family.

"It is the best plan," said Mrs. Rose, "for a fortnight in camp will do
the girls lots of good and make them strong and rosy again. Then they
will better enjoy a fortnight at a big hotel."

The two D's were enchanted at the prospect.

"You'll just love it!" said Dotty, enthusiastically; "we'll just wear
short skirts and middy blouses, and spend all our time in the woods or
on the lake."

Dolly wanted to go to the camp, but she had never before been away from
her mother for more than a day or two at a time, and she felt some
misgivings about being homesick.

"Nonsense!" said Bert. "A great big girl like you homesick! Why,
Towhead, you're too big for such things. You'll have a gorgeous time in
the camp, there's more fun in a camp than in any other place on earth. I
wish they had asked me."

"Of course they wouldn't ask you," said Dolly, "because Bob Rose won't
be there. Not at first, anyway; he's going to visit some school friend.
He's going to the camp later. But Bob, what's a camp like? Don't you
have to sleep on old dry twigs and things? I want to be with Dotty, but
I don't believe I'll like sleeping in a tent or whatever they have."

"Ah, be a sport, Towhead. You're altogether too finicky about your
foolish comforts. Learn to rough it,--it'll be good for you. You're as
white as a sheet, and you ought to be all brown and red and freckled and
look like a real live girl instead of a wax doll. I'm going to coax Dad
to go camping next year. It's loads of fun. Maybe if Bob Rose gets up
there before you leave they'd ask me up for a couple of days."

"Or they might ask you after I've left," said Dolly; "you boys could
have a lot of fun even if we girls weren't there."

"You bet we could! Girls are not a necessity to a fellow's pleasure if
he has fishing and boating and swimming and such things to do."

"Well, I can't swim and I hate to fish,--but I do like boating. What
kind of boats will they have, Bob?"

"Oh, motor boats and canoes and rowboats and sail boats and every old
kind. Don't get drowned, Dolly, and don't break any more of your bones,
but I guess there's nothing much else that can happen to you, if you
behave yourself. But don't try to do everything Dotty suggests. She's a
hummer, that girl, and I'll bet you in camp she'll run wild. You'll have
to hold her back a little."

Dolly's parents gave her practically the same advice. But they felt
little fear of Dolly's likelihood of rushing into madcap adventures even
if Dotty urged it. For Dolly was slow of movement and slower still in
making up her mind; while Dotty was quick as a flash in thought and
action.

Mrs. Fayre sighed a little as she selected Dolly's wardrobe. She dearly
loved to array her pretty daughter in muslins and organdies with dainty
laces and ribbons; but camp life called for stout frocks of tweed or
gingham, heavy walking boots and no fripperies.

"I shall put in one or two pretty dresses," Mrs. Fayre said, "in case
you are invited to a party or any such affair. And the rest of your
summer things I will have ready for you, when you come back and join us
at the seashore."

       *       *       *       *       *

And so the first of August, Mr. and Mrs. Rose and their two daughters
with Dolly as the guest started for the Crosstrees Camp.

It was a sad parting between Dolly and her mother and at the last Dolly
declared flatly she would not go, and throwing herself in her mother's
arms burst into tears.

"Rubbish!" cried Rob, who was dancing about in his efforts to get Dolly
started. "I'm ashamed of you, Towhead! Brace up now, and have a nerve.
One final wrench and off you go!"

The boy literally tore Dolly from Mrs. Fayre's arms and boosted her in
to the Roses' motor car which was waiting to take them to the station.

"All aboard! Go ahead!" Bob called out, waving his hand to the chauffeur
and the car started off at a brisk rate.

"You know you needn't go, Dolly, even yet, if you don't want to," and
Mrs. Rose smiled kindly at the little girl, as they flew down the
avenue.

"I do want to go, Mrs. Rose, and I am ashamed of myself for acting so
bad, but I will brace up now. It was just saying good-bye to Mother that
somehow sort of seemed to shake my heart."

Dolly smiled through her tears and determinedly began to chatter gaily.

"That's the ticket!" said Mr. Rose, smiling approval at her. "That's
the brave little girl. Now when you get to Crosstrees you'll be so
delighted and interested, that you won't think of home and Mother for
two weeks, except to write a postcard now and then."

"You won't hardly have time for that!" cried Dotty, "there's so much to
do from morning till night, and that makes you so tired that you sleep
from night till morning. Oh, Dollyrinda, we will have the most
gorgeousest times ever!"

"It's beautiful to have Dolly with us," said Genie, her big black eyes
dancing with anticipation; "we can show her all our fav'rite places, and
all the islands and woodses and everything! But two weeks is an awful
short time."

"We'll make it longer next year," said Mr. Rose. "If our two wounded
soldiers hadn't been wounded, we would have started a month ago."

"Why do you call it Crosstrees camp?" asked Dolly.

"You'll see when you get there," and Mr. Rose smiled at his little
visitor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sure enough when they arrived, Dolly discovered the meaning of the
strange name. The gateway was formed by two trees which had started to
grow parallel, but in some way had been bent toward one another until
their trunks crossed about ten feet above ground. The trees had gone on
growing this way, and formed an "N," covered with branches and foliage.
The party had landed from their train at a small station near one end of
a long lake. They had traversed this lake in a swift motor boat, for
their camp was at the other end. It was nearly dark when they reached
their own pier and all clambered out and climbed a flight of narrow wet
steps.

"Hang on to the railing, Doll," said Dotty; "the steps are slippery, a
little."

Passing under the crosstrees, to which Mr. Rose drew Dolly's attention
as the name of the camp, they came to a sort of bungalow or long, low
house.

"Is this the camp?" said Dolly, in surprise. "I thought it was tents.
You said so, Dot."

"There are tents, too. Only on stormy nights we sleep inside. Come on
in, Doll. Isn't it fine?"

Dolly Fayre looked around at the bare boarded rooms, the scant furniture
and rough walls of the cabin, for it was little more than that.

She was cold and rather hungry, but underneath these discomforts was a
far more troublesome one which she tried not to think about, but which
she felt sure was going to develop into an acute case of homesickness.

"Run up to your rooms, girlies, and take off your things," said Mrs.
Rose, cheerily. "We'll eat inside to-night, and Maria will make us some
of her good flap-jacks for supper."

Maria was an old coloured servant and the only one who accompanied the
Rose family to camp. Other help that might be needed they procured from
some of the natives who were glad to do odd jobs for the summer people.

Dolly followed Dotty and Genie upstairs where there was a long row of
tiny bedrooms opening onto a narrow hall. These bedrooms had ceilings
which slanted right down to the floor, so one could not stand upright
after advancing a few feet into the room.

"Aren't they funny rooms?" said Dotty, laughing with glee at Dolly's
blank-looking countenance. "But you'll get used to them soon. Of course
you have to bend double, except just here by the door, but that's
nothing. This one is yours, Dolly, and mine is right next and then
Genie's. Mother and Father have a room downstairs. But we won't sleep
here, we'll sleep in the open tent to-night, it's plenty warm enough.
Oh, it's _such_ fun!"

Dolly didn't know what sleeping in an open tent meant, but she smiled in
response and soon the three girls went downstairs together.

Mr. and Mrs. Rose were bustling around, happily engaged in unpacking and
arranging books and pictures and various trifles to make the big
living-room more homelike.

"Looks a little bare now," said Mr. Rose, as he placed his smoking set
in position near his own particular easy chair, "but in a day or two
we'll have it looking like a little Paradise on earth. Just you wait,
Miss Dolly, till you see this desert blossom like a rose,--like a whole
Rose family, in fact!"

"These things help a lot," and Mrs. Rose deftly arranged half a dozen
sofa pillows on a big inviting-looking couch.

"And to-morrow we'll put up a swing, and the hammocks, won't you,
Daddy?" said Genie.

"Course I will, chickabiddy," and Mr. Rose whistled in gay contentment
as he took books from their boxes and arranged them on the table.

When supper was announced, Maria informed the family that she hadn't
been able to manage the flap-jacks that night.

"But you-all sho'ly will hab 'em for breakfast, dat you will,--you
suttinly will. But you see huccum I jes' didn't hab de proper
contraptions unpacked for 'em to-night."

"That's all right, Maria," said Mr. Rose, good-naturedly; "we don't mind
what we have to-night. To-morrow we'll get a good fair start. Sit down,
children, we'll manage to make out a supper."

The supper was sort of a makeshift of sardines and herring and crackers,
with coffee for the older people.

Dolly had no wish to be critical, but the viands were not tempting and
she ate very little, being conscious all the time of an ever-growing
lump in her throat. She tried hard to be merry and gay, but she couldn't
feel the enthusiasm with which the others overflowed.

"Shall we have a fire to-night, Daddy?" asked Dotty as they left the
table.

"Oh, not to-night. It's pretty late, and we're all tired out. We'll
leave that for to-morrow night. You see, Dolly Fayre, the curtain
doesn't really rise on the glories of Camp Crosstrees until to-morrow.
Can you wait?"

"Yes, indeed, Mr. Rose," and Dolly smiled bravely. "Where is it that
we're going to sleep?"

"I'll show you," said Mrs. Rose, and amid shouts of glee and peals of
laughter, Dotty and Genie ran upstairs, and returned with their arms
full of blankets and other things.

"Grab a pillow and come on," shouted Dotty as she herself picked up a
pillow from the couch. Genie took one, too, and Dolly did also and then
the whole tribe left the house.

They walked across some very uneven ground and Dolly would have stumbled
in the darkness had not Mrs. Rose clasped her arm firmly.

"Here we are!" she said, and Dolly saw a large tent, but it wasn't
exactly a tent. It was a platform of boards raised not more than a foot
above the ground. It had a roof and three sides of canvas, but the front
was entirely open. On the floor were piles of balsam boughs and on these
the Roses arranged the blankets they had brought.

"I envy you girls," said Mrs. Rose, as she tucked up the impromptu beds.
"It is Heavenly to sleep out here, but we older people dare not risk
rheumatism. You'll love it, Dolly. Perhaps you'll hear an owl or two
hooting you a lullaby."

In less than half an hour the three girls were put to bed and Mrs. Rose
had said good-night and left them.

Dotty and Genie had murmured sleepy good-nights and had snuggled down
into their spicy-smelling nests of branches.

Dolly lay with wide open eyes staring out at the stars. She had never
experienced this sort of thing before, and she was frightened and
uncomfortable. Although mid-summer, the air was chilly, and she did not
like the feeling of the rather coarse blankets. Moreover she was wearing
a thick, clumsy, flannel nightgown, and the bed of branches seemed to be
full of knots and lumps. She longed for her own pretty room with its
dainty appointments and soft bed clothing.

She looked across at Dotty and Genie. She could see them but dimly, but
she knew they were sound asleep. She felt alone, utterly alone in that
dreadful place, with the forest trees making a sad murmur and the silent
stars winking solemnly at her. She thought of her mother and father and
Trudy and Bert and she had the most dreadful wave of homesickness roll
over her. Then the tears came, hot, scalding tears that rolled down her
cheeks in ever increasing number. She made no noise, lest she waken the
other girls but the effort to stifle her sobs made her cry harder, and
she buried her face in the rough worsted of the sofa pillow and wiped
her eyes with the harsh blanket.

"Oh, Mother," she said, to herself, "I _can't_ stay here. This is a
dreadful place. Why did you let me come? I knew I would hate a camp. How
can anybody like these awful beds? And I'm cold,--and I'm not cold
either, but I'm all shivery and I feel horrid! I'm--I'm--oh, I'm just
lonesome and homesick and I want Mother!"

After a time Dolly stopped crying from sheer exhaustion and spent with
her sobs, she lay there gazing at the stars. She felt sure there were
bears and wolves among the trees, and soon they would come out and
attack the camp.

Moreover, she was dreadfully hungry. She had a box of candy in her
suitcase, but that was upstairs in the bungalow. She could not get it
without disturbing Mr. and Mrs. Rose and that was not to be thought of.

The poor child lay for a time in her misery, every moment getting more
and more homesick and with a deeper longing to get back to her mother
and never leave home again.

At last a spirit of desperation took hold upon her. It was
characteristic of Dolly Fayre to endure patiently and bravely the
greatest trials that might come to her, but when the strain became too
great it was in her nature to rebel, suddenly and decidedly.

And now, when it seemed that she simply could not stand the dreadfulness
another moment, she sat straight up in bed, and said clearly, "I'm going
home."

The sound of her own voice startled her and she looked round quickly to
see if the other girls had heard her. She fully expected to see one or
both heads pop up in amazement at her speech. But neither dark head
moved, and listening to their regular breathing, she knew the two Rose
girls were still sound asleep.

With her white face set and a desperate look in her wide open blue eyes,
she put one foot out of bed and then the other. She had on her
stockings, as Mrs. Rose had advised her to wear them all night. Silently
and swiftly she discarded the flannel nightgown, which was one of
Dotty's, and with flying fingers, which trembled with a nervous chill,
she rapidly dressed herself in the garments she had worn when she
arrived.

Her hat and coat were at the bungalow, but she did not stop for them.
She was determined to go home that very minute, and she would let
nothing interfere.

Fully dressed she went over and looked down at the sleeping Dotty. It
seemed awful to go away and leave her like that, but Dolly knew if she
waited till morning the Roses would not let her go. And yet she must
leave word of some sort or they would think her very rude and
ungrateful.

She had with her a little shopping bag, which, as it contained some
money, she had put under her pillow. Luckily there was paper and pencil
in this on which she had planned to write a letter to her mother.

So with an uncertain hand, in the dim light, she traced the words: "Dear
Dotty, I can't stay here, I've got to go back to Mother. Good-bye.
Dolly."

This she slipped gently beneath Dotty's pillow, and then stepping softly
to the open edge of the tent she stepped down to the ground and walked
swiftly toward the lake.




CHAPTER IX

DOLLY'S ESCAPE


Dolly had learned as they came up the lake in the motor boat that there
was a footpath along the lake shore which led directly from the camp to
the railroad station. It was about a mile long and passed several other
camps, but Dolly felt sure that she could walk the distance, and
allowing time to rest now and then could reach the station before six
o'clock, when the first morning train went through. The dim starlight
just enabled her to make out by her little watch that it was two o'clock
when she started. She felt no fear of bears or wolves now, for her whole
mind and soul were filled with the one idea of going home. She would
have started, had the road been lined with hot ploughshares, so
indomitable was her will and so strong her resolution. She gave no
thought or heed to possible difficulties or dangers. She knew the way,
there was no chance of getting lost, and she had in her bag money enough
to buy a ticket home. She felt guilty and even ashamed at leaving her
kind friends in this manner, but that thought was swallowed up and lost
sight of in the terrible gnawing agony of her longing for home.

So she set forth along the path at a swift, steady gait which promised
fair for the accomplishment of her design. As she walked along the stars
seemed brighter and seemed to wink at her more kindly, as if willing to
do all they could to help along a poor little homesick, mother-lonely
child. Though without hat or coat, her swift pace kept her warm enough
for a time, but at last poor little Dolly grew very weary. She had not
walked much since her illness and her newly mended leg felt the strain
and began to ache terribly. She sat down to rest on a flat stone and was
surprised to find that her leg ached worse sitting down than it had
walking. Moreover, when she stopped exercising, she became very chilly
and in addition to this she realised afresh that she was exceedingly
hungry.

Poor little Dolly! She could scarcely have been more physically
miserable, and yet her material discomfort was as nothing to her pangs
of homesickness. She felt she could not pursue her journey, and yet it
made her shudder to think of returning to that awful camp.

So after a time, hoping she had rested enough, she rose and plodded on
again. She kept up this means of procedure, walking until utterly
exhausted and then stopping to rest, until somehow she managed to cover
the distance to the station.

It was half-past four when she reached the forlorn little building and
found it closed and deserted. But there was a bench outside and Dolly
sank upon this in a state bordering upon utter collapse. She fell asleep
there and was only awakened when, shortly before six, the station agent
came to unlock his office.

"Bless my soul! who are you?" he exclaimed, and Dolly sat up blinking in
the early sunlight.

"I'm a passenger," she said; "I want to take the early train."

"Humph! a pretty looking passenger you are! Where's your hat?"

"I don't always wear a hat in summer," and Dolly tossed back her golden
curls and looked at the man steadily. Her sleep had refreshed her
somewhat, and she had recovered her poise. Her determination was still
unshaken and she had every intention of going on that six o'clock train.

But the station master was a knowing sort of man and he had before this
seen campers afflicted with a desperate desire to go back to
civilisation.

"Didn't you come up here last night with the Roses?" he inquired
affably.

"Yes," replied Dolly, "but I'm going back to town to-day."

"Pshaw, now, is that so? Don't like it, hey?" The station master had a
kindly way with him, and as he threw open the door he invited Dolly to
enter the little waiting-room. "You stay here a spell," he said, "that
train ain't due for fifteen minutes."

He disappeared into the ticket office and closed the door. Then he
called up Mr. Rose on the telephone.

"Hello! what is it?" responded that gentleman sleepily, for he had been
roused from a sound slumber.

"I'm Briggs, the station agent. That little yellow-haired girl you
brought with you last night is here in the station. Says she's goin'
home."

"Dolly Fayre! At the station? Impossible!"

"Yep. She's here. And she's just about all in. You don't want I should
let her go on the train, do you?"

"Good gracious, no! Keep her there somehow till I can get there."

"I'll try, but she's terrible set on goin'."

"Keep her somehow, Briggs, if you have to lock her in. I'll be down
there inside of half an hour."

"All right, Mr. Rose. Good-bye." Briggs hung up the receiver and
sauntered back to the waiting-room.

"Best come over home with me, little Miss and get a bite of breakfast.
How about it? My home's just across the street and my wife'll be glad to
give you a snack."

"Thank you," said Dolly, doubtfully, "but I don't want to miss that
train."

"Oh, land! she's likely to be half an hour late! Come along, I'll keep
my eye out for the train."

Dolly hesitated. She was awfully hungry, but it was five minutes of six
and the train might not be late after all. Moreover, it seemed to her
that the station man was a little too anxious. Perhaps he wished to
detain her, though she could see no reason why he should interfere with
her plans. Unless it might be because she had no hat on. Still it was
not a crime to go hatless in the summer time, though it might be
unconventional when travelling.

"Pretty good breakfast my wife cooks," said Briggs, temptingly.

"Perhaps I would have time just for a glass of milk," said Dolly, "but
no, I hear a locomotive whistle now!"

"Aw, she's way up round the bend. Sound carries awful far 'mong these
hills. She won't be here for ten minutes yet. Come on."

"What are you talking about? There's the train now!" And from the
window Dolly saw the smoke of the approaching engine.

"Why, so 'tis!" and with a strange smile on his face, Briggs whisked the
door open, flew out and slammed it behind him and turned the big key,
making Dolly a prisoner in the little waiting-room.

For a moment she was too amazed to do or say anything. She stood
watching the train draw nearer and stop at the little station.

Then she realised what had happened and she flew to the door and pounded
on it with her little fists, crying, "Let me out! you awful, dreadful
man, let me out!"

But the door did not open, and after a couple of minutes the train went
on its way.

Then Briggs unlocked the door and came in. "Bless my soul!" he said, "if
I didn't forget you wanted to go by that train! Well, it's too late now,
so you might as well come on over to breakfast."

"You didn't forget it, any such thing! You locked me in here on purpose!
You had no right to do it, and my father will pers--persecute you,--or
whatever you call it!"

"Well, anyhow the train's gone, and you can't get it back, so make the
best of things and smile and come along."

From sheer lack of anything better to do, Dolly rose and walked with
Briggs across the street to his little cottage.

"Hello, Mother," he called out, as they entered, "I've brought a visitor
to breakfast. Got enough to go round?"

"Yes, indeedy!" and a fat, comfortable looking woman smiled pleasantly
at Dolly; "why, you poor baby, you're all tuckered out. Here sit right
down and drink this fresh milk, it's a little warm yet. Take slow sips,
now, don't swallow it all at once. Here's a nice piece of toast."

Dolly eagerly accepted the fresh milk and the golden-brown buttered
toast, and was glad to follow Mrs. Briggs' advice and partake slowly.

The warm, pleasant room and the appetising food made Dolly feel
decidedly better. A poached egg came next and more toast and milk and as
both Mr. and Mrs. Briggs were kind and cheery, Dolly's spirits rose
accordingly.

No reference was made as to why she wanted to take the train, in fact
the subject was not touched on, and Mr. Briggs was entertaining her with
a funny story when the door opened and Mr. Rose walked in.

"Hello, Dolly-Polly," he said, cheerily; "had your breakfast? Good for
you, Mrs. Briggs, glad you gave the little lady a bite. Come along now,
Dolly, we must be on the move."

Mr. Rose's face was so smiling and his manner so pleasant, that Dolly
jumped up from her chair and ran to his side. He put his arm round her
and kissed her cheek and then with brisk good-byes and thanks to the
hospitable Briggs, he whisked Dolly away.

"Skip it!" he said, and taking her hand they skipped across the road and
down the long length of the pier. There was Mr. Rose's motor-boat
waiting, with Long Sam at the wheel.

"Mornin' folkses," he said, unfolding his ungainly length as he rose to
help them in. Long Sam, it was generally agreed, had the longest length
for the narrowest width of any man in the county. He grinned at Dolly
and taking her hands helped her into the boat, while Mr. Rose followed.

In a moment they were off, and the little boat scooted up the lake in a
hurry. The sun was well up now and it was a warm day, so the lake breeze
was most refreshing and the swift motion very exhilarating. Mr. Rose
said no word whatever concerning Dolly's informal departure from his
camp, but he was so gay and entertaining that Dolly herself forgot it.
He pointed out various houses and camps along the shore, often telling
funny stories of the people who lived there. He showed her the club
house and the casino and the picnic grounds and lots of interesting
places, which had passed unnoticed on their trip up the lake the night
before. Sometimes Long Sam put in a few words in his dry, comical way,
and Dolly found herself enjoying the morning lake ride immensely.

Mr. Rose was in the midst of a funny story at which Dolly was shaking
with laughter as they reached the pier which belonged to Crosstrees
camp.

"Out you hop!" exclaimed Mr. Rose, jumping out himself and in a moment
Dolly was beside him on the pier. Mrs. Rose and the two girls stood
there smiling, their arms full of bathing suits.

"Hurry up, Doll," cried Dotty, grabbing her arm. "This is your bathhouse
right next to mine and here's your suit. Scrabble into it, quick's you
can."

And so almost before she knew it, Dolly was shut in to her little bath
house and was hastily changing from her street suit to her
bathing-dress.

Just as she finished arraying herself, Dotty was pounding on the door
and she immediately opened it. Mrs. Rose put a bathing cap on Dolly's
head and tied a gay kerchief over that. The rest were all in bathing
suits and with gay laughter they all joined hands and ran down the
sloping shore and into the lake.

Dolly loved bathing and she pranced round with the rest, enjoying the
delightful feel of the cool ripples of the lake as they dashed against
her.

The young people were not allowed to go out very far alone, but Mr. Rose
would swim out with them, one at a time, for a short distance and return
them safely to shallower water.

"Do teach me to swim," pleaded Dolly, who took to water like a duck. So
Mr. Rose gave her her first lesson and she was so promising a pupil that
he declared she would soon learn to become expert.

The bath over, they returned to the bath houses to dress and Dolly found
in hers, instead of her travelling suit, a serge skirt and middy blouse.
She put these on, and when she went out she found Dotty similarly
arrayed. Mrs. Rose braided the two girls' hair in long pig-tails and
tied their ribbons for them.

"Now for a camp breakfast!" exclaimed Mr. Rose, as the group reunited.

"I've had my breakfast," began Dolly, but Mr. Rose interrupted her,
saying, "indeed you haven't! Just wait till you see."

In a little clearing not far from the bungalow, Dolly saw a table of
boards with seats each side and here the family gathered.

Such a breakfast as it was! Maria's flap-jacks had materialised and of
all light, puffy, golden delicacies they were the best. Then there was
brook trout, fresh and delicious; a tempting omelet; and as a great
treat the girls were each allowed a cup of coffee.

The trip up the lake and the invigorating bath had given Dolly a
ravenous appetite and never had food tasted so good. She didn't quite
understand why nothing was said about her running away in the night, but
it was a great relief that the subject was not touched upon, and in the
gay laughter and chatter of the Rose family, she finally forgot all
about it.

"Now, who's for a tramp in the woods?" and Mr. Rose lighted a cigar as
he left the table.

"Me!" cried Dolly, dancing up to her host; "when can we start?"

"Right away quick," and Mr. Rose smiled down at her; "have you good
stout shoes?"

"Yes, indeed," and Dolly showed her little tan boots.

The whole family started off, each with a stout stick to help their
steps in climbing, and each with a little basket, because, as Mr. Rose
said, "you never can tell what you'll find to bring home."

They started off briskly, Dolly and Dotty on either side of Mr. Rose and
Genie and her mother following close behind.

"Guess we'll try the Rocky Chasm path this morning," said Mr. Rose, who
acted as guide.

Away they went, walking briskly, but not too rapidly. Though it was a
warm day the path through the woods was cool and pleasant and
occasionally they paused to rest for a time. Presently the climbing
began and this they took by easy stages, so that when at last they
reached their goal, Dolly was not at all tired.

"What a beautiful place!" she cried, as they found themselves on top of
a high hill looking down into a rocky chasm.

"Don't go too near the edge," warned Mrs. Rose as her husband and the
two girls went to peer over the edge of the precipice.

"No, indeed!" he returned, "but Dolly must see down in the chasm. Here,
Dot, you show her how."

So Dotty lay down flat on the rocks and wriggled along until she could
see over the very edge while her father held tightly to her feet.

"It's wonderful!" she exclaimed; "now you try it, Dolly."

Somewhat timidly, but with full faith in Mr. Rose, Dolly lay down prone,
and cautiously edged along till she could see over the shelving rock.
She felt Mr. Rose's firm grip on her ankles, and she looked down with
wonder at the sheer straight descent of rock and down at the very bottom
of the chasm she saw a tiny brook tossing and foaming along.

"Not yet!" she called as Mr. Rose advised her to come back. "Let me see
it a moment longer!"

"Don't get dizzy!" called out Mrs. Rose.

"No, indeed!" said Dolly, as at last Mr. Rose pulled her in; "I wasn't
dizzy a bit! I never saw anything so wonderful. That beautiful little
brook way down there a thousand miles below!"

"Oh, not quite so far as that," said Mr. Rose, laughing. "Come on; let's
go down and see it from below."

They picked up their baskets and following Mr. Rose's direction they
climbed down a rocky ravine and, sure enough, found themselves right
beside the little tumbling brook. Dolly sat on a rock and gazed upward
at the precipice, looking at the very spot where she had poked her head
over.

"Were we really up there looking down?" she exclaimed. "I can hardly
believe it. Oh, what a lovely place this is!"

"Yes, isn't it!" cried Dotty; "let's dig something, Daddy."

"What can we find?" And Mr. Rose looked around. "Why, my goodness, my
basket is full already!"

"What's in it?" cried Genie, scampering around to see. "Oh, goody!
cookies and lemonade!"

Though Dolly had really had two breakfasts, the mountain climb had made
her ready to welcome a little light refreshment and the bottles of
lemonade and the box of cookies were rapidly disposed of by the party.

"I see Indian Pipes," remarked Mr. Rose, and Dotty cried, "Where?
Where?"

"Those who seek will find," said Mr. Rose, smiling, and the girls set to
work hunting.

Dotty was the first to spy some of the graceful white blossoms under
some concealing green leaves, but a moment later Dolly found some too.
With their trowels they carefully dug up the plants and put them in
their baskets to take home.

Genie collected some odd stones, and Mrs. Rose found a particular bit
of Eglantine that she wanted and soon the baskets were filled and the
party took up their homeward way.

Mostly of a down-hill trend, the way home was easy, and as the baskets
were not heavy the girls danced gaily along singing songs as they went.

"Why, goodness, gracious sakes; it's nearly two o'clock!" cried Dolly as
they entered the big living room of the bungalow and set down their
burdens.

"It sho'ly is!" and Maria's black face appeared in the doorway. "I
suttinly thought you-all was never comin' home to dinner! I'se been
waitin' and waitin' till everything is jes' 'bout spoilt!"

"Oh, I guess not as bad as that, Maria," and Mr. Rose smiled pleasantly
at her. "We're not much behind time, and we won't grumble if things are
cold."

"Laws' sakes! they ain't cold! I'se dun looked out for dat. Yo' better
wash that mud off your hands and come along. Doan' waste no time now."

The Roses were accustomed to Maria's good-natured scoldings and they ran
away to follow her advice.




CHAPTER X

HIDDEN TREASURE


"Take time to tidy up and put on clean blouses," called out Mrs. Rose as
the girls went to their rooms.

But they made quick work of it, and helped each other in the matter of
hair ribbons and soon three very trim and tidy young persons in clean
white linen presented themselves, hungry for their dinner.

Maria had a steaming chicken stew for them, with fluffy white dumplings
that showed no sign of being "spoilt"; in fact, she had not cooked them
until after the family's return.

"Was there ever anything so good!" exclaimed Dolly as she received a
second portion of the fricassee.

"Everything tastes good up here," said Dotty, "but Maria sure is a dandy
on stewed chicken. But go easy, Doll, for I happen to know there's an
Apple Betty to follow and just you wait till you see that!"

But Dolly's camp appetite was quite equal to the Apple Betty also,
which was, as Dolly had predicted, a triumph in the matter of desserts.

"I feel as if I had been to a party," Dolly said as they left the table.
"I believe I've eaten more to-day than I do in a week at home."

"It's the air," said Mr. Rose. "Crosstrees' air is the greatest
appetiser known to man. If I could bottle it and sell it, I'd make my
everlasting fortune. Now, may I ask what you young ladies have on hand
for this afternoon?"

"Nothing particular," said Dotty. "Why?"

"Because I asked a few young people from the neighbouring camps to come
over here for awhile."

"A party?" cried Genie. "Oh, Daddy, a party?"

"Not exactly a party; only half a dozen of the Norrises and Holmeses."

"Lovely!" cried Dotty. "I haven't seen the Norrises since last year, and
I don't know the Holmeses. Who are they?"

"Mr. Holmes is a friend of mine and his daughter Edith is about the age
of you girls, and they have two or three guests."

"And the Norrises, Maisie and Jack, are awfully nice," said Dotty.
"You'll like them, Doll; Maisie is something like you."

"She isn't a bit like Dolly," put in Genie, "'cept she's fat and yellow
headed and blue eyed. But she isn't half as pretty as Dolly, so don't
you mind, Dollyrinda."

"Oh, I don't mind," and Dolly laughed. "I don't think a blue-eyed
Towhead can be pretty anyway. I like dark eyes and dark curls best."

"Thank you, ma'am," and Dotty dropped a curtsey. "Shall we dress up,
Mother?"

"No; those clean blouses are all right. It's just a camp frolic, not a
formal party."

"It's a Kidd party," observed Mr. Rose, looking mysterious.

"A kid party?" echoed Dotty; "of course. I didn't s'pose it was a
grown-up party, Daddy, for us children."

Mr. Rose only laughed and turned away, and the girls wandered out toward
the open tent where Dolly had gone to bed the night before.

The hemlock-bough beds were covered now with big spreads of gay cretonne
and many cretonne pillows, and served as day couches.

The sight of the tent recalled to Dolly's mind the events of the night
before, and she suddenly experienced a wave of embarrassment and remorse
at the way she had acted. She felt, too, that an apology was due to her
hosts and somehow it didn't seem right to talk about it to the girls for
she felt that it was to Mr. and Mrs. Rose she owed an explanation.

"Wait here for me a minute," she said suddenly to Dolly and Genie, and
turning, she ran back to the bungalow.

She found Mr. and Mrs. Rose in the living room, and going straight to
them she said impulsively, "I was very naughty to run away last night
and I want to apologise. You see I got homesick--"

"Bless your heart; don't say a word about it," said Mr. Rose, in the
kindest tones; "that's part of the performance, child. Everybody gets
homesick the first night in camp. It's to be expected. Then, you see,
the next day they begin to like it and the third day you couldn't drive
them home."

"But I was very impolite to go away like that--"

"Never mind, Dollikins," and Mrs. Rose put her arm around her little
visitor; "it's all right, dearie; don't think of it again. I know
perfectly well how forlorn you felt and how you wanted your mother. And
I know, too, you were chilly and you felt strange and lonesome and
couldn't sleep. But that's all over now and we won't even think of it
again. If you don't sleep all right to-night and if you want to go home
to-morrow, I'll take you down myself, right straight to where your
mother is. Now put it all out of your mind and scamper back to Dotty.
The party will be coming pretty soon now."

"Run along," and Mr. Rose patted the golden head. "You wouldn't have
been the right kind of a guest at all if you hadn't been homesick the
first night. But I'll bet you a ripe red apple that you won't want to go
home to-morrow, but if you do want to you shall. Now skip along, for if
I'm not mistaken I hear a motor boat and like as not it's that bunch
from the Holmes'."

Dolly ran away, her heart greatly lightened by the kind attitude of her
hosts, and though she felt sorry she had run away the night before, she
did not feel so ashamed since they had so pleasantly made light of it.

Sure enough, the party of young people were just coming along the pier,
and Edith Holmes, a bright girl of about Dolly's age, was introducing
herself and her friends.

"I'm Edith Holmes," she said, laughing, "and these are my cousins, Guy
and Elmer. They're nice enough boys, but here's their sister Josie who
is nicer yet."

Josie was a shy little thing, who blushed and cast down her eyes at
Edith's praise.

"I thought the Norrises would be here," went on Edith, "and as they know
us and know you they could introduce us better. But we'll just scrape
acquaintance."

"Oh, that's all right," said Dotty. "I'm Dotty Rose and this is my chum,
Dolly Fayre, and my little sister, Genie. I have a brother but he isn't
here." She smiled at the boys as she said this and Elmer Holmes said,
"That doesn't matter; we just love to play with girls. And anyhow here
comes Jack Norris to keep us in countenance."

Jack and Maisie Norris came along, having walked over from the next
camp. They were acquainted with the Holmes' young people as both
families had been there all summer.

Introductions over, they all sat along the edge of the open tent. The
floor of this, being only about a foot above ground, made a convenient
seat and those who wished had cushions to sit on or lean against.

"Awful glad you people got up here at last," said Maisie Norris as she
twisted one of Dotty's curls round her finger. "Is your arm all well,
Dot?"

"Yes, though it isn't awfully strong yet. I have to be a little careful.
But it was my left one, you know, so I can play croquet and tennis and
do most everything."

"You had a gay old mixup, didn't you?" said Jack Norris, smiling at
Dolly. "You broke yourself, too, didn't you?"

"Oh, yes; you know Dotty and I are next-door neighbours this year, and
whatever one of us does the other has to. But we're both mended now and
ready for any sort of fun."

Then Mr. Rose came along, bringing about a dozen spades. They were small
ones, such as come with children's gardening tools, and he gave one to
each of the young people present.

"What for?" asked Elmer Holmes, as he looked at the shining new tool.

"I told my girls that this was to be a Kidd party," said Mr. Rose, "but
they didn't quite understand what I meant. Now I'll explain. Has each
one a spade?"

"Yes," and the nine boys and girls held them up.

"All right then. Now, what you want to do is to dig for Captain Kidd's
buried treasure. You have all heard that old Captain Kidd buried a lot
of treasure somewhere, but I doubt if you were aware that he buried it
in Crosstrees Camp. However, there is a tradition to that effect and so
I would like you to do your best to find it. Tradition says that the
treasure was buried somewhere near the spot where we are now. It is
hidden, I believe, not farther than fifty feet away in any direction
from this open tent, so everybody may dig wherever he chooses within
that radius, and see if he can unearth the treasure."

"But, Daddy," said Genie, "how do we know where to dig?"

"That you must decide for yourselves. Dig any place you like; turn up
the whole area if you choose; or, if you see a place that seems
especially hopeful, dig there. I feel sure the treasure is really buried
somewhere around and it's up to you young people to discover where it
may be."

"We'll find it!" and Jack Norris brandished his spade in the air. "Come
on, girls and boys; let's dig down to China if necessary, but let's get
Kidd's old treasure chest."

The young people scattered, looking about for probable places to dig.

Dolly, a little unused to digging, began rather aimlessly to toss up the
soil near by where she stood.

"Oh, I say," said Jack Norris, "don't start in that way. Come along with
me and let's find a place that looks promising."

They walked away, looking eagerly at the ground about them, when Dolly
spied something white under the leaves of a vine.

"Oh, look here!" she cried, and Jack stooped down to see what it was.
They saw a grinning skull and cross bones made of white plaster and
partly sunken in the earth.

"Geewhillikens! we've struck it!" cried Jack, "or rather you have! I
felt sure from that twinkle in Mr. Rose's eye that there was some way of
knowing where to dig. This is it, of course. The treasure is buried
here! Let's dig for it!"

Carefully setting aside the little skull, which was only a papier-mache
toy, they both began to dig desperately.

"The ground is soft! It has lately been dug, you see, to plant the box
here. How lucky you saw that white thing under the leaves."

"You would have seen it if I hadn't," said Dolly, not wanting to take
all the credit to herself. "It's buried pretty deep, isn't it?"

"Yes, sort of. Don't you dig any more, if you're tired; I'll dig the
rest of the way."

Dolly paused a few moments, and Jack went on digging. At last he said,
as he straightened himself up and wiped his brow with his handkerchief,
"Do you know, I believe we're hoaxed! I believe that skull was there to
fool us!"

"Oh, I'll bet it was!" and Dolly's eyes danced as she realised the
situation. "Maybe there are other skulls in other places!"

"I shouldn't wonder. Let's go and see."

"Let's fill up this hole first and put the skull back to fool somebody
else."

"All right," and Jack hastily tossed the dirt back into the hole, and
replaced the little white skull.

"Somebody is coming this way! Let's hide," and Dolly and Jack quickly
whisked themselves behind a clump of trees.

Guy Holmes and Maisie Norris came along and they spied the white skull
which Jack had left placed rather more conspicuously than he had found
it.

"Oh, look at that!" cried Guy, and Maisie exclaimed, "This is the right
place, of course! We've struck it at last! That pirate flag was just to
fool us. Hooray! let's dig!"

Dolly and Jack could scarcely keep from laughing aloud as they saw the
newcomers digging desperately in the very spot they had dug themselves.

At last Jack beckoned to Dolly and they softly glided away without
letting the others know of their presence.

"Now we want to find where it really is," whispered Jack as soon as they
were out of hearing of the others. "I say, this is a great game! and
we've learned something from those people. The spot marked with a pirate
flag is not the right one! When we find that, there is no use of
digging."

The pair went on, prospecting for a likely place to dig. There were so
many trees and shrubs, that often there would be no view of any of the
other seekers. And then again they would come across groups of two or
three, or perhaps one alone digging desperately or looking disappointed
at a failure.

Gay greetings were exchanged or words of sympathy and commiseration and
each went on his chosen way.

"Do you know," said Jack at last, "I shouldn't be surprised if the real
place isn't marked at all. Hullo, what's this?" Right at his feet lay a
toy bowie-knife. Though made of pasteboard, it was a ferocious-looking
affair and the spot where it was had not been disturbed.

"I don't believe that's the right place," said Jack, who had grown
suspicious of misleading clues. "Anyway, Dolly, let's leave that, and
come back to it if we don't find anything more hopeful."

So they wandered on and next they came to the pirate flag. This black
and white emblem was planted above a much dug up space and they laughed
as they concluded that several trials had been made there.

Soon they came upon Dotty and Josie Holmes who were hastily digging at a
spot which had been marked by two stakes. They had pulled up the stakes,
but as yet had not found any treasure.

"Bet it isn't there," said Jack, looking closely at the two stakes.

"Why?" demanded Dotty.

"Dunno. Somehow it doesn't seem 'sif it is. Come on, Dolly, let's try
again."

"Go on," said Dotty; "I think this is the place. Josie and I feel
certain of it. Go on, you two, and good luck to you."

Shouldering their spades, Jack and Dolly trudged on.

"Let's think it out," said Jack, seating himself on a flat rock, while
Dolly did likewise. "I believe we can think out where Mr. Rose would
have been likely to put the thing. Now I don't believe it would be very
close to where he started us. These nearby digging places are all
frauds. Let's go to the limit of the space he said, and try all 'round
the edge."

"How can you tell?" And Dolly looked at him with a puzzled expression.

"Why, he said fifty feet, you know, and I can pace off what ought to be
about fifty feet and then we'll walk all the way round."

They did this, and as they walked round the circle which Jack declared
was about the boundary of the fifty-foot radius, they soon came upon a
good-sized iron key.

"This is it!" cried Jack; "we've struck it! This is the key to the
chest, and the chest is buried here!"

"Good work!" and Guy Holmes and Maisie Norris appeared just in time to
hear Jack's exclamation. "Come on, let's all dig!"

"No," said Dolly, sitting down on the ground; "I can't dig any more; I'm
too tired. Maisie and I will sit here while you boys do the digging."

"All right," the boys agreed, and they fell to work with a will.

They had thrown out but a few spadefulls of dirt, when they struck
something hard.

"Hooray! hurroo!" cried Guy; "we've got it! We've struck the treasure!"

"Sure we have!" and Jack flung out the dirt excitedly. "Easy there now,
old fellow! Look out! It's the chest, sure enough!"

The two girls jumped up and ran to look, as the boys uncovered one
corner of what seemed to be an old brass-bound chest.

"It is; it is!" cried Dolly. "We've found it. Hooray, everybody! We've
found the treasure!"

As her voice rang out the others left their digging and all congregated
about the lucky finders.

Other spades were set to work and in a short time willing hands lifted
the old chest from the hole and set it up on the solid earth.

"It's locked!" cried somebody, as several tried to open it at once.

"Of course it is," said Dolly; "don't you remember, Jack, it was the key
that first showed us where it was. What did you do with that key?"

"I don't know," and Jack Norris began looking around.

"I know," said Dolly, laughing; "you left it on the ground and you
spaded out the dirt all over it. Now you'll have to dig for the key!"

"That's just what I did do! If I'm not the chump!" and Jack began to dig
in the heap of dirt they had thrown up out of the hole.

"Toss it back in the hole," cried Guy, and in a jiffy the dirt was flung
back where it came from and the key was discovered.

"Don't let's open the box here," said Dolly; "I think we ought to take
it to Mr. Rose first."

"I think so, too," agreed Jack Norris, and the boys carried the big box,
while Dolly and the girls followed with the key.

"Here you are, Captain Kidd," cried Jack as they met Mr. Rose already
coming to meet them.

"Found it, did you?" said that gentleman, smiling at the band of
treasure seekers. "Bring it along and we'll open it."

They all followed him to the bungalow veranda, and there the treasure
chest was unlocked.

It contained a little souvenir for everybody present and there were
exclamations of delight over the pretty trinkets that were found tied up
in dainty tissue paper parcels that did not look at all as if they had
been prepared by Captain Kidd or his pirate crew!

Dolly's gift was a pretty writing tablet, well furnished, and upon
which, she declared, she should write a long letter home telling of the
treasure hunt and its success.

Later on a jolly picnic supper was served to the young people and before
this was finished the sun had set and the stars were beginning to show
above the tall trees.

"Now for a real camp-fire," said Mr. Rose, leading the way to the open
tent. "Come on, boys, and help me fetch wood."

The boys followed their host and under direction of Mrs. Rose and Dotty
the open tent was transformed into a cosy and inviting place. Hemlock
and spruce boughs were thrown about and partly covered with Indian
blankets and many cushions and pillows and mats of woven rattan.

Mrs. Rose and the girls arranged themselves comfortably in this spicy
nest and when the boys returned with arms full of fagots and brush, Mr.
Rose superintended the building of a glorious fire right in front of the
open tent.

Then the party all gathered together and sang songs and told stories and
cracked jokes in merry mood.

The blazing fire cast grotesque shadows all about and the merry
crackling blaze was a joy of itself.

Boxes of marshmallows made their appearance and faces took on a rosy
glow as the young people toasted the white lumps of delight on the ends
of long forks provided by Maria.

"I never had such a good time in my life," exclaimed Dolly, her eyes
dancing and her cheeks rosy as she scampered around the fire.

"Do you like camping?" asked Jack Norris, looking admiringly at the
pretty laughing face.

"I just love it!" Dolly cried, and everybody wondered why all the Rose
family chuckled with glee.

"Haven't you ever been up here before?" asked Jack.

"No; I never saw a camp-fire before. I had no idea these things were
such fun. This has been the most beautiful day in my life!" And Dolly
looked roguishly up into the face of Mr. Rose who chanced to be passing
by. "And I thank you for it," she added, slipping her hand into his.

Mr. Rose gave her little hand a warm welcoming grasp as he answered,
"I'm awfully glad you're enjoying it and you are very welcome to Camp
Crosstrees!"




CHAPTER XI

A THRILLING EXPERIENCE


After that the days just fairly flew. Dolly changed her mind completely
and concluded that camp life was one of the jolliest things in the
world.

Talking things over with Dotty, she explained her lonesomeness and
homesickness that first night.

"Yes, I understand," and Dotty wagged her head sagaciously. "Most
everybody doesn't like camp at first and we didn't have any fun that
first night, but, you see, we all knew the fun was coming next days and
you didn't."

"It was partly that," said Dolly, honestly, "and partly 'cause I felt
that I _must_ see Mother. You see, I've never been away from her all
night before, and it was so queer sleeping outdoors, and I was sort of
cold, and--"

"I know! You were hungry! There's nothing makes anybody as homesick as
being hungry. Supper was skinny that night, I remember, and I was hungry
too, only I went to sleep and forgot all about it. Come on, Doll, let's
go over to the Norrises."

"All right," and having informed Mrs. Rose of their intention the two
girls set off for the Norris camp, which was but a short distance away.

To their disappointment, when they reached there, they learned that Mrs.
Norris had taken both Maisie and Jack to town with her to do some
shopping, and they would not be back before six o'clock.

It was Sarah, the nurse girl, who told them this, as she sat on the
verandah taking care of Gladys, the two-year-old Norris baby.

"Let's stay a few minutes and play with the kiddy," said Dolly, patting
the little fat hand of the smiling child.

"All right," agreed Dotty; "let's take her in the swing."

The two girls with Gladys between them sat in the wide porch swing and
Sarah said diffidently, "Would you two young ladies mind keeping the
baby for half an hour, while I run down the road a piece to see my
sister? She's awful sick."

"Go ahead, Sarah," said Dolly, good-naturedly. "We'll take care of
Gladys. She won't cry, will she?"

"That she won't. She's the best baby in the world. There's a couple of
crackers you can give her if she's hungry, or the cook will give you a
cup of milk for her. I won't be gone long."

"Don't stay more than half an hour, Sarah," said Dotty; "I'd just as
lieve keep the baby but I don't know as Mrs. Norris would like it to
have you go away from the child."

"Oh, pshaw!" said Dolly; "the baby is all right with us. Stay as long as
you want to, Sarah; I just love to take care of babies."

So Sarah went away and the two girls proceeded to give Gladys the time
of her life. They soon tired of the swing and took the baby out into the
woods, where they crowned her with leaves and called her Queen of the
May.

The child laughed and crowed, and as her language was limited she called
both the girls Doddy, and beamed on them both impartially. Herself she
called Daddy, being unable to achieve her own name.

"Two Doddies take Daddy saily-bye!" she cried, waving her fat hands
toward the lake.

"Oh, no," said Dolly; "Daddy go saily-bye when Jack comes home."

"No! no wait for Dak! Daddy 'ant to go saily _now_! Daddy go in boat!
Two Doddy go in boat and sail Daddy far, far away!" The two little arms
waved as if indicating a journey round the world, and the baby face
beamed so coaxingly that Dolly couldn't resist it.

"We'll go down to the shore," she said, "and Gladys can paddle her hands
in the water; that will be nice."

"Ess!" and the baby danced with glee as the three went down to the lake.

There was a short bit of fairly good beach at the Norrises' place, and
here the children sat down to play. A sail boat, a row boat and a canoe
were tied there and soon Gladys renewed her plea to go sailing.

The girls tried to divert her mind, for they were not willing to take
the responsibility of taking the little girl out on the water.

"Maybe we might take her out in the row boat," suggested Dotty, but
Dolly said, "No, I'd rather not. I can row well enough, but you can't do
much with your weak arm and suppose anything should happen to this
blessed child! No, siree, Dot; I'm not going to take any such risk."

"I think you're silly. We could row around near shore and it would
please the baby a heap. She's going to cry if you don't."

Dotty's prediction seemed in imminent danger of being fulfilled, but
Dolly sprang up and began a frolicking song and dance intended to divert
the baby's attention.

But for a few moments only Gladys was pleased with this entertainment.
With the persistency of her kind, she returned again and again to the
subject of her greatly desired water trip.

Still being denied, she set up a first class crying act. It scarcely
seemed possible that so many tears could come from those two blue eyes!
She didn't scream or howl, but she cried desperately, continuously, and
with heartbroken sobs until the two caretakers were filled with
consternation.

No effort to divert her was successful. In no game or play would she
show any interest, and as the little face grew red from the continued
sobbing, Dotty exclaimed, "That child will have a fit, if she doesn't
get what she wants! Now look here, Doll; we won't go in a boat, but
let's put the baby in the canoe and just pull her back and forth gently
by the rope. It's tied fast to the post."

Dolly looked doubtful, but as the baby sensed Dotty's words a heavenly
smile broke over her face and she exclaimed, "Ess, ess! Daddy go
saily-bye all aloney!"

Dolly still hesitated, but Dotty picked up the eager child and plumped
her down in the middle of the canoe, which was partly drawn up on the
shelving beach. A little push set it afloat and grasping the rope
firmly, Dotty gently pushed and pulled the canoe back and forth, while
the baby squealed with delight.

"That can't do any harm," said Dotty, pleased with the success of her
scheme, and Dolly agreed that Gladys was safe enough as long as she sat
still.

"Even if she should spill out, she'd only get wet," said Dotty; "the
water isn't six inches deep where she is. And you _will_ sit still,
won't you, baby?"

"Ess, Daddy sit still," and the baby folded her hands and sat motionless
in the canoe, only swaying slightly with the motion as Dotty slowly
pulled her in shore and then let her drift back again.

"It's like a new-fashioned cradle," said Dolly; "I'll hold the rope for
awhile, Dot."

"All right, take it; it hurts your hand a little after awhile."

So Dolly pulled the rope and the two girls sitting on the beach chatted
away while the baby floated back and forth.

"Let me take it now," said Dotty after a time; "you must be tired."

"No, I'm not a bit tired, and I can use two hands while you can use only
one. You oughtn't to use that left flapper of yours much while it's
weak, Dot."

"Pooh, it isn't weak! It's as strong as anything. Give me that rope!"

"No, sir, I won't do it," and there was a good-natured scuffle for the
possession of the rope as the four hands grabbed at it and each pair
tried to get the other pair off.

"Let go, you!" cried Dotty, pulling at Dolly's hands.

"Let go yourself!" Dolly replied, laughingly, and then,--they never knew
quite how it happened, but somehow their scramble had pulled the rope
loose from the post, and as they twisted each other's hands, the rope
slipped away from them and slid away under the water.

The lake was full of cross currents and even before they realised what
had happened the canoe was several feet from shore. To Gladys it seemed
like some new game and she clapped her hands and shouted in glee, "Daddy
saily all aloney,--far, far away!" She waved her baby arms and rocked
back and forth in joy.

Dotty and Dolly were for a moment paralysed with fright. Then Dotty,
grabbing Dolly's arm, said, "_Don't_ stand there like that! We must _do_
something! That baby will drown! Let's holler for help."

Dotty tried to scream, but her heart was beating so wildly and her
nerves pulsing so rapidly she could make scarcely any sound, and her
wail of agony died away in a whisper.

"I can't yell, either," said Dolly, hoarsely, as she trembled like a
leaf. "But we must _do_ something! _Don't_ go to pieces, Dotty--"

"Go to pieces nothing! You're going to faint yourself. Now stop it,
Dollyrinda," and Dotty gave her a shake. "We've got to save that child,
no matter how we do it!-- Sit still, baby, won't you?" she called to
Gladys.

But the child bounced about in her new-found freedom and grasping each
side of the canoe with her little hands began to rock it as hard as her
baby strength would allow.

"Oh!" breathed Dolly, who was watching with staring eyes; "sit still,
little Gladys; don't rock the boat, dearie."

"Ess; rock-a-by-baby, in a saily boat!" and again Gladys swayed the
little craft from side to side.

"We must make her stop that first of all," and Dotty wrung her hands as
she stepped down to the water's edge and even into the water as she
called to the baby. "Gladys, sit very still, and Doddy come out there in
another boat. Sit _very_ still."

Gladys did sit still, and the canoe floated steadily on the smooth lake.
But it drifted farther and farther from land and now about twenty feet
of water separated the baby from the shore.

"We've got to get in the row boat and go out there," said Dotty, who was
already untying the rope.

"Yes, it's the only thing to do," agreed Dolly; "but you can't row, Dot,
and I can. So I'll take the boat, and you run for help. I don't know
whether you'd better go to the Norrises; I don't think there's anybody
there but the cook, or whether you'd better make straight for home and
get your father to come."

"I'll do both! I can run, if I can't row!" and Dotty flew off like a
deer up the hill toward the Norris camp.

Dolly stepped into the boat and shipped the oars. It was a large
flat-bottomed boat and the oars were heavy. Dolly knew how to row but
she was not expert at it, and, too, she dreaded to turn around with her
back to the baby. "Though," she thought to herself, in an agony of
conflicting ideas, "I've got to row out there, and I can't do it and
keep watch of Gladys both."

She pulled a few strokes, twisting her head between each to get a
glimpse of the baby who was now sitting quietly in the canoe, drifting
out toward the middle of the lake.

Not a motor boat or craft of any kind that might lend assistance was in
sight. They were at the extreme upper end of the lake and most of the
camps were farther down. Vainly Dolly scanned the water for a boat of
any kind, but saw none. Bravely she pulled at the big oars, but she was
not an athletic girl, and having been laid up so long with a broken leg
her muscles were weak.

She pulled as hard as she could, in a straight line toward the canoe,
but though she succeeded in lessening the distance between them she
could not get very near the baby, for the canoe drifted steadily away.

At last, by almost superhuman efforts, she came within a few feet of the
child, and then fearing to bump into the canoe and upset it, she turned
around and tried to back water gently. But the big oars were ungainly
and the task was not easy.

Moreover, Gladys was overjoyed at seeing Dolly in the other boat and she
expressed her joy by leaning over the side of the canoe.

Dolly's heart seemed to stop beating as she saw the wobbly little boat
careen with the laughing baby leaning far over the edge. She knew she
must not alarm the child and so in a desperate endeavour to speak
naturally, she called out, "Sit up straight, baby; see how straight you
can sit!"

"So straight!" and Gladys emphasised her straightness by putting both
arms up in the air.

"Yes, dear. Now fold your arms and sit straight."

Gladys obeyed and folded her chubby arms and sat motionless right in the
middle of the canoe.

Dolly's heart bounded with thankfulness as with aching arms she pushed
her way nearer the drifting canoe. She was moving stern first and tried
to manoeuvre to try to come up sideways against the canoe. Then if she
could lift the baby safely into her own flat-bottomed boat she would be
content to drift about until help came.

How many times she tried! But just as her boat would near the other, a
chance current or a puff of wind would take the canoe just out of her
reach. Paddling now with one oar she came very near the unsteady little
craft, so near that Gladys suddenly decided to jump into Dolly's boat.

The child scrambled to her knees and leaned over the side of the canoe
till she was almost in the water.

"Sit down!" screamed Dolly frantically, forgetting the danger of
suddenness.

Gladys was startled and instead of sitting down leaned farther over the
edge, and the canoe capsized!

Dolly's face blanched, her oars dropped from her hands and every muscle
in her body went limp. Then the impulse came to jump in the water after
the child. Seizing the row-lock, she was about to plunge, blindly,
heedlessly, but obeying the irresistible impulse, when something white
appeared on the water, right at her very side. It was Gladys's white
dress, and Dolly made a grab for it just as it was again about to sink
from sight.

She held on firmly, though it seemed as if her strength was ebbing
rapidly away.

She strove with all her might to pull the baby into her own boat, but
she could not lift the heavy child over the edge. How glad she was now
that she was in the big flat-bottomed boat, which was in little if any
danger of upsetting.

Not knowing whether the baby was dead or alive, she hung on to the
precious burden, still trying to lift her over the edge, but unable to
do so. It was all she could do to keep her grasp on the wet clothing and
keep the child's head above water as the eddies tossed her boat around
on the rough surface of the lake. The waves were choppy and every time
she would nearly succeed in lifting the baby in, a sudden lurch would
almost make her lose her grip.

It was when at last she almost felt the little form slipping from her
grasp that she heard the chug-chug of a motor boat and a cheery, loud
voice sang out, "Hang on, Dolly; hang on! All right, we're coming!"

Dolly didn't dare look up, but with her last ounce of strength she hung
on to the baby's white dress, which she had already torn to ribbons in
her clutches. She heard the swift oncoming of the motor boat and feared
lest its waves might even yet wash the little form away that she held so
insecurely. She refused to lift her eyes as the sound of the engine grew
louder and she felt a sickening fear of the first waves that might reach
her from the motor boat.

To her dismay she felt her hold loosening. Her muscles were powerless
longer to stand the strain of the baby's weight. She heard the motor and
she felt, or imagined she did, the first of the rhythmic waves that
would, she felt certain, as they grew stronger, tear the child from her
grasp. In desperation she bunched up a portion of the little white dress
and leaning her head down clinched it firmly in her teeth.

But even as she did so, she knew she could not hold it there. The wet
cloth choked her, and the water dashed in her face and blinded her. A
sickening conviction came to her that it was all over and in another
instant little Gladys would fall away from her helpless hands, and
drown.

But to her ears there came a sound of a human voice. Not a shout, not
even a loud call, but a calm, pleasant voice close to her, that said:
"All right Dolly! Let go. You have saved Gladys!"

Mechanically obeying, though scarcely knowing what she did, Dolly opened
her teeth and as the baby slid from her numbed fingers the child was
grasped by strong arms, and Mr. Rose's face appeared to Dolly's view. He
had swum from the motor boat, and now holding Gladys in one arm he hung
on to the row boat with the other.

"Take her in," he said, as he lifted the child over the edge into the
boat.

The reaction brought back Dolly's lost nerve. Gladly she received the
little form in her arms and in another moment Mr. Rose had himself
scrambled, big and dripping, into the boat also.

"You little trump!" he exclaimed; "you brick! you heroine! Let me take
the baby. Why, she's all right!"

Gladys, though she had been partly unconscious, while in the water, was
really unharmed and as Mr. Rose held her to him she opened her eyes and
smiled.

Swiftly the motor boat came and took the three on board, and dragging
the row boat behind them, they made quickly for the shore.

"Well, I swan!" exclaimed Long Sam, who was at the wheel, "if you Dolly
ain't the rippenest little mortal! However you managed to keep a grip on
that there kid is more'n I can tell!"

"I'm sure I can't tell you," and Dolly smiled, out of sheer happiness at
Gladys' safety.

They reached the shore in a few moments and Mrs. Rose was there with a
big blanket in which to wrap the baby while they carried her up to the
house. Sarah the nurse was there, and soon Gladys, warmed and fed and
arrayed in dry clothes, was pronounced by all to be none the worse for
her thrilling experience.

Dolly, however, was exhausted. Mrs. Rose, after leaving the baby to the
nurse, hurried Dolly home and put her to bed.

"Yes, my dear," she said as Dolly objected; "you have an ordeal to go
through with as heroine of this occasion. When Mrs. Norris comes home,
she will come over here to give you a medal for bravery and heroism and
general life-saving attributes. So you must go to bed now and get rested
up to receive her thanks. You're going to have a cup of hot broth and a
good rest and perhaps a nap, and you'll wake up just as bright and happy
as ever."

And Mrs. Rose's treatment was just what Dolly needed. She slept an hour
or more and then awoke to find Dotty's black eyes gazing into her own.

"You beautiful, splendid Dollyrinda!" she exclaimed. "You're a Red Cross
heroine and a Legion of Honour Girl and I don't know what all!"

"Nonsense, Dot; I didn't do any more than you did. If you hadn't had the
gumption to run and get your father, Gladys would--well,--things would
have been different."

"It was all my fault, though," and the tears came into Dotty's eyes. "I
did the wrong in putting the baby in the canoe in the first place."

"I did that just as much as you did. We both did wrong there, I expect.
And we both did wrong in scrabbling over the rope. Oh, we did wrong all
right, but neither of us was worse than the other. What will Mrs. Norris
say to us?"

"She's here now," said Dotty, "waiting for you to come down. She doesn't
blame us, she blames Sarah for going away and leaving the baby."

"That isn't fair!" and Dolly sprang out of bed; "we told Sarah she could
go. Tie up my hair, please, Dotty, I want to go down and tell Mrs.
Norris all about it."

But as it turned out, Mrs. Norris was so glad and happy that little
Gladys was safe, that she wouldn't allow the two D's to be blamed at
all. And as the girls besought her not to blame the nurse, for what had
really been their doing, they all agreed to ignore the question of blame
and dwell only on their gladness and happiness at the safety of
everybody concerned.




CHAPTER XII

WHO WAS THE TALL PHANTOM?


"What _is_ a phantom party?" asked Dolly.

"Oh, it's lots of fun," Dotty replied; "everybody is rigged up in
sheets, with a head-thing made of a pillow-case, and a little white mask
over your face, so nobody knows you."

"Can I go?" asked Genie, her black eyes dancing.

"No," said her mother, "you're too young, dearie, this party of Edith
Holmes' is an evening party; it begins at seven o'clock and only the big
girls can go to it."

"Oh, dear, will I ever get grown up!" and Genie sighed with envy of her
sister and Dolly.

"But how do you know who anybody is?" went on Dolly, who had never heard
of this game before.

"You don't! that's the fun of it. You can't tell the girls from the
boys, and you must try to make your voice different, so nobody will know
who you are. Have you plenty of sheets, Mother, to fix us up?"

"Yes, indeed; one apiece will do you I think, if they are wide ones."

"We'll make our own masks," said Dotty, who had attended parties of this
sort before.

So they cut masks from white muslin, with a little frill across the
bottom and holes to fit their eyes.

"Now we must put a piece of gauze or net behind these eye-holes," said
Dotty, out of her full experience, "for if we don't, they'd know your
eyes and mine in a minute, Dollyrinda."

"Then how can we see where we're going?"

"Oh, we can see through the thin stuff easily enough, but our eyes don't
show plainly to other people."

So insets of fine white net were put in the eye-holes and the dainty
white masks were really pretty affairs.

They had made them not exactly alike, lest duplicates should lead to
suspicion of their identity.

When it was time to get ready for the party Mrs. Rose pinned the girls
into their sheet draperies.

"Make us as different as possible, Mother," advised Dotty, "so they'll
never think we're us."

Mrs. Rose pinned Dolly's sheet into the semblance of a Japanese kimono,
while she arranged Dotty's in full folds round the neck and let it hang
in a Mother Hubbard effect.

Dolly's pillow-case headdress was bunched on either side of her head,
like rosettes over her ears, and Dotty's hung in a plain flat fold down
her back like an Italian girl's.

The masks were adjusted and the girls were ready to start. They wore
white gloves and white shoes and looked like a pair of very lively
ghosts.

Mr. Rose escorted them over to the Holmes Camp, or nearly there,--for it
was the plan that each phantom must sneak in as stealthily as possible,
in order to remain unknown.

So sometime before they reached their destination, Dotty ran on ahead,
and with great manoeuvring, managed to slip in unseen and saunter
among the crowd already gathered.

Silently, among the trees, Mr. Rose led Dolly until he saw a good
opportunity and then with a whispered "Scoot in there!" he indicated a
chance for her to make her entrance, and he himself went back home.

It was dusk, not dark, but the light of the big camp fire made
convenient shadows to screen the entrance of the guests.

It seemed a weird sight to Dolly as she somewhat timidly made her way
in. Twenty or thirty white-robed figures were bowing and scraping or
dancing wildly about or talking to each other in high squeaky voices and
short sentences.

"Know me?" somebody said, stopping in front of Dolly.

The voice seemed a little familiar, and yet Dolly couldn't quite place
it. It might be Jack Norris, or it might be one of the Holmes boys. But
in a spirit of fun she nodded her head affirmatively, with great vigour,
as if to declare that she knew the speaker perfectly well, but she would
not speak herself.

"Who?" squeaked the high voice, hoping Dolly would speak and thus reveal
her own identity.

But Dolly was too canny for this. Instead she joined together her thumb
and forefinger of each hand and held them up to her eyes, making circles
like eye-glass rims. Now, in sunny weather, Guy Holmes wore big glasses
with shell rims, and as this described him fairly well, it was a stroke
of triumph on Dolly's part. For it was Guy Holmes himself, and he
doubled up with laughter at the clever identification.

But he shook his head as if Dolly were greatly mistaken in her guess,
and so she didn't know whether she had been right or not.

When all had arrived, they danced in a circle round the fire, chanting
wild sounds that had no meaning or rhythm but were supposed to be
ghostlike wails and groans.

Then a game was played, under the direction of Mr. Holmes, by which it
was endeavoured to learn who the different phantoms were.

Their host led them to what was really the drying-ground for the family
laundry. A clothesline stretched on four posts formed a square, and from
the clothesline depended brown paper bags of varying sizes, from large
to tiny, each held by a slender string.

"One at a time," Mr. Holmes explained, "our ghostly friends will go into
the square, and being blindfolded, will endeavour to hit a bag with a
stick. If the attempt is successful the ghost may return unchallenged,
but if he fail to hit a bag the others may guess from his gestures who
it is."

The bags were not very near together, there being only three or four on
each side of the clothesline square.

Mr. Holmes selected one of the phantoms and escorted it to the middle of
the square, placed a stick in the outstretched hand, blindfolded the
motionless figure, turned it round with a whirl and said, "Step
forward, and hit where you choose, and see if you can bring down a bag."

The ghost was very evidently a boy, for two vigorous arms grasped the
stick and with a couple of long strides the white figure stalked
forward.

A vigorous blow ensued, but the stick came down between two of the bags
and made no hit.

"Now you may guess who it is," said Mr. Holmes, "as our friend ghost did
not strike anything. If you guess right, he must take off his mask, but
if not he may retain it. Only one guess allowed."

Somebody sung out the name of Jack Norris, as the ghost was about his
height, but the white figure shook its head vigorously and glided back
among the crowd.

The game went on. Sometimes a ghost would hit a bag and the flimsy paper
would burst and a quantity of peanuts or popcorn would scatter on the
grass, to be scrabbled for by the rollicking phantoms.

One bag held confetti which scattered through the air in a gay shower of
colour.

When it was Dolly's turn, she was determined that she would act as
differently as possible from her usual manner and so fool everybody.
After she was blindfolded and turned round, she took the stick and with
little mincing steps, imitated exactly the gait of Josie Holmes. She
made a wild dash with the stick, but failed to hit a bag and Maisie
Norris called out at once, "You're Josie Holmes! I know that walk!"

Dolly shook her head vigorously and ran back to the crowd. She chanced
to stand next to a very tall ghost who gravely patted her cheek as she
stood beside him. Dolly looked up quickly, for she did not like this
familiarity from a stranger, and she was sure the phantom was too tall
to be any of the boys she knew. Of course, as the party was large, there
were many of the guests whom Dolly had never met, and she resented the
act of the stranger and drawing herself up with great dignity turned her
back upon him.

But the tall ghost jumped around in front of her and patted her other
cheek, the while he gave a cackling, rattling, ghostly chuckle.

To be sure Dolly's cheek was covered by her mask and the ghost wore
white cotton gloves, but she did not at all like his familiar manner and
she walked quickly away from him.

A few moments later the tall ghost himself went to take his turn with
the stick.

Blindfolded and whirled about, he went with short, steady steps
straight forward, and with a big whack he chanced to bring down a good
sized bag. It was filled with the feathers of a whole pillow, and great
laughter ensued as, like snowflakes, the feathers flew through the air.
His heavy stroke had sent the bag flying upward and as it burst the
feathers descended in a shower.

Since he had broken a bag, the identity of the tall ghost was not even
guessed at, so Dolly had no chance to learn his name.

However, everybody was laughing and sneezing, as the feathers drifted
down and flew into their mouths or tickled their ears.

Only a few of the ghosts' names were guessed correctly, as many of them
had carefully disguised their shapes and sizes. Thin people had put on
sweaters or bulky coats to make themselves appear stout, and short
people had built up high headdresses in an effort to seem taller.

By the time the game was over every one was in most hilarious mood, and
the few who had been guessed and so had removed their masks, were
teasing the others in efforts to make them talk.

"I know you," said Elmer Holmes, pausing in front of Dolly. "You're
Dotty Rose!"

"How do you know?" And Dolly spoke in low, guttural tones, way down in
her throat.

"Oh, you needn't growl like a little bear cub! I know you, because
you're so careful of that left wing of yours. You thought nobody would
notice it, did you? But I spied it, and I _know_ you're Dot! You've got
on a couple of coats or something to make you look fatter, but you're
Dotty, all right."

Dolly shook with laughter, for she had pretended to shield her left arm
with a gesture that was purposely copied from Dotty.

Just then the tall ghost appeared again at Dolly's side. He laid his
hand on her shoulder and bent down a little to look in her eyes.

Dolly drew away from him and turned to Elmer Holmes.

"Who?" she said, in a hoarse whisper, pointing to the tall phantom.

"That's telling," said Elmer, laughing. "Ask him yourself who he is."

"Who?" grunted Dolly again, addressing herself to the tall one.

"Peter, Peter, Pumpkin-Eater!" and the tall ghost grunted out the words
from one corner of his mouth and Dolly could not recognise the voice.
As the ghost spoke he patted Dolly on the head.

Dolly disliked his manner, for none of the other boys were other than
correctly formal and polite, so she turned away from him, making a
gesture of dismissal with her hand.

Apparently "Peter, Peter, Pumpkin-Eater" was desolated, for he put his
hands to his eyes and rocked himself back and forth with wailing groans
of despair. He was funny, and Dolly had a great desire to know who he
might be, but she did not like the familiarity of his manner, and she
turned away to speak to some one else.

"Take partners for a Virginia reel," called out Mr. Holmes, "and after
that, we will unmask for supper."

The next moment Dolly found the tall ghost bowing before her and
evidently asking her to dance with him.

But instinctively she felt that she preferred not to dance with a
partner who was what she called "fresh" in his manner and she shook her
head in refusal.

"Peter" urged and begged her, in dumb show, to consent. Dolly was
tempted to do so, for his gestures were pleasantly wheedlesome, but as
she held out her hand in half consent, Peter grasped it and falling on
one knee kissed it with his hand on his heart with all the effect of a
most devoted cavalier.

"He's too silly!" Dolly thought to herself; "I won't dance with him, for
I don't know how he would carry on. But I wonder who he is."

So Dolly turned decidedly away from the tall suitor and found two other
ghosts bowing before her and evidently requesting her to dance.

She looked at the two figures and having no idea who they might be, she
hesitated which to choose.

Finally, with a white-gloved finger, she touched each in turn, "counting
out."

"My--mother--told--me--to--take--this--one!" She mumbled, in a
monotonous singsong tone.

And then as her final choice rested on one of the ghosts, she went away
with him to take her place in the lines that were forming for the dance.

Dolly was at the end of the line of girls and opposite her, of course,
was her partner. Next to Dolly's partner stood the tall ghost and as
Dolly looked at him, he waved his hand at her and then lightly blew her
a kiss from the tips of his white-gloved fingers.

"Freshy!" said Dolly to herself. "I think he's horrid! to act like
that, when he doesn't know me at all, for I know I've not met any boy up
here as tall as he is."

The dance began and there was much gay laughter as the phantoms advanced
and retreated in their respective turns. The boys pranced awkwardly in
their unaccustomed draperies, while the girls minced around prettily and
flung their sheets in graceful whirls.

When it came Dolly's turn, she suddenly realised that as the tall ghost
stood next to her own partner it was the obnoxious Peter with whom she
would have to go through the figures of the old-fashioned dance.

With a very stately air she went forward as the tall ghost came to meet
her half-way. They bowed with great dignity and turned to their places
while the other couple did their part.

Next they must join right hands and swing around and this time the tall
ghost whirled Dolly around so vigorously that he almost swung her off
her feet.

Dolly began to be really annoyed, but she determined not to show it and
stepped gracefully up for the next figure. This was the left hand twirl,
and Peter turned her around more gently this time, but the next, when
they joined both hands, Peter swung her swiftly round twice instead of
once, his own feet clumping as if in a clog dance.

The next time the pair merely walked round each other back to back, and
Dolly was very careful to keep as far distant as possible from the
obnoxious Peter.

The dance would soon be over, she knew, and then he would have to unmask
and she could see who this unpleasantly forward youth might be.

It was during the last of the grand march when it came Dolly's turn to
dance gaily down the line with her own partner, whom she did not yet
know by name, that Peter unceremoniously pushed Dolly's partner aside,
and himself taking Dolly's hand, whirled her down the long aisle between
the two lines of ghosts who clapped their hands and chanted or whistled
in time to the music.

So rapidly did Peter whirl Dolly around that she had no choice but to
follow, and she realised suddenly that the tall ghost was a most awkward
dancer, and that unless she was very nimble herself he would tread on
her toes.

Too angry now to think of disguising her voice, Dolly whispered to Peter
as they danced along. "You are most rude and unmannerly! I have never
met a boy so fresh and horrid! As soon as we reach the other end of the
line I command you to let me go and I wish you never to speak to me
again!"

Dolly was thoroughly angry, but as she preferred not to let the others
know of her annoyance, she danced on with Peter toward the end of the
line, though she suddenly realised that he was guiding her so as to make
their progress as slow as possible.

"Oh, now,--oh, now, don't get mad!" and the squeaky voiced, choked with
laughter, was almost inaudible.

"I _am_ mad! I _hate_ you! you're not a nice boy at all, and I wonder
Edith Holmes invited you!"

"She didn't!" was squeaked into Dolly's ear, and then, as they reached
the end of the line the audacious Peter lifted the frill of Dolly's mask
and kissed her cheek. Then with a bow, he released her and turned away
to his place in the line.

But as Peter had taken the place of Dolly's partner, and as her partner
had apparently not resented this act, Dolly had no choice but to join
hands with Peter and march back under an arch-way formed by the clasped
hands of the other ghosts. Rather than make an unpleasant scene by
refusing, Dolly thought better to do this, as it would end the dance. So
giving her finger-tips to the horrid Peter she bent to go under the
raised hands.

Tall Peter had to bend a great deal, and as for some reason or other he
was decidedly clumsy with his feet and forever tripping on his trailing
robe, the pair could think of nothing but their progress along the line,
and as they reached the end, the dance was over and the music stopped.

"Now," thought Dolly to herself, "I'll see who that horrid boy is,
though of course it's no one I know, and as he said Edith didn't invite
him, he must be some intruder who hasn't any business here. But I can't
see why he picked _me_ out to annoy with his bad manners. I hope nobody
saw him."

"Masks off!" sang out Mr. Holmes, and each ghost began to untie the
strings of his concealing disguise. It was not always easy and many had
to ask help from their neighbours before they could release themselves.

Dolly untied her mask quickly and stood with angry eyes awaiting a
revelation of Peter's identity.

With one hand behind his head, as he loosened his mask, the tall ghost
stepped to Dolly's side and said in a squeaky whisper, "Won't you
forgive me?"

"No," said Dolly sternly, as she frowned at him. "You have been
unpardonable, and I have no wish to know you."

"Aw, now, Dollydoodle," and the mask was whisked off and smiling down at
her stood--Dolly's brother, Bert!

Dolly stared at him in utter amazement and then burst into laughter as
she realised what it all meant.

"You goose!" she exclaimed, as the brother and sister stood choking with
laughter at the situation.

"But how _could_ I know you?" said Dolly, "What makes you so tall?"

"I have big blocks of wood fastened to my shoe soles," explained Bert,
"and, my, but it makes me clumsy-footed!"

"I should think so! I don't see how you danced at all! Where _did_ you
come from? How did you get here? Oh, Bert, I'm so glad it was _you_, for
I was so mad when I thought some stranger was acting up like that."

"It was a shame, Dollypops, to tease you, but I just couldn't help it. I
had no intention of acting up like that, but when I just patted your
hand you got so mad, that I thought it would be fun to go on. I'm glad
you _are_ such a little touch-me-not."

"Well, I should hope I _wouldn't_ want strange boys patting me like
that! And when you kissed me, Bert, I thought I should scream, I was so
mad, but honestly I was ashamed to make a scene and let people know what
you had done."

"You'll forgive me, sister, won't you?" and Bert's big blue eyes looked
into Dolly's, as for a moment he did feel ashamed of himself for teasing
her so. But his love of a joke was so great, that he had thoroughly
enjoyed fooling Dolly and his affectionate sister willingly forgave him.

"Don't know yet who was your partner, do you, Dolly?" said a voice near
her, and turning, Dolly saw Bob Rose.

"Oh, were _you_?" and Dolly turned to him, laughing.

"I sure was! I resigned in favour of Bert at the last, because he
commanded me to."

"When did you come up here?" and the amazed Dolly began to realise how
matters stood.

"To-night," said Bert. "We were at Crosstrees before you girls left, but
Mrs. Rose kept us hidden and after you were gone, she togged us up in
sheets, and here we are."

"But why did you make yourself tall, Bert? Nobody up here would know you
anyhow, except Dot and me."

"Oh, just did it for fun. Thought I'd make an impression as the tallest
ghost in captivity. Where's Dotty? And I want to meet a few of these
other ghost girls. I'll shake you now, Dollikins, and you can have your
own partner back." Bert went away leaving Bob with Dolly, who escorted
her to supper.

The supper was served in true camp-fire fashion. There was no table, the
ghosts, all unmasked now, sat round the big fire on camp stools or
cushions, and the boys waited on the girls in true picnic style. There
were substantial viands, as the evening air caused hearty appetites, and
Dolly settled herself comfortably on a divan improvised of evergreen
boughs and gratefully accepted a cup of hot bouillon and some sandwiches
that Bob brought.

Edith Holmes was sitting by Dolly, and she was chuckling with laughter
as Bert told her the joke he had played on his sister.

After supper the merry young people sang songs and glees round the fire
until it was time to go home.

"Daddy said he'd come for us," said Dotty laughingly to Dolly, "but of
course he didn't mean it for he knew the boys would be here to take us
home."

"I'll just remove these blocks of wood before I start," said Bert, as
he quickly tore off the clumsy and cumbersome things.

"Now I can walk better," and he stood on his own shoe soles and at his
own height.

"I'm awfully glad you're here again, Bob," said Edith Holmes, as they
said good-night, "and I'm glad you're here too," she added to Bert
Fayre. "Our camps are so near that we must play together a lot."

"Nice girl," commented Bert, as the quartette walked away. "Lots of nice
people at that party."

"Yes," agreed Bob, "girls are nice at parties, but sometimes we don't
want them around. Be sure to be up, old man, by sunrise to-morrow
morning, for we're going fishing early."

"Can't we go?" asked Dotty.

"No, ma'am! No girls need apply. A real fishing trip is a serious matter
and we can't be bothered with girls. When we come home to-morrow night,
if Mother says you've been good children all day, you can have some of
our fish."




CHAPTER XIII

THAT LUNCHEON


To Dolly's surprise she discovered that Bob and Bert were in earnest
regarding their preference for expeditions that did not include girls.
Nearly every day the two boys went off fishing or motor boating with a
lot of their cronies, but the girls were seldom asked.

"They're always like that," said Dotty, carelessly. "They like to ramble
through the woods or cruise around the lake by themselves. They wear old
flannel shirts and disreputable hats, and they eat their lunch any old
way, without any frills or fuss. I don't like that sort of picnicking
myself, I like pretty table fixings even if they're only paper napkins
and pasteboard dishes. But the boys like tin pails and old frying pans
and they catch their fish and cook 'em and eat 'em like a horde of
savages."

"All right," agreed Dolly, "we can have fun enough without them; but I
think they might take us along sometimes. Let's get up a rival picnic
some day, and see if they won't come to it."

"They won't," said Dotty, "but we can try it, if you like. And anyway
we can have our own fun."

So one day when all the boys of the neighbouring camps were going on a
fishing trip, the girls arranged a picnic of their own.

The two Holmes girls, Maisie Norris, Dolly and Dotty, and three or four
others, were in the crowd and they were to go in two motor boats to
Bramble Brook, the very spot where the boys were trout fishing that day.

Long Sam navigated one boat and the Norris's man engineered the other.

Dolly had evolved a plan for a great joke on the boys, which, she
flattered herself, would even up with Bert for the joke he had played on
her.

In pursuance of their plan, the girls were taking with them a most
marvellous luncheon.

There were boxes of devilled eggs, each gold and white confection in a
case of fringed white paper. Sandwiches in tiny rolls and fancy shapes.
Dishes of salad that were pictures in themselves, and platters of cold
meats cut in appetising slices and garnished with aspic jelly in
quivering translucence. Platters of cold chicken, delicately browned and
garnished with parsley and lemon slices. Dainty baskets of little
frosted cakes and tartlets filled with tempting jam covered with
frosting.

Oh, Dolly had planned well for her little joke, and if successful, it
would be rare sport.

The boys had been gone for hours when the girls started, and in their
fresh linen dresses and bright hair-ribbons they were a jolly looking
crowd who filled the two motor boats as they left the Crosstrees pier.

Mrs. Rose waved a good-bye, knowing the young people were safe, in
charge of Long Sam and old Ephraim, the tried and trusted factotum of
the Norris family.

"In you go!" cried Long Sam as he deftly handed the girls into the
boats, and the laughing crowd settled themselves to enjoy the trip.

It was a beautiful mid-summer day, and the heat sufficiently tempered by
the cool breezes that swept across the lake. The girls chattered and
sang and called to each other as the two boats kept close together on
their way.

When they reached Bramble Brook they did not go to the regular landing
place, but Long Sam cleverly found a concealed nook where they could
land without danger of being seen by the boys who were already there.

The trout stream was a long one, but all of its meanderings were well
known to Sam and Ephraim, who were old residents of the locality.

The girls waited while the two men went to reconnoitre.

After a time the scouts returned.

"They're away up the brook," said Long Sam, "but all their grub and
things is stacked in the clearing, and I reckon they'll be coming along
back in about an hour to feed. They started pretty early and I reckon
they can't hold out much longer 'thout their grub. What next, ladies?"

"You, Sam, help us unpack our hampers," said Dolly, who was directing
affairs, "and you, Ephraim, go and gather up all their foodstuff and
either hide it around there or bring it back here."

"Yes'm," and old Ephraim trudged away, intent only on obeying orders to
the letter.

He returned with a big basket on either arm.

"Thought I'd better fetch it along," he said; "them chaps would hunt it
out wherever I hid it. I left 'em all their cooking things, pots and
pans, but poor fellers, they won't have nothin' to cook!"

"Here's their coffee," cried Edith Holmes, who was peering into the
baskets. "And here's bacon and eggs, oh, what horrid looking stuff! And
loaves of dry bread! Guy and Elmer just hate plain bread. _May be_ they
won't care for our sandwiches!"

"Let's make coffee!" said Dotty; "there's nothing so good at a camp
feast as coffee. Don't you love it, Edith?"

"Mother doesn't let me have it, but make it all the same, the boys adore
it."

"We can have one cup," said Dotty; "Mother allows that. But I'm going to
make it, the boys will be crazy about it. You scoot back and get the
coffee pot, Ephraim, and the big long spoon, they'll probably have one."

Back went Ephraim on his errand, and when he returned his eyes were
greeted by the sight of the daintily spread luncheon.

Heavy brown papers had been spread on the ground, and these were covered
with a tablecloth of white crepe paper with a design of green ferns for
a border. Real ferns were laid here and there under the dishes of good
things, and piles of white pasteboard plates and paper napkins were in
readiness.

"What about coffee cups?" exclaimed Maisie. "I know they only have
horrid old tin things."

"Oh, we've lots of paper drinking cups," said Dotty, "those pretty
pleated ones, they'll be lovely for coffee. Say, Sam, I want this coffee
to be just right, and I wish you'd make it. I know how, but I'm sure
yours will be better."

Long Sam was greatly flattered at this compliment, and he proceeded to
build a fire and make the coffee with a practised hand that betokened
long experience in these arts.

"Isn't the table lovely!" exclaimed Josie Holmes, as she brought a few
wild flowers she had found, and placed them gracefully among the ferns
that decorated the feast.

"And thank goodness I haven't seen a spider nor an ant!" cried Nellie
North, who had been, with another girl, told off to keep the table free
of any such marauders. One venturesome grasshopper had made a spring
toward the food, but had been caught and had his energies turned in a
far different direction.

"S'pose we have to wait an awful long time," said Edith, as she looked
longingly at the tempting dishes.

"Never mind if we do!" said Dotty; "there's nothing that can take any
hurt. There's nothing to get cold except the coffee, and Sam will attend
to that. The glass fruit jars full of lemonade are in the brook, so that
will be lovely and cool when we want it. Oh, everything is all right;
and we've only just got to wait. So you girls may as well make up your
mind to it."

Although the wait seemed long, after a time, Long Sam, scouting about,
heard the boys' voices in the distance. He warned the girls and they
were all quiet as mice, awaiting developments.

The crowd of boys came nearer, laughing and shouting, as they reached
their own headquarters.

Sam beckoned to the girls to come and peep through the bushes at the
amazed group, who had suddenly discovered that their food was missing.

"Somebody has swiped it!" cried Elmer Holmes, angrily. "All our grub is
gone! I say, fellows, what shall we do?"

"Do! Go after them and get it back!" cried Jack Norris, and then a
chorus of shouts went up; "the coffee pot's gone!" "All the bacon and
eggs are gone!" "And the bread, too!"

"They sure made a clean sweep," said Bert Fayre. "Who do you s'pose did
it?"

"Some other crowd of fishing chaps," said Bob Rose, confidently, "but it
doesn't often happen,--a thing like that. No decent fellows would do
it."

The girls, only a few rods distant, were peeping through the bushes and
shaking with silent laughter at the discomfited boys. Such looks of
chagrin and dismay as they showed! and such belligerent determination
to hunt the marauders and duly punish them.

"Just you wait till I get hold of the thieves!" cried Elmer Holmes,
"I'll give them what for!"

"You won't catch them," said Bert; "they're probably miles away by this
time, and they've probably eaten up all our snacks. Wow, but I'm
hungry!"

"So say we all of us!" chorused the boys, as they flung themselves
around in disconsolate attitudes.

"Not a snip-jack of anything," Jack went on, peering vainly into a few
empty baskets that Sam had left behind him. "The nerve of them, to steal
our coffee and then take our coffee pot to make it in! Honest, fellows,
I never knew such a thing to happen before. I've been up here a lot of
summers and I never struck a crowd that would do such a thing as this."

"That's so," agreed Bob Rose, "why, often a lot of strange chaps will
share their grub with you, but I never knew 'em to hook it! Must be an
awful mean crowd."

"Well, all the same," said Bert, "what are we going to do for lunch? I
rousted out at sunup, and to be sure, I had my breakfast, but it's
forgotten in the dim past."

"We can cook our fish," said one of the boys "but we'll miss the coffee
and potatoes and bread and such various staffs of life. We haven't such
a lot of fish anyhow."

"No; we depended on bacon and eggs for our mainstay. I move we go home."

"S'pose we'll have to," and Bob looked rueful, "We can't put in a whole
afternoon on empty stomachs. What do you say, shall we cook the fish, or
light right out for home?"

"Here's a cracker they dropped," cried Bert, who spied a soda biscuit on
the ground and brushing it off, began to eat it.

"Aw, give a starving comrade a bite," and Guy held out his hand eagerly.

"By jiminy, here's another!" and Jack found another cracker farther
along.

Now this was part of the plan, and it was at Dolly's directions that
Long Sam had carefully planted a few crackers at intervals to lure the
unsuspecting boys to the surprise that awaited them.

Dolly and Dotty, with their arms around each other, were peeping through
the trees, and they shook with glee as they saw the boys eagerly hunting
for the stray crackers.

"Funny how they came to drop 'em along," said Guy and Elmer responded,
"Must have been eating them on their way. But say, they've left a trail;
let's follow it."

The group of boys--there were eight of them--moved slowly along toward
where the girls were hidden. The trail of crackers had been adroitly
arranged to bring them finally within sight of the appetising luncheon
so daintily set forth.

As the boys came nearer to the little clearing, and as the sight of the
feast must in a moment burst upon their eyes, the girls scampered to
hide behind trees to watch the astonished faces.

Nor were they disappointed. In a moment more the boys came in sight of
the luncheon and stopped suddenly.

"By gum!"

"Well, what do you know about that!"

"Jiminy crickets!"

"Ah there, my size!"

And various other boyish exclamations gave voice to surprise and delight
on the part of the onlookers. But they paused several steps away from
the feast.

"That's a girls' layout," said Bert Fayre, nodding his head sagaciously;
"no fellows ever set up that dinky business! But it looks good to me!"

"Good!" exclaimed Jack; "I'd face a term in State's prison to nab that
loot! Wonder who owns it!"

"Certainly not the people who stole our grub; so we can't claim this in
return. Oh, I smell coffee! 'M-mm!"

Unwilling to intrude further on what was so evidently a girls' picnic,
and yet equally unable to tear themselves away from the enticing scene,
the boys stood, a comically eager crowd, looking vainly about for signs
of the picnic party.

"Seems 'sif I must grab one sandwich," said Bob, rolling his eyes
comically toward the piled-up dishes.

"Well, you won't," said Bert, who had no fear that Bob would be guilty
of such a thing, but he wasn't quite so sure of some of the other boys,
and so they stood like a lot of hungry tramps, a little bewildered at
the situation and greatly tantalised by the sight of the feast and the
odour of steaming coffee.

"Nothing doing," said Bob, at last. "We can't touch other people's
property, and we might as well go on home. But if the ladies belonging
to this church sociable would show themselves, I'd sit up and beg for a
bone of that fried chicken over there."

"Maybe we all wouldn't!" commented several, and then, at a signal from
Dolly, the girls sprang from their hiding-places and stood laughing at
the crowd of hungry boys.

"Oh, you Dotty Rose!" cried Jack Norris, as he caught Dotty's dancing
black eyes, "I might have known you were at the head of this!"

"No more than Dolly Fayre," cried Dotty, "and all the rest of us. Are
you hungry, boys?"

"Are we hungry? We should smile! We've been hungry all the while!" came
in chorus from the famished tramps.

"_Would_ you care to come to lunch with us?" said Dolly, her blue eyes
dancing as she put the question.

"Would we care to!" and Jack grinned at her. "We're hungry enough to eat
you girls; but, alas! kind ladies, we're obliged to regret your
invitation as we're not in proper society garb."

Suddenly the boys became aware of their flannel shirts and old hats and
general fishermanlike appearance.

"We'll forgive that for once," cried Dotty; "we'll pretend we're a
rescue party and you're a lot of starving soldiers, so we won't mind
your tattered uniforms."

"Rescue party!" cried Bob; "I like that! Aren't you the sly ones who
raided our commissariat department? Own up, now!"

"What makes you think so?" And Edith Holmes looked the picture of
injured innocence.

"Oh, yes! 'What makes us think so!' What makes us think that's our
coffee boiling in our coffee pot! Fair ladies, we invite you to lunch
with us, on our coffee and our bacon and eggs. And if you'll wait a few
minutes, we'll cook our trout for you."

"Well, I'll tell you what," and golden-haired Dolly settled the
question; "we'll eat our luncheon now, as it's all ready, and then, if
you like, you can cook your fish afterward."

"That suits me," said Bob, "and I'm free to confess that I can't wait
another minute to attack this Ladies'-Own-Cooking-School Lay Out! Take
seats, everybody-- I mean you girls sit down, and us chaps will wait on
you."

"All right," laughed Dolly; "we resign in your favour. I can tell you
girls get hungry, too."

So the girls sat around, and the boys quickly passed plates and napkins
and then the dishes of delicious food.

Then they served themselves, and sitting down by the girls, rapidly
demolished the contents of their well-filled plates.

"I'm not going to rub it in," said Dolly, dimpling with smiles, "but for
boys who don't want girls along on their picnics you seem to enjoy our
society fairly well."

"It isn't our society they're enjoying," said Nellie North; "it's our
stuffed eggs and cold chicken."

"It's both, adorable damsels," declared Bob. "Just let us appease our
hunger, and goodness knows you've enough stuff here for a regiment, and
then we'll show you how we appreciate the blessing of your society.
We'll entertain you any way you choose."

"That we will," agreed Guy. "We'll give you a circus performance, a
concert, lecture, or song and dance, as you decree."

But it took a long time to satisfy the boys' appetites. It seemed as if
they could never get enough of the various delicacies, and though they
pretended to make fun of what they called the fiddly-faddly frills, they
thoroughly relished the good things.

"These eggs ought to be shaved," said Bob, as he picked the little
fringes of white tissue paper from a devilled egg.

"No critical remarks, please," said Dolly, offering him a rolled up
sandwich tied with a narrow white ribbon.

"Oh, my goodness! do I eat ribbon and all? I can do magical stunts for
you afterward, like the chap who pulls yards of ribbon out of his mouth,
on the stage."

"Anybody who makes fun of our things can't have any," declared Josie.

"Oh, I'm not making fun," and Bob took half a dozen of the tiny
sandwiches. "Why, I always have my meals tied up in ribbons. I have
sashes on my griddle-cakes and neckties on my eggs, always."

"I like these orange-peel baskets filled with fruit salad," said Bert,
as he helped himself to another; "I think food in baskets is the only
real proper way."

But at last, even the hungry fishermen declared they couldn't eat
another bite, and the young people left the feast and sat on the rocks
and tree stumps near by, while Long Sam and Ephraim cleared away and
packed up the things to take home.

The boys were as good as their word, and entertained the girls by
singing college songs and giving gay imitations and stunts, and
everybody declared, as the picnic finally broke up, that it had been the
very best one of the season.




CHAPTER XIV

THE CAKE CONTEST


"Oh, _do_ go in for it!" Edith Holmes was saying, as she and Maisie
Norris sat on the edge of the Rose's shack and tried to persuade Dotty
and Dolly to agree to their plan.

"But I never made a cake in my life," Dolly objected.

"Nor I, either," said Dotty; "I don't see how we can, Edith. You're a
regular born cook, and that's different."

"But maybe you're a regular born cook, too," argued Edith; "you can't
tell if you never have tried."

"Anyway, enter the contest just for fun," urged Maisie. "Everybody will
help with the bazaar, and of course you want to be in it; and I want you
to be in this contest, because all us girls are."

"I'd just as lieve," said Dolly, "only there's no chance of our winning
the prize."

"Well, never mind if you don't. You'll have a lot of fun, and besides
it will teach you to make cake, and that's a good thing to know. That
funny old Maria of yours will help you."

"But would it be fair to have her help us?"

"Oh, of course not _make_ the cake; you must do that yourselves. But she
can tell you how, or show you how, and you can practise all you like
beforehand, of course. And you might win the prize, after all."

"What is the prize?"

"A twenty dollar gold piece!"

"What a grand prize! I didn't know it was such a big one."

"Well, you see, old Mrs. Van Zandt gives it. She's a crank on Domestic
Science and girls knowing how to cook and all that. And besides there'll
be lots of entries. All the girls all round the lake will send cakes."

"Can anybody send?"

"Any girl under sixteen. They call it the Sweet Sixteen Cake Prize."

"All right, let's do it," said Dotty, and Dolly said, "I'm willing, but
it seems nonsensical when we don't know a thing about making cake, and
less than a week to learn in. But we can have a try at it, anyway, and
we'll be in the fun. Hey, Dotsy?"

"All right, then," said Maisie, delightedly; "I'll tell Miss Travers
that you two girls will join the contest. She'll be delighted. She's at
the head of that committee."

Later the two D's conferred with Mrs. Rose about the matter.

"I'll be glad to have you do it," that lady said. "I always like to have
you learn anything domestic. Of course you can learn to make cake in a
week, if you have any knack at all. Go down to the kitchen now, and
Maria will give you your first lessons. Ask her to show you how to make
plain cup-cake first, and if you make a little more elaborate kind every
day, by the end of the week you ought to be able to concoct almost
anything. I don't want to be discouraging, but I can hardly think you'll
take the prize, for I remember last year the cakes were really most
astonishing affairs."

"No, we won't catch any prize," Dotty agreed; "but we want to be in the
bazaar, and the cake department is about as much fun as any. You see,
even if we don't take the prize, we sell our cakes for the biggest price
possible and that helps the bazaar along."

"Is it for charity?" asked Dolly.

"Yes; they hold it every year in the hotel, and all the camp people
take part. Oh, it's lots of fun; I'm so glad it's going to be while
you're here."

The two girls ran down to the kitchen, and informed Maria of their
immediate desire to learn to make cake.

"Bress gracious, chillun," said the surprised old coloured woman, "I'll
make all de cakes you all can eat. Don't you bodder 'bout makin' cakes
yo'self. Jes' leab dat to ole Maria."

"But you don't understand, Cookie," said Dotty. "We want to learn,
because we're going to make a cake to send to the fair, for the prize
contest."

"Prize contes'! What's dat?"

"Why, they give a prize for the best cake sent in."

"All right, den. Leab it all to me. I'll sho'ly make a cake what'll
catch dat prize. You all shoo out ob here now."

"No, no, Maria, you don't understand," and Dolly began to explain. "We
must make the cakes ourselves. You can't do it, because you're not under
sixteen--are you?" And the laughing blue eyes looked quizzically at the
old darky.

"Sixteen! Laws, chile, I's a mudder in Israel. I got chilluns and
grandchilluns. I ain't been sixteen since I can 'member. But, lawsy,--a
young un of sixteen can't make no cake worth eatin'!"

"But we can, if _you_ teach us, Maria," said Dotty, with tactful
flattery.

"Well, mebbe dat's so, if I do the most of it, and you jes' bring me the
things."

"No, that won't do; we must do it ourselves, but you must show us how."

At last they convinced Maria of her part in the undertaking, and with
more or less good-natured grumbling, she proceeded to enlighten the
girls in the mysteries of cake making.

The old cook was not trammelled by definite recipes and her rules seemed
to be "a little of dis," and "a right smart lot of dat."

But, even so, she was a good teacher, and at the end of the first
lesson, the girls had each a round cake, plain, but light and wholesome,
well-baked and delicately browned.

These were proudly exhibited at the family luncheon, and were at once
appropriated by Bob and Bert, who immediately constituted themselves a
Court of Final Judgment, and declared their intention of eating all the
preliminary cakes that would be made during the week's lessons.

So interested did the girls become, that every morning they spent in the
kitchen.

Mr. Rose expressed a mock terror lest his bills for butter and eggs
should land him in the poor-house, but the cake-making went on, and more
and more elaborate confections were turned out by the rapidly
progressing cooks.

Mrs. Rose declared that it was her opinion that doctors' bills were
imminent, if indeed the whole family would not soon be in the hospital;
but though the boys and Genie ate a fair portion of the cakes, much more
was consumed by the neighbouring young people, who formed a habit of
drifting in to Crosstrees camp afternoons to sample the morning's work.

The days brought plum cakes and marble cakes; chocolate, cocoanut,
custard and jelly cakes.

Once having achieved the knack of making the cake itself, the fillings
or elaborations were not difficult.

The girls took the matter rather seriously, but as the great day drew
nearer, they began to have a glimmering hope that they might achieve the
prize after all.

"But, oh, Dollyrinda," exclaimed Dotty, impulsively, "if my cake should
take the prize ahead of yours, I'd cry my eyes out, and if your cake
took the prize ahead of mine, I'd never speak to you again!"

Dolly laughed. "I've been thinking about that, too, Dot, and do you
know, I think it would be nicest for us to make only one cake, and make
it together, and enter it under both our names, and then if it takes the
prize we can divide the twenty dollars."

Dotty drew a long sigh of relief. "That is the best way, Doll; I never
thought of that. To be sure we run a double chance with two cakes, but
it would be horrid for one of them to take the prize. So let's devote
all our energies to one beautiful, splendiferous cake that will be so
perfect nobody else will have any chance at all."

"Yes, that's what I think. Now, what kind shall it be?"

This was the great question. The girls had proved apt pupils, for they
had a housewifely knack, and Maria was really a superior teacher. They
had learned the art of pound cake, the trick of sponge cake and had even
penetrated the mysteries of fruit cake. They had learned to make raisin
cake without having all the raisins sink to a thick mat at the bottom;
they had learned ginger-bread in all its forms, from the puffy golden
sort to the most dark spicy variety. Angel food and sunshine cake
presented no difficulties to them and layer cakes were their happy
hunting ground.

Also they were Past Grand Masters in the matter of icing. They could
boil sugar through its seven stages of spun thread, and they even
experimented with a few confectioners' implements in the matter of fancy
decoration and borders.

"It seems to me," said Dotty, as they held solemn conclave over the
great question, "that our trick is to invent an absolutely new
combination of flavours or ingredients. Say, cocoanut stirred into
chocolate icing, or something that's different from the regulation
'White mountain cake' or 'Variety cake.' I'm sure we can think of some
new idea that will be perfectly stunning."

"I don't agree with you, Dot," and Dolly looked solemnly thoughtful, as
her blue eyes stared into Dotty's black ones. "Now, I think this way. A
more simple cake, but of perfect quality and with a plain but beautiful
icing, that will charm by its very simplicity."

"That's a fine line of talk, Doll, and sounds well," put in Bert, who
was present with Bob as Advisory Board; "but I doubt if 'twill go down
with the Powers that Be. You see, after all, they're on the lookout for
novelty and elaborate messes."

"I'm not so sure of that," and Bob shook his head. "Perhaps Dolliwop's
idea isn't so worse! It's like a beautiful big white monument being more
impressive than a lot of ginger-bread architecture."

"Oh, we wouldn't make ginger-bread!" cried Dotty, laughing; "but I can't
see a plain cake taking a prize. I tell you, it's got to have an unusual
combination of materials. I can't get away from the idea that a novel
mixture of just the right kind of flavouring would turn the trick."

"And I'm positive that simplicity is the note to strike for." Dolly said
this with a faraway look in her eyes, as if she saw the vision of the
beautiful cake she was planning.

"Stick to it, Doll," cried Bob. "You've got the right idea or I'm a
loser!"

"You boys go away, now," and Dolly's brows wrinkled in serious thought.
"This is no time for fooling and Dot and I have to decide this thing
to-day."

Realising the gravity of the occasion, the boys went off, and the two
girls settled down to a desperate confab. Neither of them was insistent
merely because she wanted her own way, but each was eager for success,
and quite ready to settle their controversy by careful weighing of each
other's arguments.

At last, after a long discussion, they reached their conclusions and
went down to the kitchen to construct what they had finally decided
would be the best plan for their masterpiece.

Very carefully they worked, Dolly, slow, sure and very particular as to
measurements and combinations; Dotty, quick, beating the batter like
mad, whisking eggs and sifting sugar in a whirl of excitement.

And when the great work was accomplished, and the marvellous result set
on the dining-room table for exhibition, the family came in to gaze in
an awed silence on the beautiful cake.

No one was allowed to see it but the household, for of course it was
kept secret from the other contestants.

The cake was a marvel of beauty, and it combined the best ideas of the
plans of the two girls.

It was square in shape, instead of round, as that gave a touch of
novelty. It was only two layers, but the layers were of the most
exquisitely textured angel food, which had, after three attempts,
graciously consented to turn out "just right."

Between the layers was a filling, which followed in a measure Dotty's
idea of novelty. It was a combination of confectioners' icing, whipped
cream, pineapple juice and a few delicate feathery flakes of freshly
grated cocoanut. This delectable mixture was novel and of charming
delicacy.

But the icing was Dolly's triumph. The square cake, large and high, was
covered so smoothly with white icing that not a lump or a crack marred
the perfect surface of its top and sides. There were no decorations save
three lines of icing that delicately outlined the square top. The
trueness of these lines was a wonder, and only Dolly's steady hand as
she traced them with a paper cornucopia of icing could have resulted in
such an effective scheme.

"It is perfectly wonderful!" said Mr. Rose, looking at it as an artist.
"It's like the Taj Mahal or some such World Wonder."

"It's perfectly exquisite!" said Mrs. Rose, as she bent over to examine
it and then walked away to view it from a distance. "I never saw such
icing! How did you do it, girlies?"

"Dolly did that," said Dotty.

"Only because you were so excited your hand wiggled," said Dolly, who
was always placid, whatever happened. "But the filling is Dot's
invention, and it's just fine. We put some of it on another cake and I
want you all to taste it."

So they all sampled the other cake, and tested the flavour like
connoisseurs.

"Ripping!" exclaimed Bob.

"Out of sight!" remarked Bert, suiting the action to the word.

The boys were vociferous, the older people were enthusiastic; but one
and all agreed that there had never been such a cake built before and
that it would surely win the prize.

"Are you going to send it over now?" asked Mr. Rose.

"No," said Dotty; "we're going to take it with us when we go ourselves.
I wouldn't trust it to anybody, for it might get joggled and crack the
icing. Put it in the pantry, Dolly; I daren't touch it myself." Dotty
was quivering with excitement, but Dolly's steady hand carefully lifted
the precious cake and carried it safely to the pantry.

Later in the afternoon, the girls made ready to go to the bazaar. They
were to serve as assistants in the cake department, for the majority of
the cakes were to be sold. The prize cake, and those having honourable
mention would be exhibited, and later sold at auction, but much cake
would be disposed of at the regular sale.

They wore white dresses, with pale green ribbons, which was the costume
of all connected with that department of the bazaar.

Very pretty they looked, as they came dancing downstairs for Mrs. Rose's
inspection.

"You'll do, girlies," she commented; "your frocks are all right. We'll
be over later. I hate to have you carry that big cake, Dolly."

"Oh, I must, Mrs. Rose; I wouldn't trust it to any one else. Bert
offered to take it, and Bob did, too. But if they should drop it or
anything, I'd never get over the disappointment. We worked so hard on
it, and it is _so_ lovely, and if we can just get it there safely, I'm
sure it will get honourable mention at least."

"It ought to take the prize," said Mrs. Rose, enthusiastically; "but
don't get your hopes up too high, for there's nothing surer than
disappointment. Be very careful as you get in the boat, Dolly."

"Indeed, yes, but Long Sam is such a kind old thing, I know he'll do all
he can not to joggle, but to run very steadily all the way."

The bazaar was held in a hotel which was some distance down the lake.
But Dolly did not fear any accident while on the motor boat; she was
only apprehensive lest some one push against her as she made her way
into the building or into the cake booth. For one little crumb of broken
icing or one dent on its perfect surface would spoil, to Dolly's anxious
eye, the perfection of their cake.




CHAPTER XV

WHO WON THE PRIZE?


"We'd better take our sweaters," said Dolly, as she handed the two
white, fleecy garments to Dotty. "You carry them, Dot, and I'll carry
the cake; you'd be sure to drop it."

Dotty took the two sweaters and flung them over her arm, well knowing
the precious cake would be safer in Dolly's steady hand.

"Now we're all ready," Dolly said, as she tucked a handkerchief into her
sash folds. "Wait for me here, Dot, and I'll get the cake."

Dolly went to the kitchen and on through to the pantry, where she had
left the cake on a shelf by the window. But it was not there.

"Maria," she called, wondering what the old darky had done with it.

There was no reply and Dolly called again louder.

"Yas'm, I'se comin'," and the old cook came in at the back door of the
kitchen. "What yo' want, honey? I spec' I jes' done drapped asleep fer
a minute, settin' out dere in de sun. What is it, honey chile?"

"Where's the cake, Maria?"

"On de pantry shelf, whar yo' done left it. I ain't teched it, dat I
ain't."

"But it isn't there. You must have put it someplace else."

"No, Miss Dolly, I nebber laid a hand on dat cake. I know jes' how
choice you was of it, an' I lef it jes' whar yo' put it."

"But it isn't there, and who would disturb it?"

"Tain't dar! Land o' goodness! Den whar is it?" Maria's black eyes
rolled in dismay. "Somebody's done stole it!"

"Stole it? Nonsense! Nobody would do that. Dot--_ty_!" and Dolly's loud
call brought Dotty flying.

Mrs. Rose followed, and both stood aghast with consternation when Dolly
announced, "The cake is gone!"

"Gone! What do you mean?" and Dotty looked around the shelves in a dazed
sort of way.

"I mean what I say," cried Dolly impatiently. "Our cake is gone, and, as
Maria says, somebody must have stolen it."

"Stolen it! Our cake!" and Dotty gave a wild shriek.

"It can't be stolen," said Mrs. Rose, looking puzzled; "we've never had
anything stolen all the years we've been here."

"Then where is it?" demanded Dolly. "Where can it be?"

"Didn't you take it into the dining-room?" suggested Mrs. Rose, unable
to think of any other solution of the mystery.

"No, indeed; I left it right here till we were ready to start. I had it
in the open window, because the kitchen was so hot, and of course some
tramp has come along and stolen it. Oh, Dotty, what shall we do?"

But Dotty was beyond speech. Her staring eyes gazed at the table where
the cake had been. Vaguely she glanced round the pantry shelves, and
then flew through the kitchen to the dining-room and looked all around
there. But of course she saw no cake, for Dolly had left it in the
pantry.

"Where are the boys?" asked Dolly, suddenly.

"Gone to a motor boat race," said Mrs. Rose. "They went off half an hour
ago. But they wouldn't steal your cake."

"They might do it for a joke," said Dolly.

"No," said Mrs. Rose, decidedly; "they wouldn't do that. They were too
interested in the success of you girls, and they felt about that cake
just as we all did. No, Bob and Bert never stole the cake! Where's
Genie?"

"Upstairs, I think," said Dotty, and going to the foot of the staircase
she called her sister.

Genie came running down and was as greatly disturbed as the other girls
at the disappearance of the cake.

"Of course I never touched it!" she said indignantly. "I wanted my Dotty
and my Dolly to take the prize. Do you s'pose I'd steal their lovely
cake?"

There was no mistaking the little girl's honesty and good faith, and
Mrs. Rose said finally: "Then it _must_ have been stolen by some one
passing by, but I can't understand it. There are no tramps around here,
Long Sam is as honest as the day, and nobody else would be passing by
this window. I wish your father were here, Dotty."

"So do I, but he couldn't do anything. The cake's gone, and it must have
been taken by somebody. What do you say if we make another, Dolly?"

Dolly looked blank. "Make another!" she said slowly; "why it's three
o'clock now, and the fair begins at four. We couldn't do it, Dot, and
anyway we couldn't make a prize one. I wouldn't have the heart to try
again as hard as I did for that one. Would you?"

"Yes, I would! I'd just like to fly at it and make one as good as that
or better! I know who stole that cake, Dorinda Fayre! It was some girl
who had made a cake herself and who was afraid ours would take the
prize, and so she came and stole it!"

"Oh, Dorothy Rose! aren't you ashamed to think such a thing! And anyway,
how could any girl do that even if she was mean enough?"

"Of course she could!" and Dotty's eyes flashed; "everybody knew about
our cake, and they knew it would take the prize, and so of course they
wanted it out of the way! Now that's just what happened, because it's
the only thing that can have happened. As Mother says, there aren't any
tramps around here. We always set cakes or pies on that window shelf and
they've never been stolen. Come on, I say, let's make another; I hate to
have any girl get ahead of me like that!"

"Oh, Dotty, it just seems as if I couldn't make another. Why we were
three hours on that one this morning. It would be after six o'clock
before we could get another done. And I know it wouldn't be any good,
I'm too upset to make it properly. I'm all of a quiver. And besides we
haven't all the things in the house."

"No, we've no pineapple. But let's make some other kind of a cake,
chocolate, or something."

"Yes! I think I see a chocolate cake taking the prize! Why don't you
make ginger-bread and be done with it? That prize won't go to any common
kind of cake, like chocolate."

"It might if it was awful good chocolate. Oh, Dolly, our cake was so
beautiful!" And Dotty's overwrought nerves gave way and she burst into
violent sobbing.

"Well, crying won't do any good, Dot," and Dolly drew a long sigh; "I
don't blame you for crying, 'cause I know you can't help it. But I can't
seem to cry, I'm too--too flattened out."

Dolly looked the picture of disheartened woe, but it was not her nature
to give way to tears. She felt absolutely dismayed and utterly cast
down, as if under a depression that would not lift, but she gave no
physical sign of this except by her tense, drawn face and her frequent
despairing sighs.

"It's just awful, girlies," said Mrs. Rose, full of helpless sympathy;
"but I can't think of anything to do. I don't believe you could make
another cake successfully, you're too nervous and upset, both of you."

Maria, however, did not take it so calmly. Her grief was more boisterous
even than Dolly's. She ran round the kitchen, throwing her apron over
her head, and wailing and moaning like a crazy woman.

"Oh, dat cake! dat cake!" she groaned, dropping into a chair and rocking
back and forth in ecstasies of woe. "Dat hebenly cake! Sho'ly Miss Dotty
and Miss Dolly yo' could make anudder. I kin help yo', and we'll whisk
it up in a jiffy. Do make some kind, oh do, now!"

"No, Maria," and Dolly looked positive; "we can't make another cake.
It's out of the question. Shall we go to the fair at all, Dot?"

"Yes, of course we will! I want to find out what girl was mean enough
and smart enough to cut up this trick!"

"Come on then. You'd better wash your face, you're all teary looking. I
s'pose we might as well go, but I don't feel a bit like it. All the
fun's gone out of it."

Dotty ran away to bathe her reddened eyes, and Dolly gravely walked
round the kitchen, looking here and there as if the cake might have
voluntarily hidden itself somewhere.

"It's most mysterious," said Mrs. Rose. "I never heard of anything being
stolen up in this region before. I wish Mr. Rose were here, but of
course he couldn't do anything, and I think we may feel sure that he
didn't steal the cake."

"Where is he?" asked Dolly, smiling a little at the jest.

"Gone over to the Norris camp, I think. I wish the boys were here; of
course they couldn't do anything, but they could help us express our
indignation."

"Yes, they could do that, but it wouldn't do any real good. Hello, Dot,
ready?"

The two girls started off down the path and Mrs. Rose watched them go
with a sad heart. She knew how disappointed they were, after all their
trouble to make the cake, and she couldn't imagine what had become of
it.

"I can't believe any of the girls came and took it," she said to Maria.

"No, ma'am, dat dey didn't! dat cake was sperrited away by ghos'es.
Dat's what it was!" And the big black eyes rolled in terrified
apprehension. "Yas'm, sho'ly fer certain, dat's what happened. It's de
work of dem sperrits!"

Mrs. Rose went on into the house unwilling to subscribe to Maria's
theory, but equally unable to propound any of her own.

       *       *       *       *       *

The girls reached the hotel where the fair was held and joined the gay
throngs of people that were entering.

"Hello," said Maisie Norris as she met them. "Where's your cake?"

Now Dolly and Dotty had made up their minds not to tell of the
catastrophe, until they could make some endeavour to find out if there
were any suspicious looks or hints to be noticed among the other young
cake makers.

"Where's yours?" Dotty said to Maisie.

"Oh, I left mine in the committee room. You know the committee take all
the cakes, and then those that haven't any chance at all, they send out
to the cake table to be sold. But the ones that have a chance at the
prize they keep for final decision. They've kept mine so far, but Edith
Holmes' was just sent out. It's too bad, it's a lovely chocolate cake."

"It is too bad," agreed Dotty, "but I don't believe a chocolate cake
will take the prize, do you?"

"No, probably not," said Maisie. "Mine's a variety cake. What sort is
yours?"

Dotty hesitated, for she well knew they had no cake in the committee
room, but Dolly said: "We made up ours. We mixed things together that we
never heard of combining before. It was mostly Dot's invention."

"But Dolly made the layers and did the icing," put in Dotty, unwilling
to take all the credit.

"Sounds lovely," said Maisie, and then her attention was diverted
elsewhere and she ran away.

No more embarrassing questions were asked, for every one assumed that
Dotty and Dolly had given their cake to the committee when they arrived.

A dozen times during the afternoon they were asked, "Has your cake been
sent out yet?" And they truthfully answered no.

But no hint could they glean from the words or looks of any girl to make
them suspect wrong-doing.

"I can't keep it up any longer, Dot," said Dolly at last, in an
undertone. "I feel as if I'm telling a lie, when I let them all think we
have a cake with the committee."

"Fiddlesticks! it's none of their business. And anyway they have just
that much more chance at the prize. Don't tell anybody, Doll, it can't
do any harm to keep it to ourselves, and if one certain person takes
the prize, I just want to see how she looks or what she says when I tell
her our cake was stolen."

"Why, Dotty Rose! Do you mean to say you suspect anybody?"

"I don't say that; and I won't mention any name, even to you, but just
you wait and see. They'll announce the prize winner at six o'clock and
it's after five now."

So Dolly deferred to Dotty's wishes in the matter, and as there was much
going on and plenty of diverting incidents, the hour slipped away and
soon a whisper was passed around that the committee had made their
choice.

Mrs. Van Zandt, the aristocratic and somewhat eccentric old lady who had
offered the prize, came over to the cake table and smiled as she began
her speech.

"It has been rather difficult," she said; "to decide among the beautiful
and delicious cakes selected by the committee, for my final test. There
were half a dozen at the last judging, that seemed equally well made and
delightful of taste. Of course, I did not know who made the various
entries, and so I decided, entirely on the merits of the cake itself.
And considering everything, the method, the execution and the delicacy
of flavours, I adjudge the best cake submitted in this contest to be
the one that represents the joint work of Miss Dorothy Rose and Miss
Dorinda Fayre. And I'm greatly pleased to present these two young ladies
with the golden double eagle I offered as a prize, and I consider it
well earned and honestly won."

If Dolly and Dotty had been amazed when they missed the cake from the
pantry window, they were ten times more amazed now. What could it mean?
There must be some mistake. Dotty's quick thought was that somehow their
names had been connected with some other girl's cake, but in a moment
that illusion was dispelled by the sight of their own beautiful white
cake being brought in and placed in the very centre of the cake table.

It was positively their own cake, although a portion had been cut from
one corner for the members of the committee to taste.

Realising that by some miracle their cake had been submitted, and had
won the prize, Dolly and Dotty suddenly became aware that they must do
their part, and together they stepped forward to receive the prize from
Mrs. Van Zandt.

"I'm sorry it is not in two ten dollar gold pieces," she said, as she
smilingly held it out to the blushing girls; "but you must divide it
between you."

Smiling, Dolly and Dotty held out their hands together, and together
received the gold piece, holding it between them as they bowed their
thanks.

Then there was a hubbub of congratulations and laughter and chatter from
the girls. It seemed unnecessary to say anything about the cake having
been stolen, so the two D's smiled and beamed as they listened to
flattering words about their prize winning cake.

Soon they were flying homeward to tell the family all about it.

"Our cake was there, and we took the prize!" cried Dotty, as they rushed
into the living-room of the Rose bungalow.

"How did it get there?" cried Mrs. Rose, and Mr. Rose and Genie
exclaimed in surprise, while Maria appeared in the kitchen doorway,
holding up her hands and crying out: "Dem sperrits jes' nachelley wafted
dat cake right ober to de fair place!"

"We don't know," Dolly went on, taking up the tale. "I asked two or
three ladies of the committee, and they didn't seem to know anything
about it--about how it got there. They just said it was there, entered
in our names, and it sounded so silly to ask them to find out who
brought it, that I just didn't."

"It _was_ our cake," declared Dotty; "and it took the prize. So that's
all right. But, however did it get there, unless it walked over itself.
You didn't take it, did you, Daddy?"

"No," said Mr. Rose; "I did not. I would willingly have done so, but you
girls insisted on taking it yourselves."

Just then the boys rushed in.

"Great sport!" cried Bob, flinging his cap and sweater on a chair;
"Norris's boat is the swiftest thing ever!"

"You bet it is! Wow, but it was a great race!" And Bert Fayre waved his
hands in enthusiasm; "Hello, girls, did your dinky white cake catch the
gold piece? Did you bamboozle the judges into thinking it was fit to
eat?"

"Yes, we did!" cried Dolly, her blue eyes sparkling with delight; "but,
oh, Bert, what do you think! We don't know how the cake got there!"

"Got there? Why, Bob and I took it over. We knew you girls never could
transport that masterpiece of modern architecture all that way in
safety."

"You boys took it over?" and Dotty looked dumfounded.

"Sure we did," said Bob; "weren't you glad?"

"But why didn't you tell us? we almost went crazy!"

"Crazy nothing! We left a note on the pantry shelf saying we took it. We
called to you girls but you were primping in your room and didn't
answer. Maria wasn't on deck, so I just scribbled on a paper that we'd
taken the cake and left the paper in its place."

Bob looked injured at the thought that their kindness was not
appreciated.

"We didn't see any note," said Dolly; "where did you leave it?"

"Right on the pantry shelf, where we took the cake away from. You don't
seem awful grateful, for what we thought would be a boon and a blessing
to you. I can tell you we had to work pretty hard to get the old thing
over there without a smooch on it, and I didn't dare put anything over
it for fear it would stick to the icing."

While he was talking, Dotty had flown out to the pantry and returned
with the bit of scribbled paper. "Here it is!" she cried; "it was on the
floor under the shelf!"

"Must have blown off," said Bert, carelessly; "well, no harm done; cake
got there all right. Took prize all right. Everybody happy."

"Yes, we are now," and Dolly grinned contentedly; "but we had a pretty
miserable afternoon."

"Oh, pshaw, now," and Bob tweaked the black curls that clustered round
her temple; "you must have known we took it, even without the note.
Where else _could_ it have gone to?"

"That's so," agreed Dotty; "and it's all right now. But next time you
leave an important document for me, don't leave it in an open window on
a breezy afternoon."




CHAPTER XVI

A WALK IN THE WOODS


"Only three days left of Camp Crosstrees," said Dolly, as the girls sat
in the shack one summer afternoon. "I never knew two weeks to slip away
so quickly."

"Don't you love it?" said Dotty, looking around at the various delights
of camp life, the wooded hills and the distant mountains. "There's
nothing like it, Doll; I wish we didn't ever have to go back to town."

"You'll have your visit with me, before we go back to Berwick. I wonder
if you will like Surfwood, Dotty?"

"I'll love the seashore, I know; but I don't know about liking the big
hotel. Don't you have to keep dressed up all the time and all that?"

"Why, we don't wear party clothes all the time. Of course we can't go
around in an old serge skirt and middy blouse as we do here. But
mornings we'll wear ginghams or linen frocks and late in the afternoon
dress up nice."

"Awful bother, fixing up so. I like to go round as we do here. Nobody
cares what they wear in camp."

"Of course it's awfully different at the hotel, but you'll like it after
you get there. I don't see why you object to dressing decently. It's
only a habit, going around in these old regimentals!"

Dolly looked with distaste at her brown serge skirt, and her tan
stockings and shoes, the latter decidedly the worse for wear and scarred
and scratched by stones and brambles.

"Oh, I've got plenty of good clothes; Mother's been fixing them all in
order. And I know I'll like it to be down there two weeks with you. But
I mean for a whole summer, I'd rather be up here, tramping around the
woods and dressing like Sam Scratch, than to fuss up fancy every day."

"I wouldn't. I've had an awful good time up here on this visit, but for
a whole summer, I'd rather be at the seashore, and at a hotel where I
wear pretty white dresses and silk stockings and slippers."

"Aren't we different!" and Dotty laughed as she looked at her golden
haired friend. "Sometimes I wonder, Doll, that we're such good friends,
when we're so awfully different. Everything I like you hate and
everything you like I hate."

"Oh, not quite that. In lots of ways, we like the same things."

"No, we don't. I like to go off in the woods on long tramps, and you'd
rather lie around here on a lot of balsam pillows and read a story book
or do nothing at all."

"I expect I'm lazy."

"No, you're not, not a bit of it. You're ready enough to work if it's
anything you like to do. Why, at a picnic, you'll do more than all the
rest put together. We're just different, that's all. You're easy-going
and good natured, and I'm a spitfire."

"Well, I guess it's good for us to be different, and so we influence
each other, and that's good for both of us."

"Well, I'll influence you right now to go for a ramble in the woods.
It's lovely to-day. Just the kind of a day when the breeze sings in the
trees and the birds flutter low and you can watch them."

"All right, I'll go, if you don't go too far, nor walk too fast. We've
only three days more up here, and we won't have many more chances to go
woodsing, so come on."

"All right, we've a good long afternoon. You go ask Maria for some
cookies and fruit, and I'll go tell Mother we're going. But don't let
Genie know. We don't want her along to-day, for she gets tired in about
an hour."

Dolly went in search of Maria, half sorry that Genie was excluded from
the party, for unhampered by the child, Dotty was apt to walk fast and
far in her untiring energy. But Dolly could always make her stop and
rest by a reference to the weak muscles that still troubled her a little
on a long walk. The girls had entirely recovered from their broken
bones, but Dolly's was an indolent nature and disinclined to great
exertion at any time.

Carrying their sweaters and a box of food they started off for their
tramp in the woods.

"I want to get a whole lot of birch bark," Dolly said, as they walked
along; "let's look for particularly nice pieces and get a whole lot to
take with us down to the seashore."

"What for?"

"Oh, to make fancy work out of. Everybody does fancy work and they have
bazaars, something like the one where we took the cake prize. And we can
make lovely things out of birch bark for the bazaar tables."

"All right, we'll gather a heap. What shall we do with our cake prize,
Doll, save it or spend it?"

"I'd rather spend it. I think it would be nice if we bought something
special with it. Two things you know, just alike, to remember our first
cake by."

"Something to wear?"

"Maybe. A ring or a pin or something."

"Couldn't get much of a ring for ten dollars. And we've got a lot of
little fancy pins, both of us. What do you say to a gold pencil for
each?"

"Only they never write very well; the leads are so hard."

"That's so. Well maybe beads, or how about a lace collar?"

"Let's wait till we get down to Surfwood and ask Trudy. She'll tell us
something nice, and maybe we'll buy something there, or else in New York
as we go through on the way down."

"All right. Here's some good birch bark, only it's yellowish. Let's keep
on till we find some whiter."

The pair rambled on, happily chatting and laughing and now and then
sitting down to rest or to refresh themselves from the box of lunch
which was rapidly growing lighter.

"We have an awful lot of bark," said Dotty, looking at the big bundles
they had collected.

"Yes, too much. Let's chuck out the worst pieces and just keep the best.
And I'd like some more of that silvery kind. It's awful pretty combined
with this dark yellow to make things."

"We want to get some big pieces. A portfolio of the silvery kind lined
with yellow is lovely."

"Yes, with one corner turned back and a ribbon bow on it."

"Yes, or tied with sweet grass. There's a big tree on ahead. We can get
some there, I'm sure."

"All right and there's another tree out there,--that's a dandy."

Eagerly they went on, absorbed in their fascinating quest. For the
hunting of birch bark is ever enticing and lures one on to further
treasures like a mirage.

"We can't carry another scrap," said Dolly, at last, laughing to see
Dotty with her arms full of rolls of bark and more pieces gathered up in
her skirt.

"No; we'll sit down and straighten this out and roll it up and finish
the cookies and throw away the box and then we'll go home."

It was hard to throw away any of the beautiful bark, for they had
gathered only fine specimens, and the quantity they finally selected to
keep was a goodly load.

"We'll put on our sweaters," said Dolly; "so we can carry it all. It's
no heavier than that lunch box was."

"No heavier," agreed Dotty; "but a good deal more bunglesome and awkward
to carry."

Each girl had a big fat roll under each arm and turning they started
gaily along in single file.

"You go first," said Dolly, stepping back; "I'm not sure I know the way.
I declare to goodness, Dot, I don't see how you remember the way
yourself. You've got a regular guide's brain under that black mop of
yours! How do you know which way to go, when you can't see anything but
trees?"

"Easy as pie!" Dotty called back over her shoulder. "Just follow the
nose of Dorothy Rose and away she goes!" And Dotty hopped over a big
stone, while Dolly walked around it.

On they went, Dotty leading the way and Dolly following.

"It's getting awfully late, I believe the sun has set," said Dolly,
shivering a little under her woollen sweater.

"Oh, no, the sun hasn't set, but you can't see it in these thick woods.
We'll soon be out of this thick part now. We came quite a way in,
Dollypops."

"A million miles, I should say! That's the worst of you, Dot, you never
realise that all the walk you take has got to be walked back again!"

"'I took a walk around the block, to get some exercise,'" Dotty chanted,
imitating a popular song which was a favourite with the boys.

"Exercise! I've had enough to last me the rest of the summer! Honest,
Dot, I've got to rest a few minutes; I can't walk another step."

"Dollyrinda Fayre, you do give out the easiest of anybody I ever saw!
Sit down on that stone and rest, do. But you mustn't wait long, for I
guess it _is_ about sunset. I feel sort of chilly, and I don't hear the
birds much."

"All right, Dotsy, I'm rested now," and Dolly jumped up and walked on.
She tired easily, but also a rest of a very few minutes made her ready
to walk on again. She followed Dotty in silence for some distance and
then said; "you're sure you _do_ know the way, aren't you?"

"M--hmm," Dotty flung back over her shoulder and trudged on.

But Dolly noticed a difference in Dotty's attitude. She walked as
quickly as before but she was not quite so alert. Also, she kept
turning her head suddenly from side to side with a gesture of an
inquisitive bird, a little uncertain which way to fly.

"You do know the way, don't you, Dotty?"

"'Course I do, Doll, don't be silly."

"How do you know it?"

"Just by instinct. I've been around these woods so much, I just kind of
know the way home, even if I can't see out. Don't you see this kind of a
trail? We just follow this and it brings us out right by our own camp."

"Are you sure?"

"Yes, I'm sure! What's the matter with you, Dolly?"

"Nothing; only it seems as if we'd walked as far since we've started for
home as we did when we were going."

"So we have, nearly. Just a little farther now and we come into that
clump of beech woods, don't you know? Where there aren't any birch
trees, hardly."

"Yes, I know where you mean; but this doesn't look like it."

"'Cause we haven't got there yet, that's why. You wouldn't think birch
bark would be so heavy; would you?"

"I don't mind it. Here give me one of your bundles; I'd just as lieve
carry it as not. Give me the one out of your left wing. I know that one
must be tired."

"'Deed I won't. You've got enough to carry. I'll throw my left hand
bundle away before I let you lug it."

"Oh, don't throw it away! It's a shame, after we've taken such trouble
to gather it. Do let me carry it, Dotty."

"No, sir, I won't do it! I don't mind it, anyway. Come on, Doll, let's
hurry a little. Don't you think it's getting sort of dark?"

"Not dark, exactly, but dusky here under the trees."

"It isn't dusk, Dolly, it's dark! I mean, it's after sunset, and the
real dark will settle down on us in a few minutes. I know more about
these woods than you do, and I know we want to get along faster. We
mustn't be in here when it gets really dark."

"But you said you knew the way, Dot," and Dolly's tone was anxious.

"I do, most always, but if we'd been on the right track we ought to have
been out of the woods before this. I must have got turned around
somehow."

Dotty stopped still and turned a despairing face toward Dolly.

"Good gracious, Dot, you don't mean we're lost!"

"I hope not that, but honest, I don't know which way to go."

"Why not go straight on?"

"I'm not sure, but I think that leads us deeper into the woods."

"Why, Dorothy Rose! You _said_ that was the way home!"

"I know I did, and I thought it was; but don't you see, Dolly, if it
_had_ been the right way, we would be home by now?"

"Oh, Dotty, what are we going to do?"

Dolly's face took on a woe-begone expression, and her big blue eyes
stared at the white face of her friend. "I'm frightened, Dolly, I-- I
never was lost in the woods before."

"Nor I, either. I've often heard of people being lost in these woods,
when they were really quite near their homes. One man was lost for three
days before they found him."

"Oh, don't say such dreadful things! It's getting awful dark, and I'm
cold, and--and I'm scared!"

"I'm all those things, too! oh, Dolly, I'm awfully frightened!" and
Dotty dropped her bundles of birch bark and sitting down on a stone
began to cry hysterically.

Now Dolly Fayre was the sort to rise to an emergency, where Dotty Rose
would lose her head completely. So Dolly, though terribly frightened,
controlled herself, and sitting down, put her arm around Dotty and tried
to cheer her.

"Brace up, Dot, it can't do a bit of good to cry you know. Now you know
more about this sort of thing than I do, what do people do when they're
lost in the woods?"

"Hol--holler," said Dotty, weakly, between her sobs, "holler like fury,
and m-maybe somebody hears them and maybe they d-don't."

"All right, let's holler," and Dolly gave a yell, that sounded about as
loud and carrying as the pipe or a bulfinch.

"Who do you s'pose'll hear that?" and Dotty almost smiled through her
tears; "this is the way to holler." Dotty gave a loud scream, a long
halloo, tapping her fingers against her mouth as she did so, making a
peculiar mountain cry, known to campers.

"All right, I'll do that, too," and Dolly set up a rival yell.

But though both girls did their best, their screams were not very loud
and they were followed by a silence, so intense, that they shivered and
clung together in fear. The dark had fallen suddenly, and though only
about seven o'clock, in the thick woods, they could scarcely see each
other's faces.

Appalled by the awfulness of the situation, Dolly burst into tears, and
though not as violent as Dotty's, her sobs were deep and racking ones.

"Oh, don't, Dollyrinda, _don't_ cry so! I'll never forgive myself for
losing you in these awful woods!"

"You didn't lose me, any more than I lost you. We both lost each other;
I mean-- I guess I mean we're both lost!" and Dolly's tears fell afresh.

Then both girls gave way and cried desperately, till they could cry no
more, and with their stayed tears, they seemed to take a brighter
outlook.

"If we're lost," said Dolly, philosophically; "we must make the best of
it. Are there any wild animals, that would eat us up?"

"No, nothing of that sort. Nothing but squirrels and birds, and they
can't hurt us."

"Then there's nothing really to be afraid of--"

"No, I s'pose not. Only starving to death, and catching pneumonia and a
few little things like that."

"We won't starve right off, that's certain," said Dolly, practically;
"at least I won't, I'm so fat. But you poor little picked chicken, you
may!" And Dolly patted the thin little shivering shoulders that snuggled
up against her.

"I'm hungry now; I wish we'd saved the cookies."

"You can't be hungry, Dot, not _really_ hungry. Now, let's plan what to
do. Shall we walk on and take our chances or shall we camp here for the
night. It isn't so very different being here under the trees or under
our own trees in camp."

"'Tisn't very different, hey? Well I think there's all the difference in
the world! What are you going to sleep on? What are you going to cover
yourself with? Oh, you know we couldn't sleep anyway, when we're lost!"
and Dotty suddenly gave a vigorous yell which startled Dolly nearly out
of her wits. But realising what it was for, she quickly joined in, and
the two shrieked and shouted until it seemed to them that all the camps
in that region must hear them.

But only those who have tried it, know how thoroughly one may get lost
in the Adirondack woods in a very short time, or how loudly one may
scream without being heard even by the friends who are searching for
them.

And they were searching for the lost girls. When the two failed to
appear by half-past six, Mr. and Mrs. Rose became apprehensive for their
safety. They knew the girls had gone for a long ramble in the woods, but
it was the rule of the camp to be back for six o'clock supper, unless
due notice had been given.

"They're lost in the woods," Mrs. Rose declared, and though hoping the
contrary, Mr. Rose agreed with her.

They had telephoned to all the neighbouring camps and as no one had seen
the girls that afternoon they felt sure of what had happened.

"We must make search parties," said Bob, while Bert looked thoroughly
scared at the thought of his sister's danger. "It isn't so awfully
unusual, Bert. People get lost in the woods often, don't they, Dad?"

"Yes," replied Mr. Rose; "but it isn't often our little girls! Call up
Long Sam, Bob; tell him to bring lanterns."

Many of the neighbours volunteered assistance and inside of an hour
there were various search parties beating the woods for the missing
girls.

But Dotty, when thinking she was walking toward home had really been
walking in the opposite direction and the two girls were much farther
away from camp than their rescuers thought for.

"Nothing doing," said Jack Norris, despondently, as he met Bob and Bert
in the woods.

"Then we must keep at it," said Bert; "anything is better than giving
up."

The various searchers separated and came together again. They screamed
and shouted; they whistled and blew horns; their dogs barked, and it
seemed as if some of these noises must reach the girls' ears and bring
response calls.

But there was no success, and one by one the neighbours gave up and went
home.

But Mr. Rose and the two boys, with Long Sam, kept up the search all
through the night. They built fires occasionally, but dared not leave
them, and put them out as they went on.

At last, Long Sam seated himself dejectedly on a fallen log, his
extraordinary length of limb doubling up like a jacknife.

"'Tain't no use," he declared. "They ain't no livin' use o' trackin'
these woods any longer. We mought strike them girls in a minute and then
again we moughtn't run across 'em in a thousand years. Lord knows I'm
willin' to keep on, but I'm jest about tuckered out. And I put it to you
Mr. Rose, wouldn't it be better to rest a bit, and then push on?"

"Perhaps it would, Sam," and Mr. Rose's fingers worked nervously; "but I
couldn't stay still, I'd go crazy. I think I'll push on and take my
chances."

"Yes, and get yourself lost," grumbled Sam; "so's we'd have three to
hunt 'stidden o' two!"

"You are done up, Sam," said Bert Fayre, kindly. "You stay here, and we
three will drive ahead a little."

"Wal, I'll jest give one more howl, and see if that ketches anythin'."

Long Sam stood up on a log and gave a high pitched, long drawn out
shout, that seemed as if it must penetrate the farthest depths of the
forest.

"Now one, all together, like that," he said, and the four voices, joined
in a mighty shout and then waited in breathless silence.

"I heard 'em!" Sam cried out; "I heard 'em! Now all you keep quiet!" And
then Sam's voice rang out once more in a sharp short shriek. He listened
and then exclaimed; "Yep! I heard 'em! Come on!" And with long strides
he started anew into the blackness of the woods.

The others eagerly followed. They had heard no sound, but their ears had
not the marvellous acuteness of the Adirondack guide, and without a
word they hastened to keep up with Long Sam's pace.

"Sing out again!" Sam cried, several times, and at last the others could
hear the faint high shrieks of Dotty and Dolly.

It seemed an endless journey, but at last the search party came upon the
two girls.

"Oh, Father!" and Dotty threw herself into his arms, while Bert made a
grab for Dolly and Bob danced around the group in glee.

"You're a nice pair!" observed Long Sam, who was no respecter of
persons, when acting in his capacity of guide. "What d'you cut up such a
trick as this for? You might 'a'knowed you'd get lost!"

"Now Sam, don't scold," said Dolly, well knowing that the bluff chap was
really talking roughly to hide his glad emotion at the rescue.

"You ought to be scolded all the same, but I s'pose your folks is so
glad to get you back that they'll just make the world and all of you."

And Sam's prognostication was verified. Following Sam's lead the party
trudged through the woods, all so jubilant at the happy ending to their
search, that scolding was not even thought of. And indeed why should it
be? The girls had done nothing wrong, unless perhaps they had wandered a
little deeper into the forest than it was advisable to go without a
guide. But Dotty was positive it would never happen again. And when they
reached camp and found Mrs. Rose and Genie waiting for them and a most
appetising supper spread out by Maria, the two refugees found themselves
looked down upon as heroines and were quite willing to accept the role.




CHAPTER XVII

SURFWOOD


A couple of days after their forest experience the two girls made ready
to go to the seashore.

Secretly, Dolly was glad. She had enjoyed much of her stay at Camp
Crosstrees, but she had about concluded that "roughing it" was not
altogether to her taste. She had liked the gay parties round the camp
fires, the swift motor-boat trips and the jolly picnic feasts, but she
was not enthusiastically fond of long tramps up and down mountains and
the deprivation of many home comforts and luxuries. She said no word of
this to her kind hosts, but she welcomed the day that would take her
back to her own people and their usual summer abode.

Also there had been really unpleasant experiences, from her lonely first
night to that last awful night in the woods, and though these things
were nobody's fault, they remained in Dolly's memory as decidedly
undesirable pictures of her mountain trip.

Dotty Rose, all unconscious of Dolly's secret feelings, realised only
that they had had lots of gay times together and many occasions of
rollicking camp-life fun. Having spent many summers at Camp Crosstrees,
the Rose family had become attached to the place, and always looked
forward with eager anticipation to each successive trip.

Unlike Dolly, Bert Fayre loved it all. To him, roughing it was fun, and
he cared nothing at all for the city comforts that were missing. He
tramped the woods and went fishing, swimming and boating with the same
enjoyment of these sports that Bob Rose felt, and he was more than
delighted when Mrs. Rose invited him to spend the rest of August at the
camp while the girls went for their two weeks at the seashore.

So on the day of departure Dotty and Dolly bade good-bye to their
brothers and to Mrs. Rose and Genie, and in care of Mr. Rose started for
New York and thence down to Surfwood, a resort on the New Jersey coast,
where the Fayre family were staying at a hotel.

"Oh, don't you just hate to leave it?" exclaimed Dotty as the motor-boat
took them swiftly down the lake. "Good-bye, you dear old woods;
good-bye, you lovely lake. I shan't see you again till next summer."

For, as the children must begin school early in September, both
families would return to Berwick in about a fortnight.

Dolly did not entirely share Dotty's enthusiasm, but she realised the
wonderful beauty of the scene as she looked back at the lake with its
wooded shores and hills rising to the high mountains.

"It _is_ splendid!" she said, very honestly, as she gazed at the
beautiful landscape. "I'm afraid, Dot, that you won't have a good time
down at Surfwood. It's awfully different, you know."

"'Course I'll have a good time, if I'm visiting you. But, you see, we
were a whole month later than usual coming up here this summer, and now
to cut two weeks off the other end makes an awfully short season for
dear old Crosstrees. Why do they call it Surfwood, Dolly; are there any
woods there?"

"Yes, indeed; not far back from the beach there are lots of woods. But
all flat, of course; no hills like these."

"Well, you couldn't expect mountains and seashore together. I know we'll
have lovely times there, anyway I'd rather be with you than to stay up
here."

The girls had become inseparable friends and their stay in camp together
had strengthened the bonds and made them even more fond of each other
than they had been as neighbours. They were very different, but they
were learning to accept each other's differences, and in some ways they
frequently influenced one another's tastes or opinions.

"Good-bye, old lake!" Dolly called out again, as the motor-boat neared
its dock. "We'll see you next summer,--you will come up here again next
summer, won't you, Dolly?"

"We'll see when next summer comes," returned Dolly, laughing. "Perhaps
you won't like Surfwood a bit, and you won't want to go there next
summer, and if you don't, of course I won't come up here. You look
awfully well in that new suit, Dotty."

"Hope I do, for it doesn't feel very good. Collar's too stiff." Dotty
wriggled with a feeling of discomfort that the first wearing of a new
garment often brings. The girls both wore suits of blue serge, made
similarly, but not exactly alike; Dotty's being trimmed with black satin
and collar and cuffs of fine white embroidery, while Dotty's was
enlivened by accessories of bright plaid silk and tiny gilt buttons.

The trip was a pleasant one, and they reached New York next morning in
time for luncheon. This Mr. Rose gave them at an attractive restaurant
and the girls greatly enjoyed the novel scenes of the Metropolis.

"I just love to eat in a restaurant, don't you?" said Dolly, as she
lingered over her elaborate and complicated dessert.

"Yes, indeed; I love to look around and wonder who the people are. Only
they're all grownups. You don't see hardly any children or girls our
age."

"No," said Mr. Rose, "a public restaurant is no place for kiddies,
except on such an occasion as this, when I have to feed you somewhere.
But since you're here, you may as well enjoy yourselves. Do you want
some more little cakes?"

After due reflection, the girls concluded that they did, and the
fascinating tray of French confections was again offered for their
selection.

At the station where they were to take the train for Surfwood, Mr. Fayre
met them.

"Well," he exclaimed. "So I am to take the responsibility of these two
beautiful young ladies."

"Yes," rejoined Mr. Rose; "but I'm glad to tell you that they are not
really difficult to manage. They have behaved most properly all day and
honestly I hate to give them up. I know Camp Crosstrees will seem
deserted and desolate without these two little rays of sunshine."

After affectionate leavetakings, Mr. Rose departed and the two girls
went on with Mr. Fayre.

He was not of such a jolly nature as Mr. Rose, nor so inclined to talk
with the children.

He placed them in adjoining chairs in the parlour car, and after
supplying them with picture papers and candies, he seemed to consider
his responsibilities at an end, and taking his own seat, immediately
buried himself in his newspaper.

"Not much like the Adirondacks, is it?" said Dolly, as they whirled
along through the flat landscapes of New Jersey.

"No, of course not; you wouldn't expect it. How soon do we see the
ocean?"

"Very soon, now. We'll get to Surfwood about six, but we'll see the
ocean long before then, there are so many beach stations."

As they neared Surfwood, Mr. Fayre threw aside his papers and looked out
for the girls again. He was a most courteous man and politely assisted
them with their various belongings, treating them more as grown ladies
than as children.

"There they are!" he cried, as the train stopped at the picturesque
little station and they spied a big motor car in which Mrs. Fayre and
Trudy were sitting.

Trudy was looking lovely in her light summer costume and she warmly
welcomed the travellers as they got into the motor.

"How brown you both are," said Mrs. Fayre, kissing the girls; "a nice
healthy tan, and very becoming! Did you hate to leave your camp, Dotty?
and I suppose you, too, Dolly, became a devotee of mountain life."

"We did have lovely times, Mother, and I expect Dot was sorry to give it
up, but I persuaded her."

"You'll have lovely times here, too," promised Trudy, smiling at them;
"I'll see to that."

The car stopped at the entrance to a very large hotel. The broad
verandas were filled with people, gaily dressed, and gathered in
laughing, chatting groups. Between them and the ocean was a broad
boardwalk also filled with people.

"Come along, girls," said Mrs. Fayre, and Dotty and Dolly followed her
across the veranda and into a large entrance hall. It was very
beautiful, with glistening white and gold decorations, a thick
moss-green velvet carpet and tall palms round the walls. Then followed a
bewildering succession of gorgeous rooms, and finally they went up in an
elevator.

"Here we are," and Mrs. Fayre led the two girls into a large and
handsomely furnished suite.

"This is our general sitting room," she went on, "and this is your
bedroom, right next to Trudy's."

They entered a large room, with two brass beds and attractive
appointments of all sorts. The chairs and lounges were covered with gay
chintz and there was a long deep window seat from which, across a
balcony filled with flowers, they could see the ocean.

"How perfectly lovely!" cried Dotty; "not much like our little rooms at
camp, Doll. Oh, I'm sure I shall be very happy here. It's awfully kind
of you, Mrs. Fayre, to invite me."

"I'm very glad to have you, dear, and I only hope you'll enjoy it as
much as Dolly did her stay with you. We can't give you the wild, free
life of a mountain camp, but we're going to do all we can to interest
and amuse you. But I'm not sure that you will like the plan for this
evening. As your things aren't unpacked, I thought you two wouldn't dine
downstairs with us to-night, but would have a nice little dinner sent up
here and served in the sitting-room."

"Oh, goody!" cried Dolly; "that's a lot more fun. I don't feel like
dressing up for dinner to-night and I think that's a lovely plan. Don't
you, Dot?"

As a matter of fact, Dotty would have preferred to go downstairs, for
she was impatient to see more of the big hotel and the gay people. But
she politely acquiesced, and Mrs. Fayre bustled away, saying she would
see them again after dinner.

"Now we'll have a lovely time, Dotsy, all to ourselves," Dolly said, as
she flew around the room arranging things to suit herself.

A trim maid appeared to assist in any way needed, and the girls were
glad to change their travelling clothes, and, after a refreshing bath,
to don their pretty kimonos and boudoir caps, that Trudy had left in
readiness for them.

"Trudy's a trump!" cried Dolly. "See these heavenly things she has laid
out for us! A pink silk room-gown for you and a blue one for me, with
caps to match. We share Trudy's bathroom, you see, so you can have this
glass shelf for your things and I'll take this one for mine. I guess
that's the dinner coming now, and then our trunks will come, and we can
put our things away."

A very attractive little dinner was served in the sitting-room and the
two girls sat down to it with a feeling as if they were "Playing house."

"We're to dine with the grownups after to-night," said Dolly; "new thing
for me, 'cause always before I've had my supper in the children's
dining-room. But Mother says, now I'm fifteen, I can always dine with
them, unless they have special company and then we'll have ours up here
like this. Isn't this salad good?"

"Perfectly lovely. But, somehow, I feel so queer. It's such a sudden
change from the camp table and Maria's flap-jacks."

Dolly laughed. "Yes, it is different. But I like that, Dot, the sudden
change I mean. Crosstrees was just right in every way for mountain and
camp doings. Now this seashore stunt is altogether different, but I like
this, too. And I think it's nice for us to have both kinds, one right
after the other."

"So do I," said Dotty, as she contentedly ate her frozen pudding.




CHAPTER XVIII

DOLL OVERBOARD!


The next morning Dotty and Dolly went with the Fayre family to breakfast
in the hotel dining-room.

Very fresh and pretty the girls looked, Dolly in a pale blue linen and
Dotty in pink linen with a black velvet belt.

The great dining-room was large and airy, and the sunshine and sea
breeze came in at the open windows.

The Fayres' table was pleasantly placed overlooking the ocean, and
Dotty's black eyes roved round the room in delighted appreciation of the
surroundings.

"Oh!" she exclaimed suddenly, "there are the twin Browns! Did you know
they were here, Dolly?"

"I thought they would be; they come here 'most every summer." And Dolly
smiled across the room at Tod and Tad, who bobbed their heads and
grinned in response.

"I'm glad they're here," Dolly went on; "it's so nice to have some one
you know to start you getting acquainted."

"It won't take you long to get acquainted," said Trudy, smiling, "for
all the children of your age who are here are waiting for you. I've told
several that you were coming, and I expect the Brown boys have made all
sorts of plans for your entertainment. We won't bathe to-day until after
luncheon; you can spend the morning on the beach or go for a motor ride
with me, whichever you like."

As the girls hesitated over their decision, the Brown twins came over to
their table and greeted them gaily.

"Thought you girls would never get here," said Tod, though really it
mattered little which of them spoke, for they were so precisely alike it
was impossible to tell them apart.

"Jolly to see you again," said Tad; "do come out on the beach with us as
soon as you finish your breakfast, won't you?"

"Yes," said Dolly; "I guess we won't go with you, Trude, this morning; I
want Dotty to get acquainted with the ocean."

And so when the girls left the dining-room, they found not only the
Browns, but several other young people waiting on the veranda to escort
them down to the beach.

There were general introductions, and as they went down the long flight
of the hotel steps, Dolly found herself walking beside a girl named
Pauline Clifton.

Pauline was rather tall and seemed to have an air of authority. Though
not exactly pretty, she was striking-looking, with brown eyes and hair
and a complexion of rosy tan. She wore a white dress and a red sweater
and white stockings with red shoes, and she put her hand through Dolly's
arm with a decided air of possession.

"I like you already," she said, "and I'm sure we're going to be chums.
Are you rich?"

The question struck Dolly as funny, and she turned to look into
Pauline's face. But the brown eyes were serious, and evidently the
Clifton girl wished an answer and was prepared to rate her new friend
accordingly.

"No," said Dolly, returning the frank gaze; "we're not rich. We live in
a small town, and we have about everything we want, but I'm sure we're
not what you'd call rich. Are you?"

It would never have occurred to Dolly to ask this question, but it
seemed to follow naturally after the other's.

"Oh, yes," Pauline said, "we're awfully rich. We live in New York, and
my father has a yacht and lots of motor cars and everything."

"I should think you'd have your own summer home, then, and not come to a
hotel."

"We have; two of them. One on Long Island and one up in the mountains.
But Father takes freaks. I haven't any mother, and he jumps around
wherever he feels like it. So he picked this place for August and here
we are. There's only me and Carroll, that's my brother. He's that boy on
ahead, with his cap on the back of his head."

"Who looks after you; your father?"

"Yes; but he isn't here much. We have a kind of a nurse-governess; that
is, she used to be our nurse when we were little and she has always
stayed with us. She's a funny old thing, Liza her name is, but she can
manage us better than anybody else. Father tried a French governess for
me and a German Frauelein, and Carroll has a different tutor about every
month, but Liza just stays on through it all. I know all about you from
the Brown boys. Aren't they ducks! They told us about you before you
came, and about Dotty Rose. Isn't she pretty? You're awfully pretty,
too, and you two look lovely together."

Pauline rattled on, scarcely giving Dolly a chance to reply to her
observations. Meantime the group had come to a standstill and were
selecting a nice place on the beach to spend the morning hours.

Dotty was enchanted with her first real experience of the seashore.

She sat down in the sand with the rest, but quickly made her way to the
front of the group and as near as possible to the edge of the waves in
her effort to get an unobstructed view of the ocean. The surf was
rolling in and the great breakers filled her with awe and delight.

"Come farther back, Dotty," Tad Brown called out, "or you'll get caught
by some of those swells."

Dotty drew back just in time to escape a wetting from a big wave whose
white foam rolled up the sands to her very feet.

"Isn't it wonderful!" she cried; "I could sit right here all day and
never take my eyes off those waves!"

But the sight was not so novel to the others, and they talked and
laughed and threw sand at each other and built forts and watched for
passing steamers and made plans for future amusements.

"That's the worst of the seashore," said Pauline, discontentedly;
"there's so little to do. Just walk the boardwalk or sit on the sand or
bathe; that's about all."

"Nonsense, Polly," said her brother Carroll; "there's lots else to do.
Going motoring or walking in the woods, and there's a bowling alley at
the hotel and tennis courts--there's millions of things to do, only
you're such an old grouch you never see the fun of anything."

Pauline paid no attention to this brotherly remark, but said to Dotty,
"Come on, let's go for a walk; I want to get acquainted with you."

"Get acquainted here," said Dotty, laughing. "I'm too comfortable to
move."

The Brown boys had banked up a big hill of sand behind Dotty, and she
leaned back against it, still fascinated by the wonderful blue of the
distant ocean sparkling in the sunlight and the mad onrush of the great
breakers as they dashed on the shore.

"Then you come," said Pauline to Dolly; "let's go off by ourselves and
walk along toward the casino and the shops.

"All right," said Dolly, who was tired of sitting on the sand and quite
ready for a walk. Moreover, she was curious to know more of Pauline. She
wasn't sure she should like a girl who asked her point blank if she
were rich, and yet Pauline didn't seem ostentatious or vulgar, but was
quick-witted and full of fun.

The two walked away, leaving the rest of the crowd, some six or eight of
them, on the beach.

As the morning passed, others joined the group and some went away, but
Dotty remained, still unable to tear herself away from the glorious sea.

"I say, Dot Rose," Tod Brown exclaimed, "you _are_ stuck on that big
pond, aren't you? But there are other days coming when you can gaze at
it. Come on, now, and let's do something. I'll race you to the end of
boardwalk."

"What's there, when you get to the end?" demanded Dotty.

"Nothing much, but some fishermen's shacks and nets and things. Come on
and see it. The fishermen are a queer-looking bunch and not very
good-natured, but it's fun to tease them. Come on, anyhow."

Dotty got up, somewhat cramped by long sitting, and was glad after all
for a brisk walk in the sunshine. They didn't race, but swung along at a
good pace, Dotty with her eyes still seaward.

Nearly at the end of the boardwalk, on a bench, was a large and handsome
French doll. It was dressed as a baby, with a long white frock, a lacy
cap and a knitted pink sacque.

"Oh, look at that!" cried Dotty. "I know whose it is; it belongs to that
little golden-haired child at the hotel."

"That's so," said Tod. "The kiddy must have left it here. I saw her
lugging it around this morning, and it was about all she could do to
carry it. Shall we take it back to her?"

"Yes," said Dotty; "I'd just as lieve carry it."

"You bet you'll carry it, if either of us does. Do you s'pose I'd go
round lugging a wax infant?"

"It isn't wax," said Dotty, picking it up; "it's light as a feather.
It's one of those celluloid things, but I never saw such a big one
before. Yes, I'll take it back to little Yellowtop. If it's left here
somebody will steal it. Shall we turn back now?"

"No; come on to the end of the walk and let's have a look at the
fishermen."

They went on and soon reached their destination. It was a picturesque
place, but the cabins were deserted and only a few empty boats were in
sight. The beach was littered with old fish nets and various sorts of
rubbish, while a few piers ran out into the sea.

"Everybody's gone fishing," said Tod. "Nothing much to see here; let's
go back."

"Let's go out to the end of that pier," said Dotty. "There's no danger,
is there?"

"Danger? No! But nothing to see out there. Come along, though, if you
like."

Good-naturedly, Tod went with Dotty along the old pier. Reaching the
very end, they sat down for a few moments, their feet hanging over the
edge while they clung to the uprights.

"Oh, isn't it grand!" cried Dotty, looking down into the blue water as
it rippled against the piles at some distance below.

"Don't fall in," warned Tod.

"Never fear, I'm not that kind of a goose! I love it, but I'm scared to
death all the time, and I keep a good grip on this rope."

"That's right. Oh, here comes a fishing-boat; see, 'way out there in the
distance. We'll wait for that to get in, and then we'll go."

The two stood up, and hanging onto the ropes, leaned far over to see the
boat as it came in.

A sudden breeze made Dotty cling closer to the upright she was leaning
against, and as Tod put out his hand to steady her, somehow or other the
big doll dropped into the water.

"Oh, my goodness!" exclaimed Dotty in dismay, "there goes the baby's
doll! What a pity. Can we get it, Tod?"

"I don't know. If it doesn't drift the wrong way, maybe the fishermen
will pick it up as they come in. If I had a hook and line I could hook
it up."

"Don't lean over so far, Tod; you'll fall in," and Dotty tried to hold
back the boy as he leaned over the edge of the pier. "Oh, see, there's a
fisherman or somebody, coming out of that cabin. Maybe he'll bring a
pole or something and help us get the doll. Ask him to."

Tod shouted at the man, who had just appeared in the cabin door. It was
some distance and the boy's voice did not carry well over the breakers
between them, but finally Tod succeeded in attracting the man's
attention.

"Bring a pole!" Tod shouted, "or fish line. Help us!"

"Hey?" shouted the man, his hand to his ear. "What's the matter?"

"Doll overboard!" Tod yelled back, but the breeze was off shore and the
man could not get the words. But he saw the two children as they pointed
out on the water, and then, as he saw the big doll, he very naturally
thought it was a live baby and immediately he became excited. He ran
back into the cabin and returned with a boat-hook. He jumped into a boat
and endeavoured to put out to sea through the breakers. But at every
attempt, the waves dashed him back on the shore. Determinedly, he tried
again and again, and finally succeeded in getting beyond the surf,
though he was now at some distance from the pier. He began to row
desperately, but made little headway toward the floating doll.

"He thinks it's a live baby!" cried Tod, roaring with laughter. "Oh,
Dotty, what a joke! Keep it up! Pretend it is."

Willingly enough, Dotty caught at the idea and began wringing her hands
and screaming frantically.

"Oh, save her, save her!" she yelled, tearing around the pier like a mad
person, while Tod, hanging on to a post, leaned far over the water and
waved his hand frantically to the boatman.

The fisherman redoubled his efforts and slowly drew nearer the floating
doll, whose long white dress was whirled and tossed about in the eddy.

The boatload of fishermen which they had seen in the distance drew
nearer, and the man in the row-boat communicated to them by shouts and
signs and made them aware of the catastrophe.

The incoming fishermen saw the baby in the water, and saw the two
children screaming and wailing on the pier, and they put forward with
all speed to make a rescue.

Tod and Dotty were really doubled up with laughter, but pretended they
were in agonies of grief as the two boats made desperate attempts to
reach the drowning child.

"The old idiots!" exclaimed Tod; "they might know that a live baby
wouldn't float around like that. It would have sunk long ago."

"Of course it would," agreed Dotty. "Won't they be mad when they get
it!"

The fishermen, having had little experience with French dolls the size
of live babies, assumed, of course, that it was a real child in the
water, and they wasted no time in marvelling as to why it should
continue to ride blithely on top of the waves. They simply put forth
every effort to reach the white object, whatever it might be, but the
perversity of wind and wave continued to thwart them.

At last, however, very near shore, the fishermen drew near enough to
grab the doll and draw it into their boat, just as they rowed in on top
of a huge breaker and beached near the pier.

Tod and Dotty ran swiftly to them, eager to see their chagrin and
dismay at having rescued the doll.

The men were all out on the beach and they showed a belligerent
demeanour as the children appeared.

"Ye little wretches," cried one big rawboned man, "what d'ye mean by
foolin' us like that?"

His manner even more than his words were distinctly threatening, and
Dotty was scared, but Tod answered him directly.

"We didn't fool you! We dropped the doll in the water by accident, and
we sung out there was a doll overboard and we asked a man on shore to
help us get it. If you people thought it was a live baby, that isn't our
fault!"

"That don't go down!" and another man stepped forward and shook his fist
at the children. "Ye know right well ye fooled us a-purpose."

"We did not!" and Dotty, her temper now aroused, stamped her foot at
him. "We told the man it was a doll, but if he couldn't hear us, we
couldn't help that."

"Now, now, little lady, ye know better." The big brawny fisherman came
nearer to Dotty and scowled at her. "I seen you jumping around there and
play-actin' like you was wild with grief! Don't deny it, now! Ye know
well enough I say true!"

He glowered at Dotty, and as he came nearer to her his big fierce eyes
frightened her and she quickly stepped behind Tod.

"Don't you speak to the lady like that!" the boy cried. "If you've
anything to say, say it to me. I called to the man for help to get that
doll out of the water. It belongs to a little friend of ours and we want
to take it to her."

"Well, ye'll never take it!" and the fierce-eyed man picked up the wet
and dripping doll, and with a mighty sweep of his long arm, he flung it
far out to sea. The deed was merely an impulse of his angry wrath at
having been fooled by the children, and he faced them with a defiant
air.

"You had no right to do that!" cried Tod; "go right out in your boat and
get it."

"Ha! ha!" laughed the man with a loud, boisterous chuckle. "Go out and
get it, is it? Not much I'll not go out and get it! And, what's more,
I'll report you two to the life-saving station people, and I'll have you
arrested for false pretences."

Tod was pretty sure that this was all a bluff, but the other men
gathered about and promised the same thing. So threatening were they,
that Dotty was thoroughly scared, and Tod, though not really afraid of
arrest, began to think that these men could make things very unpleasant
for them. He knew by hearsay of the rough manners and ugly tempers of
this particular lot of fishermen. He had heard stories of their dislike
for the summer guests, who sometimes visited them out of curiosity and
looked upon them patronisingly.

Tod realised that nothing incensed their rough natures like being made
the subject of a practical joke and this, though unpremeditatedly, he
and Dotty had done. He thought best to drop his indignant air and try to
propitiate them.

"Oh, come now," he said; "honest Injun, as man to man, I didn't mean to
fool you. We dropped the doll in the water and I yelled for help. Now,
I'll own up that when you fellows seemed to think it was a live baby, we
did kind of help along a little but we didn't mean any harm. S'pose I
give you a dollar to forget it."

Tod spoke in a frank and manly way, and his good-natured face ought to
have evoked a pleasant response. And it did from most of the men, but
the fierce black-eyed one, who seemed to be the leader, was possessed of
a sense of greed, and his one idea regarding the "stuck-up summer
people" was to extract money from them whenever possible.

"A dollar," he said, with an unpleasant sneer; "not enough, young sir!
Show us ten dollars, and we'll try to forget the insult you offered us."

"I didn't offer you an insult, and I haven't ten dollars with me, and I
wouldn't pay it to you if I had!"

Tod was angry now, and his eyes blazed at the rude injustice of the
demand.

But the fierce-browed man was not abashed. "You gimme ten dollars or
I'll make trouble for you! If you haven't got it, you can get it. Gimme
your word of honour--you look like a gentleman--to bring me that ten,
and I'll promise to make no trouble."

Tod hesitated. Had he been alone, he would have refused them at once,
but he felt that he had the responsibility of Dotty's welfare, and he
paused to reflect. The men were very rude and uncontrolled, and Tod
didn't know what further menace they might offer.

As he hesitated, the big man spoke more threateningly. "Be quick, young
man; give us your word, or we'll put you under lock and key for awhile
to think it over."

This speech was accompanied by growls of assent from other members of
the group, and one or two stepped forward as if to carry out the
suggestion.




CHAPTER XIX

SPENDING THE PRIZE MONEY


"Hoo--hoo!" called a gay voice, and Tod and Dotty turned to see Dolly
Fayre flying toward them. She was alone and out of breath from running,
but laughing gaily as she joined them.

"I ran away from Tad," she cried. "He went to get some candy, and just
for fun, I scooted off. And somebody had said you came this way, Dot, so
I followed just for fun. Why, what's the matter?"

Dolly looked in amazement at the group of angry men and at the
half-frightened, half-indignant faces of Dotty and Tod.

"Matter enough," Tod said; "you keep out of it, Dolly. In fact, you
girls go back to the hotel and leave me to fix things up with these
men." Then he suddenly remembered his desire for an amicable settlement,
and he said pleasantly, "I guess we can come to terms after the ladies
have gone."

"I guess we can't!" said the black-browed man, in a surly tone. "You go
back to the hotel, young man, and get that ten dollars, and I'll keep
the young ladies here safe until you come back."

"Not much I won't!" cried Tod angrily. "Run on back, girls. Go on--beat
it!"

"No, you don't!" and the big man stepped forward and laid his hand on
Dotty's shoulder.

"Take your hand off that lady! Don't you dare to touch her," and Tod's
eyes blazed as he flung himself toward the big man.

"What is it all about? What is the matter?" exclaimed Dolly, who
couldn't understand what she had supposed was a good-natured chat with
the fishermen.

"They want us to pay ten dollars," said Dotty, indignantly, "and unless
we do, they're going to lock us up."

"Lock us up nothing!" shouted Tod, who was unable to decide himself what
was the best thing to do. The arrival of Dolly had complicated his
dilemma, for now he had two girls to protect instead of one. He wished
Tad had come with her, for the twins were big and brawny for their years
and could have made a fair showing of rebellion against the injustice of
the fishermen.

Dolly considered the matter gravely. She looked from Dotty and Tod to
the rude, unkempt men, and after a few moments' thought she made up her
mind. Deliberately she opened a little chatelaine bag that hung at her
belt and took from it a ten dollar gold piece. It was her share of the
cake prize, for Mr. Rose had changed the twenty dollar gold piece into
two tens for the girls.

She looked at the big man with scorn, and holding out the gold piece,
she said in cool, haughty tones, "Here is your money; please do not
detain my friends any longer."

"Don't you do it, Dolly," cried Tod; "it's an outrage!"

"I know it's an outrage," Dolly said, calmly, "but I prefer to pay the
money rather than parley with these people."

Dolly's air of superiority would have been funny, had not all concerned
been so deeply in earnest.

"Hoity-Toity!" said the big, ugly man, "you're a fine young miss, you
are! You treat us like the dirt under your feet, do you? Well, if so
be's you pay our claim, we ain't objectin' to your manner. Be as high
and mighty as you like, but give us that there coin."

Without a further word, Dolly dropped the gold piece into the man's
grimy, outstretched hand, and the three turned and walked away back to
civilisation.

"I'm up and down sorry that I couldn't get you out of that mess better,"
said Tod, as they went along the boardwalk. "Of course, I'll pay you
back the money, Dolly, only I felt mighty cheap to have you advance it.
But I had only three or four dollars with me, not expecting a hold-up
this morning."

"I don't think you ought to have paid it, Doll," said Dotty.

"'Tisn't a question of ought to," said Tod, seriously. "That's a rough,
bad gang. I've heard of them before. I don't know what's the matter with
them, but they're grouchy. All the other fishermen around here are
fairly good-natured, but this lot is noted for ugly temper and they
especially dislike and resent the summer people. I forgot all this, and
of course Dotty didn't know it. But I didn't think, and when they
supposed the baby was alive, I went ahead with the game without
realising it meant trouble."

"Well, it's all right now," said Dolly, "and I was glad enough to give
up my ten to ransom you two captives. Of course you won't pay it back to
me, Tod, but you can each pay me a third of it and that'll square us all
up."

"We'll each pay half," said Dotty, "there's no reason you should pay
anything, Doll. You weren't in on this game. And here's another thing,
I'm going to buy a new doll for that little girl. You see it's the same
as if I stole hers."

"Not at all," said Tod. "She had lost her doll, anyhow. She must have
left it there on the bench, and if we hadn't picked it up, somebody
would have stolen it sooner or later."

"We can't be sure of that," said Dotty. "And anyway I took her doll, and
I lost it for her, and it's up to me to get her another. And that's all
there is about that. I've got my gold piece with me, too, and I'm going
straight down to the shop and get the doll now."

Dotty was determined, and so the three went to the shop. There was only
one place in Surfwood where toys and fancy goods were sold. But this
shop was stocked with a high grade of goods and Dotty had no trouble in
finding a doll nearly like the one which was now doubtless afloat on the
wide ocean. The doll cost five dollars, but Dotty persisted in buying
it, as she declared her conscience would never be easy unless she did.

"Now let's settle this thing up," said Tod, as they emerged from the
store. "I find I have as much as five dollars with me, counting chicken
feed, and I'll pay this to you, Dolly, as my half of the ransom you put
up."

"And here's my five," said Dotty, handing over the bill she had received
in change for the doll.

Dolly looked dismayed. "Why, good gracious, Dot, then here am I with ten
dollars, and you with nothing of our prize money! I won't stand that for
a minute, you take this five back, and then we'll be even all round. I
rather guess if you get in a scrape like that, I've got a right to help
you out."

"Well, I rather guess," said Tod, "that when we tell our folks about
this matter there'll be something doing. I think those men ought to be
shown up and punished."

"Oh, no," said Dolly. "They're an awful gang. I've heard Father say so,
and I'm sure it's better to let them alone than to stir up any further
trouble."

And as it turned out the elders concerned in the matter shared Dolly's
opinion.

The story was told and Mr. Fayre and Mr. Brown talked over the matter
and said they would take it in charge and the children need think no
more about it, but they were directed to keep away from that locality in
the future and confine their escapades to such portions of the beach
and the boardwalk as were inhabited by civilised crowds.

Money matters were straightened out in a way acceptable to all
concerned, by the simple method of the two fathers' remuneration of all
that had been paid out, and so Dolly, Dotty and Tod found themselves
possessed of the same finances they had before the unfortunate episode
occurred.

"Dat not my dolly," declared the Chrysanthemum-headed baby, shaking her
yellow curls as Dotty offered her the new doll.

"I know it," Dotty said, smiling as she knelt beside the child; "but let
me tell you. I found your dolly sitting all alone on a bench, and I was
going to bring her home to you. And then,--well, and then, do you know
that dolly went out to sea, way out to sea--and I think she's going to
Europe as fast as she can get there. And so, I've brought you this other
dolly, which is just as pretty."

Goldenhead looked up into the smiling black eyes, and after a moment's
hesitation agreed that the new dolly was just as pretty as the departed
one, and graciously accepted it.

Goldenhead's mother demurred at the whole transaction, but Mrs. Fayre
insisted that the child accept the new dolly and so the matter was
settled.

"Tell me everything all about it!" cried Pauline Clifton, rushing to
meet the two D's on the hotel veranda. "Wasn't it thrilling? Such an
experience! My, I wish I had been with you! And Tod Brown was perfectly
fine, a real hero!"

"Didn't do a thing," growled Tod, and Tad who was beside him, said,
"Wish I'd been there! then we could have sent the girls flying home and
stood up to those toughs!"

"Aren't you splendid!" cried Pauline, but Dolly said, in her practical
way, "It wouldn't have been splendid at all, it would have been very
foolish for you two boys to think of fighting that crowd of great ugly
men! It was a case, where the only thing to do, was to submit to their
demand and come away. My father says we did just right."

"Of course, it was the only thing to do," said Tod, "but to me it seemed
awful galling."

"Well, we'll never go there again," said Dotty; "and it ought to be a
lesson to us not to play jokes on people."

"A lesson that _you'll_ never learn," said Dolly, laughing; "you'll have
to have worse experiences than that, Dotty Rose, before you stop playing
jokes on people."

"Is that so?" cried Carroll Clifton; "then you're a girl after my own
heart. I love to play jokes. Let's put our heads together and work up a
good one on somebody."

"Well, this joke isn't on us, anyway," said Dotty, laughing. "We have
our ten dollars back again, Dolly, and I say we spend them before we get
a chance to lose them again."

"But we're going to spend those for something special. You know they are
our cake prizes."

"Oho!" cried Carroll, "did you girls take a prize at a cake walk?"

"Not a cake walk, but we took a prize for making cake," Dotty exclaimed;
"and I say, Dolly, let's buy something in that shop where we bought the
doll. They have beautiful things there of all sorts."

"Come on," said Pauline, "let's all go, and we'll help you pick out
things."

So the two Cliftons and the two Browns and the two D's all started for
the shop. It was that sort of summer resort bazaar that holds all kinds
of fancy knick-knacks for frivolous purchasers.

"Going to get things alike or different?" asked Tod Brown, as they went
in.

"Different, of course," said Tad, "Dot and Dolly never like things
alike."

"Don't you really?" said Pauline; "how funny! I thought you were such
great friends you always had everything just alike."

"No," said Dolly, "we have everything just different. You see our tastes
are just about opposite, I expect that's why we're such friends."

Dotty and Carroll were already studying the things at the jewellery
counter, while Dolly was slowly but surely making toward the book
department.

"Get a picture," suggested Tad, "here are some good water colours of the
sea."

"And here's a coloured photograph of that very fishing place where you
were at," said Pauline.

All sorts of ridiculous suggestions were made, and the boys offered
jumping-jacks and comical toys to the two spenders.

"Why don't you get a lot of little things, instead of one big thing?"
said Pauline; "here are some darling slipper buckles, and I think these
little flower vases are lovely."

"No," said Dotty, decidedly, "we're each going to get one thing and
spend the whole ten dollars for it. And it must be something that we can
keep and use."

"I've made up my mind," said Dolly, calmly; "I'm just looking around for
fun, but I know perfectly well what I'm going to get. Do you, Dotty?"

"Yes, of course. I decided before I was in the store a minute."

"What?" chorused the others.

"This is mine," and Dotty went back to the jewellery counter and pointed
out a silver-gilt vanity-case.

"Well, of all ridiculous things!" cried Tod; "you might as well have let
the fishermen keep your money!"

"'Tisn't ridiculous at all!" Dotty retorted. "Mother told me I could get
exactly what I wanted, and I want this dreadfully. I've wanted one for a
long time. Don't you think it's pretty, Pauline?"

"Yes," returned Pauline, carelessly. "I have two of them, one real gold
and one silver. But I hardly ever carry them."

"Oh, well, you can have whatever you want," said Dotty, good-naturedly;
"but this is a treat to me, and I think it's lovely, though of course
not grand like yours."

So Dotty bought the vanity-case, and then the crowd followed Dolly to
see what might be her choice.

Straight to the bookshelves she went, and pointed to a set of fairy
stories. They were half a dozen or more volumes bound in various colours
and the set was ten dollars.

"I've been just crazy for these books," she said, with a sigh of
satisfaction. "I would have had them for my birthday, only we had our
rooms fixed up; and the minute I spotted them I knew I should buy them."

"What a foolishness!" exclaimed Carroll; "how can you read fairy tales?"

"She loves them," said Dotty; "she'd rather read a fairy story than go
to a party, any day."

Dolly laughed and dimpled, but stuck to her decision and soon the crowd
left the shop, carrying the important purchases with them.

Back at the hotel, they were exhibited, and Mrs. Fayre and Trudy smiled
a little at the selection, but said they were glad that the girls had
bought what they wanted.




CHAPTER XX

GOOD-BYE, SUMMER!


Days at Surfwood passed happily and swiftly. Dolly and Dotty often
discussed the matter and always agreed that camp life and hotel life
were equally pleasant, though in opposite ways. And if Dotty sometimes
sighed for the careless freedom of the life in the woods or if Dolly
felt in her secret heart that she preferred the more formal conventions
of the big hotel, they soon forgot such thoughts in the joys of the
moment.

There was seabathing every day and automobile trips and all sorts of
beach fun and frolic.

The time was drawing near for them to go back to Berwick and settle down
again to the routine of home life.

Among the last of the season's gaieties there was to be a children's
dance in the big ball-room. This was a regular summer feature and all
the guests of the hotel did their best to make the occasion attractive.

All under sixteen were considered children, and even some of the little
tots were allowed to attend the festival. Fancy dress was not
obligatory, but many of the young people chose to wear gay costumes.

The two Cliftons, the Brown twins and Dolly and Dotty had come to be a
clique by themselves, and were always together.

"Let's dress alike for the silly party," said Clifford, who liked to
appear scornful of such amusements, but who was really very fond of
them.

"All right; how shall we dress?" said Dotty, who was always ready for
dressing up.

"A shepherdess costume is the prettiest thing you can wear," said
Pauline. "I have one with me, and it's lovely. S'pose you two girls copy
that, and then have the boys rig up something like it."

"Mother will make us any old togs we want," said Tad, "It isn't a
masquerade, is it?"

"Oh, no," said Dolly; "just fancy dress, you know, if you choose, and
lots of them just wear regular party clothes."

"I'd like to be a shepherdess, all right," said Tad with a comical
simpering smile.

"Now don't you make fun of my plan!" said Pauline; "we three girls can
be shepherdesses, and you three boys can be shepherds. Shepherd lads are
lovely, with pipes and things."

"Clay pipes?" asked Tod.

"No, goosy; pipes to play on. Long ones with ribbons; oh, 'twill be
lovely!" and Pauline clapped her hands. "Liza will make you a suit,
Carroll, and then the other boys can have it copied."

There was much further discussion and the elders were called into
consultation, but finally Pauline's plan was adopted.

Her shepherdess' frock was dainty and beautiful. The Dresden flowered
overdress was of silk, looped above a quilted satin petticoat, and a
black velvet bodice laced up over a fine white muslin chemisette. A
broad brimmed hat with roses and a be-ribboned shepherdess' crook
completed the picture.

"It's perfectly lovely, Pauline," said Trudy, when she saw the dress,
"but we'll copy it for the girls in less expensive materials. Flowered
organdy will be very pretty for the panniers, and sateen or silkoline
will do for the skirts. The hats can be easily managed, and I'm sure we
can get the crooks down at the shop; if not, Dad will bring them from
New York."

"You're a brick, Trudy," and Dotty flung her arms around the
kind-hearted girl. "It's awful good of you to do mine as well as
Dolly's."

"Oh, Mother will help me, and it'll be easy as anything. I love to do
it."

Long suffering Liza was accustomed to do as she was told, so she set to
work to evolve a shepherd costume for Carroll. She was skilful with her
needle and out of sateen and some gay ribbons she constructed a suit
that was picturesque and jaunty even if not entirely the sort a shepherd
lad might choose for daily wear.

A soft white silk shirt with a broad open collar and a soft silk tie was
very becoming to good-looking Carroll, and the pipes, so necessary to
the character, were bought in New York by Carroll's father.

Mrs. Brown was quite willing to have this suit copied for her twins, and
Tod and Tad, though growling at the idea of being "dressed up like Jack
Puddings," were secretly rather pleased with the becoming garb.

"Suppose we make the caps for the boys," said Pauline, "I know just how
and I think 'twill be fun."

The others agreed, and the day before the dance, the three girls
pre-empted a cosy corner of the big veranda and sat down to work.

Copying a picture, it was not difficult to make the type of cap that
would harmonise with the shepherds' suits.

Pauline cut them out and each of the girls sewed one.

"You haven't made the head-bands big enough, Pauline," said Dolly, as
she tried an unfinished cap on her own curly head.

"They're plenty big enough," Pauline retorted, "the boys haven't such a
mop of hair as you have."

"I know that; but even allowing for that I don't think they could ever
get their heads into these small bands. Where are they, let's fit them
on them."

"They've gone off for the morning. I tell you, Dolly, these bands are
all right. Don't you s'pose I know anything? Of course I measured them
before I began. Some people think they know it all!"

Pauline was quick-tempered and Dolly was not, so the latter made no
response to the somewhat rude speech, and the girls sewed a few moments
in silence.

Then as Dotty began to sew her cap to its band, she echoed Dolly's
words: "Why, Polly, these bands aren't big enough, that's so!" and Dotty
tried to put the cap on her own head.

"How silly you are!" exclaimed Pauline, angrily. "Do you suppose your
head with all that hair isn't bigger than the boys' heads without any
hair to speak of? I tell you I measured these bands and they're plenty
big enough. If you girls want to be so disagreeable about it, you can
make the caps yourselves."

"It's no use finishing these things," declared Dotty, "for the boys
can't get their heads into them! Why they're hardly big enough for a six
year old kid!"

"I tell you they are. I guess I know. I measured one on my own brother
and his head is just as big as the Browns' heads are."

"You've got the big-head yourself!" Dotty flashed back at her, "you
think you know everything, Pauline Clifton! I'm just _sure_ the boys
can't wear these caps, but we'll go on and finish them, since you say
they're big enough."

"They _are_ big enough! there's no reason why we shouldn't finish them!"
and Pauline's cheeks grew red as she sewed hurriedly on the cap she
held.

"Well, don't let's quarrel about it," said Dolly, who had not changed
her opinion, but who wanted to make peace. "If Pauline says they're all
right, Dotty, let's go on and sew them. She must know, if she measured
Carroll's head."

"Of course I know!" and Pauline scowled at the other two girls. "If
you'd sew instead of fussing and finding fault, we could get the things
done before luncheon."

"All right," and Dolly smiled pleasantly, shaking her head at Dotty, who
was just about to make an angry speech. "If Polly takes the
responsibility, I'm satisfied to go on, but it certainly doesn't seem to
me that any boy could get his head into that thing!" And she held up a
cap whose head band certainly did seem small.

"I'll take the responsibility all right," and Pauline shook her head
angrily. "And when you see the boys with these caps on, you'll realise
how silly you've acted."

The girls stitched on for a few minutes without speaking and then
Dolly's gentle voice broke the silence with some comment on some other
subject and peace was restored outwardly, though each of the three was
conscious of an angry undercurrent to their conversation.

The caps finished, Pauline took the three of them and said she would
give them to Liza, who had the ribbon streamers for them.

So the trio separated and as the Fayres had an engagement for that
afternoon the three girls were not together again until the next day.

The next day was the day of the dance, but there was a tennis tournament
in the afternoon, in which all the young people took part, and so
interested were they in the games that no reference was made to the
quarrel of the day before.

The dance was in the evening, and at dinner time Dolly and Dotty passed
the Cliftons' table on their way to their own.

"Get dressed early and come down to the ball-room as soon as you can,"
Carroll said to them as they went by. "The party is a short one,
anyway."

The children's dance was only from eight till ten as the more grown-up
young people claimed the floor later.

Trudy helped Dolly and Dotty into their pretty dresses and both she and
Mrs. Fayre exclaimed with admiration.

The costumes of organdy and sateen were quite as pretty as the model of
silk and satin. Both girls wore their hair hanging in loose curls and
their broad rose-trimmed hats had long streamers of blue and pink ribbon
which tied under the chin with a bow at one side. Their long white
crooks bore bunches of ribbon and each carried a little basket of
flowers to add to the dainty effect.

They found the others awaiting them in the ball-room, and indeed the
dancing was just about to begin as they arrived.

It was a pretty sight. The long handsome room was specially decorated
with flowers and banners, and the gaily dressed children were laughing
and running about in glee. Many of eight or nine, were dancing in pretty
fashion, and indeed all ages under sixteen were represented. This frolic
was an annual affair and the majority of the children staying at the
hotel were allowed to attend.

Perhaps half of them were in fancy costume and fairies and Red
Ridinghoods flitted about with Bobby Shaftos or miniature cavaliers.

"Isn't it beautiful!" cried Dotty, at the threshold of the ball-room.
She had never seen a party just like this before and the gay sight
entranced her.

"We can't go in," laughed Trudy, as she and her parents looked in at the
door. "The room is reserved for you kiddies, and we can only peep in at
the windows."

Dolly and Dotty soon found their friends and crossed the room to join
the Shepherd Clan.

Pauline looked very lovely in her elaborate costume, and the boys were
really fine as shepherd lads.

As the two girls approached, Pauline whispered to them, with an air of
triumph, "You see the caps are plenty big enough!" and sure enough the
three boys wore their caps, set jauntily on the side of their heads; but
without a doubt the bands were amply large.

"So you see, I _did_ know something after all," Pauline went on, and
Dolly said frankly, "You did, Polly; you were right and we were wrong."

Dotty was not quite so smilingly gracious, but she had a strong sense of
justice and she said, "They _are_ big enough, Pauline, I was mistaken,"
and then the dancing began.

There were only simple dances as the children had not mastered the
intricacies of modern steps, and there was much fun and gay good-natured
banter. The Shepherds and Shepherdesses danced first with each other,
but later others joined them and the clan separated.

But the last dance before supper Dolly danced with Carroll Clifton.

At the finish they sat for a moment under some palms to rest, and
Carroll took off his cap and held it in his hand.

As a matter of fact, Dolly had forgotten all about the cap discussion,
but suddenly her eyes fell on the inside of the cap, as Carroll held it
carelessly upside down on his knee.

She could hardly believe her eyes, but she looked again and sure enough,
she was right! A full inch of material had been let into the band at the
back to make it larger. Dolly stared at it, and then taking the cap, as
if to admire it, she said, "I wonder if this is the one I made. You know
we girls made the shepherd caps, and I hope you're duly grateful."

"Yes, nice cap-makers you are!" said Carroll, banteringly. "They were so
little we couldn't get them on. I told Polly and she gathered them in
last night and took them up to her room and made them bigger. I guess
she spent half the night doing it, for her light was burning pretty
late."

Dolly said nothing, but a wave of indignation swept over her to think
Pauline should so deceive her. To think she should be so small and petty
as when she found herself in the wrong to secretly rectify her own
mistake and then triumphantly announce to the girls that the caps were
big enough after all!

Of course they were big enough, after she had set a piece in each one!
Dolly smiled to herself to think what an undertaking it must have been,
for that alteration, and it was done neatly, meant a troublesome bit of
ripping and sewing.

Carroll looked at her inquiringly.

"Well," he said, "_is_ it the one you made? You seem desperately
interested in it!"

"I don't know whether it's the one or not. But it doesn't matter,
they're all alike. Put it on, Carroll, they're all going out to supper
now, and it spoils your costume not to wear it."

Supper was a gay feast. It was the one occasion of the year when the
children were allowed in the dining-room at night, and there were
snapping-crackers and especial varieties of cakes and ices and jellies
suited to juvenile tastes.

After supper the young guests were supposed to say good-night and the
party was over.

As they went upstairs, Dolly pulled Dotty back beside her, and at the
same moment whispered to Tod to let her take his cap.

Unnoticed by any one else, Dolly showed Dotty the piecing inside, and
putting her finger on her lip, shook her head as an admonition to be
silent. Then she returned the cap to Tod, who hadn't noticed the
incident especially, and on the upper landing of the great staircase,
the children said their gay good-nights and went off to their various
apartments.

"Now, what do you think of that?" said the fair-haired Shepherdess, not
waiting to take off her fancy costume, but pulling the black-haired
Shepherdess down to the window-seat beside her.

This was the spot where the girls sat nearly every night to talk over
the events of the day. The wide velvet-cushioned seat with its many
pillows, was cosy and comfortable, and the view of the ocean and the
sound of the rolling waves made these evening chats very happy and
confidential.

"But I don't understand," said Dotty, looking puzzled. "You motioned for
me not to speak a word, so I didn't. But what does it mean? Who put that
piece in Tod's cap, his mother?"

"No; Pauline did it! She sneaked those caps away to her room last night,
and sat up till all hours piecing those pieces in. And a sweet job she
must have had of it! Why, it's about as much trouble to piece a thing
like that, as to make a whole cap!"

"Pauline did it?" still Dotty couldn't understand. "Why, she said this
evening that the caps were all right and big enough."

"Of course they were, after she pieced the bands out longer! She did it
herself, Dotty, and then pretended to us that they were just as we had
left them. At least she meant us to think that, for she said, 'Now don't
you see they're all right?' and she didn't tell us she had fixed them."

"How do you know she did it? Maybe Mrs. Brown or Liza did it."

"Carroll told me Polly did it herself. After she went to her room last
night. He says her light was burning awful late because she had to fix
the three caps."

"The deceitful girl! If that isn't the limit! Just wait till I see her,
I'll tell her what I think of her!"

"Now, Dotty, that's just what I don't want you to do. I knew how you'd
feel about this thing, and honest, at first I thought I wouldn't tell
you, 'cause if I hadn't, you never would have known. But we never do
have secrets from each other, and so when I found it out, I thought I
ought to tell you. But I don't want you to quarrel with Pauline about
it. Won't you let it go, Dot, and never say anything to her on the
subject?"

"No, I won't, Dolly. She told a story, or if she didn't tell it right
out, she made us think what wasn't true, and it's just the same. She
ought to be shown up. Tod and Tad and her own brother, too, ought to
know what a mean thing she did. It's only justice, Dolly, that they
should. You're so easy-going you'd forgive anything and forget it, too!
But I can't. I've got to tell that Clifton girl what I think of her.
Oh, I never heard of such meanness! Why Dollyrinda Fayre,--you or I
would scorn to do such a thing!"

"Of course we would, Dot, but I don't know as it's up to us to tell
Pauline Clifton what she ought to do."

"It isn't that, Dolly; we're not her teachers, and I don't care what she
does,--to other people. But she needn't think she can do a thing like
that, and act as if we didn't know anything, when we told her she was
wrong, and then when she finds she is wrong to go and fix it up on the
sly and pretend she was right all along! No-sir-ee! I won't stand for
it. I'll show her up in all her meanness and deceit and I'll do it
before the boys, too. She ought to be made to feel cheap! The idea!"

Dolly waited in silence until Dotty's wrath had spent itself. She had
known Dotty would act like this, but she hoped to calm her justifiable
anger.

"Well, all right, Dot," she said at last; "then if you still persist in
quarrelling with Pauline about this thing, and if you won't agree not to
say anything to her about it, then I'm going to ask you not to, just for
my sake. I don't often ask you a favour seriously, Dotty Rose, but I do
now. If you're a friend of mine and if you really care anything about
me, won't you promise, just because _I_ ask it, not to say anything to
Pauline about those caps?"

The two Shepherdesses faced each other in silence. Both were sitting
cross-legged in Turkish fashion on the wide divan, and as they had not
turned on their room lights, only the moonlight that streamed across the
ocean illumined the two earnest faces.

Fair-haired Dolly was pale in her earnestness and her blue eyes looked
beseechingly at her friend.

The black-haired Shepherdess was flushed with anger. Her crook had
fallen to the floor and she had tossed her hat beside it. Her black eyes
snapped and her curly head shook as she refused Dolly's request. But the
pleading voice kept on, until at last kindness conquered, and Dotty Rose
gave in.

"All right, you dear old thing," she cried, as she grabbed Dolly round
the neck, "you've a Heavenly disposition, and I'm a horrid, ugly thing,
but I'll do as you say, _because_ you ask me to."

"You're not ugly, Dotty, a bit; only you have a high temper, and your
sense of justice makes you feel like getting even with people. And I
don't say you're not right. Why, of course there is such a thing as
righteous indignation, and this may be the place for it. Only, I _do_
want to have my way this time. You see, we're going home day after
to-morrow, and very likely we'll never see the Cliftons again, after we
leave here. They don't come here every summer like we do. And I hate to
spoil these two last days with a horrid squabble, when we six have been
so nice and chummy and pleasant all the time we've been here. You
needn't have much to do with Pauline, if you don't want to, but just for
two days, can't you just be decently polite to her, and not say anything
about this business?"

"I can and I will," said Dotty, heartily; "but you needn't think, old
lady, that it's because I'm a meek and mild little lamb, and don't feel
like telling that girl what I think of her! No, sir! It's because,--well
first because you ask me to; and second, because I'm the guest of you
and your people, and it wouldn't be a bit nice of me to stir up an
unpleasantness that probably everybody would know about. So, unless Miss
Pauline Clifton refers to it herself, she'll never hear of that cap
subject from me!"

"You're an old trump, Dotty, and I love you a million bushels! And I'm
glad we're going home so soon, and oh, just think! we'll start off to
school together, and we'll both go to High School, and we'll have just
the same lessons, and we'll be together every day. Dotty Rose, I'm
_glad_ I've got you for a friend!"

"You're not half as glad as _I_ am, Dolly Fayre!"

"We'll always be friends, whatever happens, won't we?" said Dolly; "and
we'll always tell each other everything."

"Always and always!" said the other Shepherdess, and they sealed their
compact with a kiss.

And the big, round-faced moon smiled at them across the night-blue
ocean, and tried to make up his mind which of the two D's he was more
fond of.


THE END




"_The Books you like to read at the price you like to pay._"

       *       *       *       *       *

This Isn't All!

       *       *       *       *       *

Look on the following pages and you will find listed a few of the
outstanding boys' and girls' books published by Grosset and Dunlap. All
are written by well known authors and cover a wide variety of
subjects--aviation, stories of sport and adventure, tales of humor and
mystery--books for every mood and every taste and every pocketbook.

       *       *       *       *       *

_There is a Grosset & Dunlap book for every member of your family._

       *       *       *       *       *

CAROLYN WELLS BOOKS

       *       *       *       *       *

Attractively Bound. Illustrated. Colored Wrappers.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PATTY BOOKS

Patty is a lovable girl whose frank good nature and beauty lend charm to
her varied adventures. These stories are packed with excitement and
interest for girls.

  PATTY FAIRFIELD
  PATTY AT HOME
  PATTY IN THE CITY
  PATTY'S SUMMER DAYS
  PATTY IN PARIS
  PATTY'S FRIENDS
  PATTY'S PLEASURE TRIP
  PATTY'S SUCCESS
  PATTY'S MOTOR CAR
  PATTY'S BUTTERFLY DAYS

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MARJORIE BOOKS

Marjorie is a happy little girl of twelve, up to mischief, but full of
goodness and sincerity. In her and her friends every girl reader will
see much of her own love of fun, play and adventure.

  MARJORIE'S VACATION
  MARJORIE'S BUSY DAYS
  MARJORIE'S NEW FRIEND
  MARJORIE IN COMMAND
  MARJORIE'S MAYTIME
  MARJORIE AT SEACOTE

       *       *       *       *       *

THE TWO LITTLE WOMEN SERIES

Introducing Dorinda Fayre--a pretty blonde, sweet, serious, timid and a
little slow, and Dorothy Rose--a sparkling brunette, quick, elf-like,
high tempered, full of mischief and always getting into scrapes.

  TWO LITTLE WOMEN
  TWO LITTLE WOMEN AND TREASURE HOUSE
  TWO LITTLE WOMEN ON A HOLIDAY

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DICK AND DOLLY BOOKS

Dick and Dolly are brother and sister, and their games, their pranks,
their joys and sorrows, are told in a manner which makes the stories
"really true" to young readers.

  DICK AND DOLLY
  DICK AND DOLLY'S ADVENTURES

       *       *       *       *       *

FOR HER MAJESTY--THE GIRL OF TODAY

       *       *       *       *       *

THE POLLY BREWSTER BOOKS

By Lillian Elizabeth Roy

Polly and Eleanor have many interesting adventures on their travels
which take them to all corners of the globe.

  POLLY OF PEBBLY PIT
  POLLY AND ELEANOR
  POLLY IN NEW YORK
  POLLY AND HER FRIENDS ABROAD
  POLLY'S BUSINESS VENTURE
  POLLY'S SOUTHERN CRUISE
  POLLY IN SOUTH AMERICA
  POLLY IN THE SOUTHWEST
  POLLY IN ALASKA
  POLLY IN THE ORIENT
  POLLY IN EGYPT
  POLLY'S NEW FRIEND
  POLLY AND CAROLA
  POLLY AND CAROLA AT RAVENSWOOD
  POLLY LEARNS TO FLY

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BLYTHE GIRLS BOOKS

By LAURA LEE HOPE

Author of The Outdoor Girls Series

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustrated by Thelma Gooch

       *       *       *       *       *

The Blythe Girls, three in number, were left alone in New York City.
Helen, who went in for art and music, kept the little flat uptown, while
Margy, just out of business school, obtained a position as secretary and
Rose, plain-spoken and business like, took what she called a "job" in a
department store. The experiences of these girls make fascinating
reading--life in the great metropolis is thrilling and full of strange
adventures and surprises.

  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: HELEN, MARGY AND ROSE
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: MARGY'S QUEER INHERITANCE
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: ROSE'S GREAT PROBLEM
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: HELEN'S STRANGE BOARDER
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: THREE ON A VACATION
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: MARGY'S SECRET MISSION
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: ROSE'S ODD DISCOVERY
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: THE DISAPPEARANCE OF HELEN
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: SNOWBOUND IN CAMP
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: MARGY'S MYSTERIOUS VISITOR
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: ROSE'S HIDDEN TALENT
  THE BLYTHE GIRLS: HELEN'S WONDERFUL MISTAKE

       *       *       *       *       *

THE POLLY SERIES

By DOROTHY WHITEHILL

       *       *       *       *       *

This lively series for girls is about the adventures of pretty,
resourceful Polly Pendleton, a wide awake American girl who goes to
boarding school on the Hudson River, several miles above New York. By
her pluck and genial smile she soon makes a name for herself and becomes
a leader in girl activities.

Besides relating Polly's adventures at school these books tell of her
summer vacations and her experiences in many different scenes. Every
girl who loves action and excitement will want to follow Polly on her
many adventures.

  POLLY'S FIRST YEAR AT BOARDING SCHOOL
  POLLY'S SUMMER VACATION
  POLLY'S SENIOR YEAR AT BOARDING SCHOOL
  POLLY SEES THE WORLD AT WAR
  POLLY AND LOIS
  POLLY AND BOB
  POLLY'S REUNION
  POLLY'S POLLY
  POLLY AT PIXIE'S HAUNT
  POLLY'S HOUSE PARTY
  POLLY'S POLLY AT BOARDING SCHOOL
  JOYFUL ADVENTURES OF POLLY

       *       *       *       *       *

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS SERIES

By LAURA LEE HOPE
Author of "The Blythe Girls Books."

       *       *       *       *       *

Every Volume Complete in Itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

These are the adventures of a group of bright, fun-loving, up-to-date
girls who have a common bond in their fondness for outdoor life,
camping, travel and adventure. There is excitement and humor in these
stories and girls will find in them the kind of pleasant associations
that they seek to create among their own friends and chums.

  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS OF DEEPDALE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT RAINBOW LAKE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A MOTOR CAR
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A WINTER CAMP
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN FLORIDA
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT OCEAN VIEW
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN ARMY SERVICE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON PINE ISLAND
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT THE HOSTESS HOUSE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT BLUFF POINT
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT WILD ROSE LODGE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE SADDLE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AROUND THE CAMPFIRE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON CAPE COD
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT FOAMING FALLS
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ALONG THE COAST
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT SPRING HILL FARM
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT NEW MOON RANCH
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON A HIKE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON A CANOE TRIP
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT CEDAR RIDGE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE AIR

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS SERIES

By GRACE BROOKS HILL

       *       *       *       *       *

These splendid stories of the adventures of four young girls who occupy
the old corner house left to them by a rich bachelor uncle will appeal
to all young girls. They contain all the elements which delight youthful
readers--action, mystery, humor and excitement. These girls have become
the best friends of many children throughout the country.

  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS AT SCHOOL
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS UNDER CANVAS
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS IN A PLAY
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS' ODD FIND
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS ON A TOUR
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS GROWING UP
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS SNOWBOUND
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS ON A HOUSEBOAT
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS AMONG THE GYPSIES
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS ON PALM ISLAND
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS SOLVE A MYSTERY
  THE CORNER HOUSE GIRLS FACING THE WORLD

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Two Little Women, by Carolyn Wells

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO LITTLE WOMEN ***

***** This file should be named 30881.txt or 30881.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/8/8/30881/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
