The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jack of No Trades, by Charles Cottrell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Jack of No Trades

Author: Charles Cottrell

Release Date: January 11, 2010 [EBook #30927]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACK OF NO TRADES ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Amazing Stories August 1960. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


                          Jack Of No Trades


                         By CHARLES COTTRELL


     _First we discovered the Willy Maloon category. Then we
      discovered Willy himself. Then we data-researched, and
      postulated a theory. Everything was easy, until it came to
      the question of proof._


                            [Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




This thing really started before the time I had Willy Maloon under
observation when he gunned the small runabout well past cruising speed
in order to reach the little asteroid as soon as he could. At times
like that he showed undue impatience. I was following at a discreet
distance behind him, homing in on the rock, too. I had to find out
what he was up to.

Archie Crosby, the obliging scoundrel, had "lent" Willy the homer unit
out of supply. But, of course, he (Willy) had requested it in words to
the effect that it was to replace a defective one in the cache. And
Archie didn't doubt Willy for a moment, Willy being the kind of fellow
he is.

Willy had worked a couple of hours on the homer unit, which is nothing
more than a small radio transmitter. He tuned it to a frequency on the
high side of the band used by the homer units in the cache. This was
so no one would be likely to inadvertently tune the frequency and get
curious. Tuning any of the vehicle receivers to that particular
transmitter frequency was a simple matter. Then he had taken the
transmitter out among the asteroids and hunted around until he had
found one about two miles or thereabouts in diameter, only it couldn't
be said to have a diameter because it was quite irregular in shape.
But to Willy it must have been as fascinating as a jewel. So he
planted the homer on it so that he could find it again when he wanted
to. Of course, he hadn't yet thought of a reason for wanting an
asteroid, but he would. He usually found reasons for the strange
things he did.

And he did. It must have been just after Ollie Hadaway lost control of
his tug. It had been headed in the direction of a rather large
asteroid. Ollie had tried to unjumble the steering jets, but he
couldn't, so he bailed out and was picked up a little later. The tug
went on and shattered on the surface of the asteroid. Then later,
Willy, at my directions, investigated the accident, examined the tug,
and wrote up an accident report on it. And the inspection part of it
must have gone something like this:

When Willy arrived to examine the shattered tug on the surface of the
asteroid, he must have been pleasantly surprised to note that the hull
was a battered mess, but miraculously some of the innards were intact.
He must have looked closer and saw that the drive unit had escaped
destruction. The drive unit of a tug is a super-heavy duty workhorse
of a unit chock full of more power than would ever be packed or needed
in a conventional ship of the same size. But as I said before, this
was a propulsion unit from a tug, and tugs like ones we use need
plenty of power.

And that must have been when Willy decided on a reason for having his
own private asteroid. He would add the drive unit to it and make it
mobile. He must have sparkled with the idea for the rest of the day. I
recall his accident report saying the tug was a total loss. Of course,
no one checked Willy's decision on that.

       *       *       *       *       *

I also had Willy under observation the time he retrieved the drive
unit and took it to his newly acquired privately owned (now) asteroid.
The peculiar shape of the asteroid would lend itself to adaptation to
mobility. So Willy blasted off the tip of the elongated end with some
explosives he had diverted from some other project, drilled it out
with some small charges, and fitted the drive unit in it, and anchored
it down. It had taken quite a while to do all that, but Willy had
interminable patience once he started a project. The entire procedure
would seem impossible for one man, but bulk and weight were no
problems in space. And Willy constantly worked miracles.

The question of what value a mobile asteroid would be among swarms of
non-mobile asteroids way out in space where there was no place to go
never seemed to have entered Willy's mind.

(Now when I speak of "night" and "day," I speak of those periods of
the twenty-four hour clock set forth as working and non-working
periods. The working part was the "day" part of the twenty-four hours,
during which we all engaged in our contracted occupations. The rest of
the time until the twenty-four hour period ended was considered
"night." Naturally, among the asteroids there was no rising and
setting of the sun to help designate the passage of time. The
reference to night and day is a habit which persists with space men no
matter which part of the system they happen to be in.)

A few days after Willy had finished installing the drive unit in his
asteroid, a small company speedster came to a near-halt at the outer
fringes of our section of the asteroid belt. For the next eighty hours
it felt its way by radar through the belt, dodging and going around
the larger bodies, and slowing its speed whenever it became necessary
to shoulder its way through masses of smaller debris and dust.

Finally it had our station in sight visually, and in a matter of hours
later, it was edging its sleek sixty feet of length into a side gantry
attached to the station.

Mr. Garfield Goil disembarked from the speedster with a small
retinue. He was greeted on the inside of the lock by Mr. Orrin, our
station manager. As operations engineer-foreman, I was there with
Orrin to greet Mr. Goil.

Mr. Goil's presence had been expected for the past several days, but
not especially looked forward to. His status and stature with the
Extraterrestrial Mining Company was well known to all of us, and
certainly respected. His volatile temperament was well known also; it
commanded our concern. And if ever Mr. Goil's temperament was to be
put to a test, it was during one of his inspection visits. And that
was what he had come for--his first to this station.

As I remember, there had always been conjecture on whether Mr. Goil's
temperament was the result of his physical topography, or whether his
physical topography had been altered by his temperament. In either
case, Mr. Garfield Goil was representative of that only appellation
inevitable to him because of his facial features and his name. And Mr.
Goil was perpetually bitter and approached the world--any world--with
a chip welded to his shoulder.

       *       *       *       *       *

I tagged along as Orrin escorted Goil to his quarters and broke the
seal on a bottle of bourbon he had been saving for this particular
occasion.

It had been the wrong thing to do. Goil promptly informed Orrin that
not only was he (Goil) a teetotaler, but also that he was opposed to
drinking by anyone else, especially by company employees during duty
hours, and in a place other than an authorized area such as the
recreation room or the station bar. He told him further that he would
not condone such practices while he was around; his immediate job was
to inspect operations personally. His accompanying teams would dig
deeply into other matters such as personnel, supplies, overall
operations efficiency, and so on. Work would begin as soon as
possible.

Goil then excused himself coldly and left for the VIP quarters.

Point number one for the opposition, I thought. Why hadn't someone
warned us about the peculiarities of the man?

I hoped nothing would go wrong with the inspection. If things went
well, Goil and his cohorts could get their business over with and get
away from here that much faster. I was more than a little concerned
about Willy and what he was doing.

Willy had spent two days, mostly off-duty time, visiting and working
on the asteroid he had adopted, his two miles of irregular
monstrosity. In his spurt of activity to install the drive unit, he
had over-calculated a charge of explosives and blown out too much of
the end section of the asteroid. That caused him some concern for a
little while. In a flash of what he probably considered to be pure
genius, he solved that minor problem by deciding to fill in the hole
by installing a sub-space energizer. This first flash of genius was
apparently followed by another inspirational flash. He could, with
both installations, and some additional work, send the thing back to
Earth. He must have been proud of the thought, for private satellites
around Earth were all the rage now; no one who was Anyone was without
one. Besides that, it would make a wonderful birthday present for his
wife. Her birthday was only a matter of days away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Goil's first request was to observe a day's operation. I had made what
few arrangements were necessary, and Goil and I started out early so
we could get into position and see the operations from the start.

We had one of the observation flitters. I took it about twenty
thousand miles out from the area of operations and parked with the
forward port facing the area. I said:

"We'll watch from here, Mr. Goil. You can see the debris floating down
there." I pointed, and Goil looked at the little pin points of light
reflecting from a great volume of dust, nebula-like in its dim
luminosity. "When the crew starts actual operation, we will turn on
the magnification screens and get some close-up views of the process."

"Please explain this to me," said Goil. "I've never seen an asteroid's
operation before."

"Of course, Mr. Goil. I didn't know. This asteroid patch, or vein, as
we like to call it, has a better than average content of metal ores
and compounds. As you can see, we have swept the loose ends, so to
speak, together. And there you see the result. In the center of that
nebulous sort of mass is a large asteroid. There is at least one in
almost every patch. We use that as the core, and by planting a large
gravity generator on it and feeding it a great deal of power, it and
the asteroid attracts most of the nearby debris. The gravity generator
has been souped up tremendously. It burns out rather quickly, but it
operates long enough for our purposes. There is a respectable layer of
assorted sizes of asteroids hugging the core. And there are several
miles of dust surrounding everything. After the gravity generator has
burned out, the big attraction dies out, of course. But the
proximity of the debris is still enough to hold them together for some
time."

[Illustration]

"What is that stray body off to one side?"

"That is the trigger asteroid," I answered.

A couple of minutes before triggering time, I reached over and punched
the channel button on operations frequency. Immediately the usual
operations chatter came rushing out at us from the speaker. Suddenly a
voice blasted out saying, "Ready, Sam? Clear, everybody! Eyes off! Ten
to go!" A countdown was started.

I had switched on four screens, each a different magnification. I
pointed to a spheroid on one of the screens and said, "There's the
trigger body. It's equipped with a sub-space energizer big enough to
get it into sub-space and return it to normal. Then there is a small
propulsor unit with just enough energy to send it to the center of
that mess. Then it returns to normal space smack dab in the center of
the core asteroid. And when the asteroid matter and the trigger body
matter try to occupy the same space at the same time.... Watch it go
out."

It did. Just disappeared.

The debris-encrusted mass vaporized. It seemed to do it slowly,
lazily. Much of the debris was flung out from the mass, but raw energy
of boiling vapors chased it, overtook it, and then it too was vapor.
The light emitted from the vaporizing collection of bodies would have
been optic nerve searing if Goil and I had not been looking at it
through the screens. The vapor continued to expand and spread until it
looked like a miniature nebula.

I said, "The triggering body is about half the size of the core body.
The heat that results from the explosion vaporizes nearly a hundred
per cent of the material. What little solid matter that escapes is of
little consequence."

Goil watched in fascination. The spectrum of colors displayed were
unbelievably, indescribably beautiful. The brilliant cloud masses that
boiled and leaped around were like things alive trying to escape the
terrible inner torment.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long time passed, but the sight was so hypnotizing that Goil seemed
to be unaware of just how long he had been watching. Finally I broke
the silence.

"Watch the specks on the far left screen. They are the gravitor tugs.
They are ready to move in."

I stepped up the magnification on the screen. Goil watched a number of
great, ugly ships line abreast, head for the glowing clouds, enter,
and disappear from sight.

"Those tugs are modifications of the scientific ships that sweep close
to the sun to observe solar phenomena first hand. They are impervious
to the relatively low heat of the vapor. They will do the fringes
first. The center is still too turbulent. By the time they complete
the fringes, the center will be calm enough to sweep. They work their
way inward all the time."

"How long will it take to complete the operation?" Goil asked.

"With a cloud this size, about a week. It's best to get on it right
away. The tougher metals come out sooner than the softer and lighter
metals with lower vaporizing points. Recovery has to be made while the
metals are in the vapor state or the gravitors won't work
efficiently."

"Exactly how does it work?" asked Goil.

"Well, I guess you might remotely compare it to fractional
distillation," I said. "Only we gather metals instead of fluids. The
reason for vaporizing the solids is to make the ships accessible to
the metals. It spreads the matter out thin. The gravitors work very
well in the hot vapor. Behind each ship is towed a gravitor. Each
gravitor is set to attract a particular metal, somewhat the way a
magnet attracts iron, again loosely comparing. A magnet, as you know,
attracts by magnetic force. The gravitors are adjusted to attract a
metal by selecting its gravitic attraction. As the gravitor ships pass
through the vapor, the gravitors behind them attract the metal they
are set for. When load size has been reached, they are taken to the
cache near the station."

       *       *       *       *       *

We watched the operation for three more hours. Goil wanted to see the
first of the gravitor tugs emerge with its load. Finally a ship
emerged from the cloud mass and headed for the station.

"What is it carrying?" Goil asked, looking at the tremendous mass of
incandescent material being towed a mile behind the tug.

"Tungsten," I said. "Would you like to see our cache?"

I steered the little observation ship past the station. When we
arrived at the cache area I eased the speed of the ship until it was
barely moving around among tremendous masses of various metals. Goil
recognized small spheroids of gold and silver. I pointed out other
metals, some in greater quantities than others, all floating in space,
with thick cables connecting them. I saw Goil looking at the cables
curiously.

"Keeps them from drifting apart," I said.

For another twenty minutes we cruised around the cache. Goil said
only a word now and then. He was visibly impressed by the mountains of
metal all around, all representing untold potential wealth. I think he
better understood how such an expensive operation so far from Earth
could be quite profitable.

"You may wonder," I said, "just how I located this cache. There are
several little transmitters among the piles. I just home in on any one
of them. Each metal cache has its own frequency. Gold, silver,
tungsten, beryllium...."

Goil nodded. "Let's go back to the station."

       *       *       *       *       *

Goil called for Orrin and me. We entered his temporary quarters.

"Sit down," he said. He suggestively waved smoke away from his face,
and Orrin stubbed out his cigar.

"Mr. Orrin," Goil started, "you may have one of the top asteroid
mining stations, but in spite of your fine production record, there
seem to be some discrepancies we don't understand.

"For example, certain supply items are being used in greater
quantities than the size of your operations require. This seems to
have been going on for some time according to your records--and what
your records do not show. Your expendable supplies items accounting
seems to be lax, if not outright careless. Furthermore, there seems to
be some non-expendable items that can't be accounted for, a couple of
major items among them. This doesn't make much sense out here in the
middle of nowhere, unless careless loss is the answer. Such losses
could hardly be attributed to theft. Needless to say, theft out here
would serve a thief absolutely no purpose."

"What major items are not accounted for?" asked Orrin, with a puzzled
look on his face, as if he didn't believe Goil.

"The only thing I can recall offhand," said Goil, "is a tug. And
that's pretty major."

I gave an inner sigh of relief. "I can account for that," I said. "And
Mr. Orrin can back me up. The tug lost steering control the other day
and crashed into one of the larger asteroids. It was demolished. The
accident report and destruction data are a little slow getting into
the records section."

"That's right," said Orrin. "Willy Maloon made the inspection and I
certified it. Total loss. The tug was going mighty fast when it hit."

"Where are the remains?" asked Goil.

"Whenever anything big enough is destroyed," I answered, "it is placed
with the next batch of asteroids to be vaporized. The metals are
recovered that way, so the thing is not quite a total loss. That tug
was vaporized during the operation we watched yesterday."

"I see," said Goil. "And this man, ah--Maloon--can he be trusted on
such an inspection?"

"One of the best," I answered.

"Anyway," continued Goil, "there seems to be something peculiar going
on here. I've instructed my teams to go into this as deeply as they
can."

Orrin nodded. I nodded too, but I felt a bit apprehensive. This was an
awkward time for Goil to have arrived. And it might prove even more
awkward for him to take sudden interest in Willy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day, Goil summoned Orrin and me to his quarters once again.
It was about an hour after the end of a normal work-day. Orrin and I
were both available, and we met at the door of Goil's quarters at
about the same time.

Goil had thunderclouds ready to burst hanging around his head. I could
see that as soon as we entered the room. Orrin's spirits visibly
dropped. So did mine.

The black cloud over Goil burst. For five minutes without letup he
stormed. When Orrin and I recovered a little from the deluge, Goil was
saying:

"... complete indications of careless management. And management, Mr.
Orrin, starts at the top." He looked hard at Orrin. Then he turned to
me adding, "And goes on down. _How_ can you account for a missing
sub-space energizer, especially one as large and powerful as the ones
we use? And one gravity generator?"

"Huh?" said Orrin, seeming to come out of a daze. "What's missing?"

Goil slowed down a bit. "One gravity generator and one sub-space
energizer, Mr. Orrin. One each of these items is used for each
vaporizing process. And you have one too few vaporizing projects on
record. And one each gravity generator and energizer unsigned for,
completely unaccounted for--so far."

"What do you mean, 'so far'?" I asked. "Have you any idea how we can
account for these two items?"

"I have indeed," said Goil.

"I don't understand," said Orrin in a helpless tone. "How could anyone
lose or misplace anything as big as those? It doesn't make sense."

I was glad Orrin had put the question that way.

"Precisely," said Goil. "I don't believe someone did misplace or lose
those items. I believe someone took them for a purpose."

"That's ridiculous!" snapped Orrin. "Out here in space? For what?"

"Maybe we'll learn soon," said Goil. "One William Maloon should be on
his way here right now to do some explaining."

I turned cold all over. What had Willy done to expose himself so? I
wondered. Aloud I said:

"What has Willy to do with this, Mr. Goil? Willy is one of our best
men, completely trustworthy."

"A hard worker and really ambitious," added Orrin.

"No doubt," Goil said acidly. "Ambitious to his own ends. I've checked
Mr. Maloon's personnel records and I found some interesting things.
Mr. Maloon is not any sort of qualified engineer. Or even an expert
technician. Why, he's not even a good journeyman of any trade. His
only approach to some sort of claim to formal training is a single
correspondence course!"

"He's a good hard-working technician!" defended Orrin.

"Sure," said Goil. "He learned the hard way. Through experience," he
added sarcastically. "Can you tell me, Mr. Orrin, exactly what is Mr.
Maloon's job here?"

"He's an engineer fill-in," said Orrin with a trace of doubt in his
voice. "He's on call and handy for just about any job around here."

"In a limited capacity, no doubt," Goil said dryly. "And he apparently
does a lot of jobs around here he's not expected to do. A check of
your tool cribs and equipment storage shows that Maloon has had his
hands on just about everything you have available at one time or
another since he has been here. Mr. Maloon is a very busy man during
his off-duty hours, it seems."

"What has this to do with calling Willy in about the missing energizer
and generator?" I ventured to ask.

"Part of a suspicion," Goil said. "Maloon's use of company tools and
equipment increased just before the disappearance of those two pieces
of equipment. It may be significant or it may not. What is significant
is this: everybody having access to supply and equipment was out
participating in one way or another in the operation the other day. It
seems that everybody can be accounted for but Maloon. He could easily
have had time to get unauthorized items out of supply."

"This is fantastic!" snorted Orrin.

       *       *       *       *       *

They don't know the half of it! I thought to myself.

I didn't want Willy to have to face Goil. Willy was weak in some
ways.... Aloud I said:

"I know Willy quite well, Mr. Goil. If you will let me talk to
him...."

"I'm sure you do," said Goil icily. "You and he came here together.
Even applied and were accepted for this job together," he added
significantly.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a mild knock on the door. It opened slowly and Willy stood
in the doorway, hesitating before entering, looking around the room.
He said:

"You wanted to see me, Mr. Goil?"

Mr. Garfield Goil, in spite of his somewhat unstable temperament, had
made rapid strides in his career to his present staff position. He was
no nincompoop. He was well educated and trained, and had apparently
learned to measure a man accurately and quickly. He so seemed to
measure Willy at a glance, drawing, no doubt, also from his recent
examination of Willy's records, and the personality profile he had
gleaned from it. Willy (he probably reasoned) for all his foibles
would be basically truthful, especially if confronted by Authority.
And he apparently was timid and obviously worried. Therefore, he must
have some cause to worry. Therefore, the impact of direct action
should produce quick results. Mr. Goil asked:

"Willy, we'd like to know what happened to the gravity generator and
the sub-space energizer."

Be it noted that it was a statement question and not an accusation.
But Goil said it in such a tone and manner that it implied that Willy
and only Willy could give an answer.

Willy felt and looked the impact of the words. He looked pleadingly at
me, whose eyes sought interest in one of the empty chairs. Then he
looked at Orrin for succor, but Orrin only stared back at Willy
half-accusingly.

But my own spirits had given a little jump at Goil's use of Willy's
given name. This had not happened before. And this was most
uncharacteristic of Goil, particularly in a situation like this one.

Could it be, I thought, Willy's personable influence working on Goil?

Willy floundered for words, then stammered out with, "I--I don't know
what you mean, Mr. Goil."

Goil, apparently confident that his attack was going well, said, "I'm
sure you do, Willy. Think. Wasn't it Thursday that you removed that
generator and the energizer from the stock room? These are very
expensive and complicated items, Willy. If they can be recovered, so
much the better. What could you possibly have done with them?"

"I--I didn't--" Willy started weakly.

Goil stood up from behind his desk, leaned forward, and his features
twisted even more in sudden anger. He shouted, "Maloon, you were the
only one who could have taken them! The only one who was not working
in the vaporizing operation. Maloon, I'm going to find those things,
and I'm going to prove you took them if I have to stay here for the
next six months! And then I'm going to fire you and prosecute you.
Maloon, what have you done with those things?"

Willy tried to sink right through the floor.

I felt utterly helpless and a little angry at Goil's bullying tactics.

Orrin, suddenly angry, shouted, "Mr. Goil, this isn't a court of law.
No one is on trial here."

"This may not be a court of law, Mr. Orrin," Goil said, no less angry
than Orrin, "but you can call it a court of inquiry. You seem to
forget that your position might be at stake here. Your interfering
with my investigation will be taken into consideration separately
after this matter at hand has been resolved."

This remark, and the severity with which it was made, only angered
Orrin more, but he held himself in check.

Willy had been fidgeting and looking back and forth at Orrin and Goil
with a guilty and despondent look on his face. He started to say:

"I don't want to cause any trouble, Mr. Orrin. Ah--just how serious--"

"Hold it, Willy!" I shouted. "You haven't been accused of anything
yet. You don't have to say anything without counsel."

       *       *       *       *       *

Goil turned baleful eyes on me, and I shut up suddenly. He said, "Mr.
Weston, let me repeat: no formal accusations have been made--yet. I am
trying to learn certain facts. One fact I have learned already is that
you are exceedingly friendly with Willy. Furthermore, you as senior
engineer-foreman should be aware of what is going on around here. Mr.
Weston, you have not been absolved of this yet. Duty-wise, or
personally," he added.

Willy was resigned to his own professional downfall. He looked and
must have felt utterly miserable. He had done wrong and he knew it.
And he was not one to let his friends get any blame for what he had
done. He said:

"That's right, Mr. Goil. I did take the generator and the energizer."

My morale suddenly hit bottom and flattened. My mind went into
overdrive in an effort to think of some way to extricate Willy from
his blundering admission. Poor Willy, who had the body of a wrestler,
the temperament of a poet, and a boundless generosity wanted to
confess all.

But what a sacrifice, I thought. My mind sought answers and words and
found none.

Orrin stared at Willy, open-mouthed. He said unbelievingly, "What?"

"Yes, sir. I got the energizer and the generator."

Goil sat back with a self-satisfied look on his face.

I shot Willy a scolding glance and said, "Willy, you don't have to say
another thing--"

Before I could get out any more words, Goil snapped out, "Weston, one
more word from you unless I ask for it, and you will find yourself
under station arrest for insubordination--do you understand?"

I clamped my mouth shut. The more I defended Willy, the more Willy
would talk in order to protect his uninvolved friends.

Goil said to me in a low, ominous voice, "I am invested with certain
Company powers out here, and I intend to use them fully. I intend to
continue with this investigation in spite of any opposition you give
me. Pending on the outcome, Mr. Orrin and Mr. Weston, you are both
relieved of your positions as of now--say for mismanagement of
personnel and company property.

"Mr. Maloon, I am placing you under station arrest by authority of my
position, and because of your admission of theft. Pay and allowances
for all of you are suspended as of today.

"That's all. Please leave."

       *       *       *       *       *

Willy was the first to leave, with his head hanging low in shame.
Orrin left next, with fury shining plainly from his eyes. I lingered
until Willy had left. Then I closed the door and swung around to face
Goil.

Goil was looking at me peculiarly. He said, "I told you to go,
Weston."

"I will," I said. "But first I want to tell you something."

"When I want to hear your side of the story, I'll ask you for it,"
Goil said nastily.

"It won't wait," I said in a new voice that caused Goil to look at me
closely. "I want to tell you now while we are alone."

Goil's eyes narrowed. "Weston, anything you have to say one way or the
other I'll use against you later. Anything you want to say to save
your own skin just won't do any good."

I became suddenly infuriated. I stepped forward and slammed my fist on
the desk top and said in a low, poisonous voice, "Goil, you've shoved
your prying nose into something you know very little about. You're
jumping to conclusions about something you know only part of. Now I'm
forced to reveal certain facts which you shouldn't be knowing. And I'm
going to tell you here and now whether you want to listen or not!"

Goil had reddened and risen from his chair. But I towered over him
threateningly and he dropped back in his chair in quiet incense.

"That's better," I said, somewhat cooled off. "Now listen. What I have
to say may seem incredible to you. Hear me out, then speak your piece.
And I think I can prove what I say to your satisfaction. In any event,
I hope I can trust your confidence on this. You'll understand what I
mean by the time I'm finished.

"First, Willy did take the energizer and the generator. 'Steal,' if
you wish to say so. I knew it. Orrin, nor anyone else knows it though.
Second, those are not the only things he has taken. Third, his taking
things like that has been happening all the time he has been here. It
happened before he got here, wherever he was.

"He is not a kleptomaniac. He steals, not because he has a compulsion
to do so, nor for economic gain, but for a more important reason."

Goil said, "Stop beating around the bush. If you think you have
something to say, go ahead and say it."

"I'm trying to," I said. "But it's not something easily explained.

"Willy is nothing but a great big rabbit's foot."

"_What?_"

"Mr. Goil, Willy is the exact opposite of an accident prone. Willy is
a safety prone. No accidents involving personal injury ever happen
when he is around. Not even minor ones."

       *       *       *       *       *

Goil looked hostilely skeptical at me. "I seem to recall some accident
reports you sent in. You signed them yourself, I believe, as safety
officer."

"That's right," I said feeling foolish. "But they were falsified
reports. And I've requisitioned medical supplies too, that were never
needed."

"Now why would you want to do a thing like that?" asked Goil in a tone
cold with obvious disbelief, and the tenor of humoring a madman.

"To keep reports and consumption statistics where they belong," I
answered.

"I'm more than just an employee of the Company. I'm also a research
psychologist. And I'm studying Willy. I'll admit that through
influence and other ways I got Willy and me a job out here isolated
with a relatively small group doing rather dangerous work, normally.
That was planned. It's easier to study him this way. I can prove this,
of course."

"How do you know for certain Willy is a safety prone?"

"Through non-accident statistics where he has worked."

       *       *       *       *       *

Goil removed a small pen knife from his pocket, opened the blade, and
drew it across the back of his hand. The cut bled. He said, "Look. I'm
injured."

I shook my head. "You are injured, but it's not the same thing. It was
not an accident."

Goil stood up. "I've heard enough of your gibberish. Willy is a thief
and you are a pathological liar. What you have just told me is pure
fantasy, a yarn concocted to try to protect you and Willy. I have
little doubt but what you really believe it yourself. Mr. Weston, you
are a sick man."

"I told you it would sound incredible.

"Willy only steals or alters the normal sequence of events so that
accidents involving human injury won't happen. Sometimes his behavior
patterns are simple, sometimes complex. But always--always the
synergism, syndrome, or whatever you want to call it, is the same. I
have a file of tape recordings I can let you hear, and incident
histories--"

"Which may very well be considered part of _your_ syndrome," said
Goil. "Mr. Weston, you are either the system's boldest liar, or you
are sick. You can't really expect me to believe all that garbage, now
can you?"

"With that unimaginative type mind you seem to have, Mr. Goil, no, I
don't expect you to believe. But it was worth a try. Willy is up to
something big right now, and if you interrupt it, there is no telling
what will happen."

"We'll find out," Goil said, "for I expect to find out what this is
all about. Now if you'll leave--"

I spun on my heel, angry at Goil's intolerant stupidity. I whipped
open the door and slammed it shut behind me. Then I stormed to my
quarters where I broke open a fresh bottle of Scotch. I downed a
couple of quick shots then nursed a third, thinking about the time out
near Jupiter when Willy had rigged up a still and brewed some powerful
concoction. He had insisted that we all sample it, and everyone had,
just to please Willy (they thought!) and had all gotten roaring drunk.
And had safely passed through one of those plague areas that come up
once in a century out of who knows where to decimate any population
that happens to be in the way.

We had made an emergency landing at another mining station. We had
walked through the corridors and rooms looking for desperately needed
parts and supplies, and had tried to count the dead until the task
became too sickening, exposed in every possible way to the voracious
microorganisms that had killed every being aboard. But none of us had
gotten even a headache. We found our parts and took off again.

Willy never made any more of that brew.

I wondered often what could have been in that stuff to make it such a
powerful antibiotic.

I had been early in the process of studying Willy then and had not had
foresight enough to keep a sample of that brew. I had lost one chance
right then to add materially to the medical knowledge of humanity. And
now that stupid Gar Goil was on the point of interrupting all further
research.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the next ten minutes I considered ways I could get Goil near an
airlock so I could shove him through, sans suit, and with enough
velocity so that he would end up somewhere in the Coal-sack region.
But I gave up the idea, conceding that it would be impossible;
somewhere along the line Willy would prevent it.

I took one more Scotch and went to bed. All night long I crossed and
recrossed the threshold of sleep, my mind filled with methods of
studying and analyzing the intricacies of Willy's behavior; trying to
discover any common factors so that others of his genre could easily
be discovered and put to work and their by-products salvaged.

The following day was dismal to me. I avoided everybody possible so I
wouldn't take my troubles out on them. And I avoided Goil in
particular, for another reason. I even ate late so I could eat alone.

Just about the time I finished, Artie's voice came over the system,
saying:

"Attention, everyone. Flash news item just received. There is a
freighter out of control enroute from Ganymede to Mars. Unless the
freighter can be brought under control, it will have to be abandoned."

So what, I thought. It's happened before. So some company loses a
freighter. They're insured.

Artie's voice went right on uninterrupted by my sour thoughts. "The
present course of the ship is interception of Mars. Unless the course
can be changed, the ship might plunge into Mars."

So what again? They're still insured. The crew can abandon ship in the
lifeboats. So the ship makes a microscopic dent in Mars. It's better
than 99% wasteland.

"The exact point at which impact with Mars will be made is being
computed right now. What makes the whole thing terrible is that the
freighter is loaded with fissionable material exported from Ganymede.
If the ship is not stopped or diverted before it reaches Mars, the
impact will bring all the units of fissionable material into super
critical proximity."

And that, I realized, will not be good for Mars because the thin
atmosphere of the planet will let the ship get right through to the
surface before the tough skin could get much more than cherry red. And
the ship would bury itself in the soft red soil (how deep?) before the
impact sandwiched the containers of fissionable material enough for
detonation proximity.

Whew! My interest began to increase.

That was Artie Jones giving the news. He was like that, and it was not
part of his regular job. He did it because he wanted to keep people up
with the latest. He was Computers and Communications engineer.

He finished off by saying, "Long-range scopes are looking for the ship
now. As soon as it is located and magnifiers thrown into the circuit,
it will be 'vised. I'll have the signals relayed to the rec room
trideo.

"It is, by the way, one of our own company freighters."

       *       *       *       *       *

Alarms clanged in my head. Yowee!

I raced for the rec room. Nearly everybody else was doing the same.
Orrin was playing a half-hearted game of cribbage with Gus. Goil sat
by himself in a corner reading. Willy was not there.

Randy and Manuel were already arguing about how much fissionable a
freighter like that could carry. I settled the argument by telling
them exactly how much. They both whistled and shook their heads. Randy
said:

"If that ship buries itself deeply enough in the surface and explodes,
it'll make a neat hole in Mars."

I looked askance at Goil and saw that he was not reading. I said,
"Hole, hell! With the tonnage they have on that ship, it'll take a
chunk out of the surface the size of Australia. If it goes deep
enough, it might even crack the planet wide open. It couldn't be any
worse."

I wasn't at all certain anything like cracking the planet would
happen. Nobody could know just what sort of blast that tonnage could
make. But I wanted it to sound really bad. I sneaked a quick look at
Goil. He was looking pretty worried.

Now, I knew our company had some real estate on Mars. A few mines, a
number of atmosphere generator factories and several gravity generator
plants. And just about this time I strongly suspected that Goil had
some stock and other holdings in the Mars territory.

"That's only part of it," I said. "Think of what will happen to Mars's
atmosphere if that much planet is scattered around."

"Yeah," said Manuel. "Dust. Red dust. And how about all that
undetonated radioactive material?"

"Which will be dust also," I said, "thoroughly mixed in with all the
rest of the dust."

Gus had finished his game of cribbage with Orrin and had come over. He
said, "The dust will shut out what dim sunlight there is and the whole
planet will be in for a deep freeze."

"What's the half-life of that stuff in the freighter?" I asked Orrin.
I knew, but I wanted Goil to know too. Orrin told me.

The alarm that had clattered in my brain had settled down to a
soothing purr. I began to add three and three hoping to get nine.
Right now I needed a gestalt of something whose whole would be a lot
greater than the sum of its parts. The parts I believe I had, and the
sum I think was due to come up soon.

I went out and headed for the computer room. Artie was in there trying
to listen to a dozen news reports at one time. He wouldn't miss any of
them, for a flock of recorders were going all at once.

I grabbed him by a shoulder and spun him around and looked as hard and
serious as I could.

"Artie," I said, "I know damned well you computed a course for Willy
the other day, for an asteroid to orbit just outside Earth. I want you
to give me the exact course, where and when. And I want it now. This
is official business, Artie."

       *       *       *       *       *

I must have looked extremely convincing, for Artie paled a little and
did not try to deny anything.

"--I can't, Sam," he said. "I gave the original tapes and sheets to
Willy. I threw away the duplicates."

"Dammit, Artie!" I shouted, now really mad. "Then you'd better start
remembering pretty good, because you're going to sit right down here
and I'm going to sit with you, and you are going to give me as nearly
as you can the course of Willy's asteroid."

This was just about an impossible request. I knew it, and Artie knew
it. But he sat down at the console of the computer and said:

"I'll do the best I can, Sam."

       *       *       *       *       *

I went to Willy's room and banged on the door then threw it open. He
wasn't there. For sure then he would be someplace he wasn't supposed
to be. So I headed for one likely place.

Willy was there all right. The chef shuffled around nervously,
probably wondering if I'd just chew him out for letting Willy in the
galley, or tell Orrin. He offered me ham and eggs. I refused sharply.

"Elmer," I said, "blast off."

Elmer did.

As soon as Willy and I were alone, I said, "Willy, you got me and Mr.
Orrin in a pack of trouble. Why don't you tell me where the generator
and the converter are. If we can get them back to the stock room,
nothing can be proved."

Willy couldn't look me in the face. He added three too many spoons of
sugar to his coffee then stirred it so fast it spilled over the edge
of the cup.

"Come on, Willy. Where?"

Willy spent the next minute trying to turn inside out. He finally
squeaked. "I can't, Sam."

"Why not, Willy?"

It was my turn to be silent for a minute. It seemed a lot longer. I
said, "I think you better tell me all about it, Willy."

He did.

I went back to the recreation room.

The trideo was on and some narrator's voice was explaining and showing
the course of the ship on a chart, and just where it would go.

The ship was still unaccountably out of control. The plotted course
showed that it would intercept Mars. And a map of Mars showed
precisely where the ship would strike the surface.

Of all the barren areas on Mars where the ship could strike and do a
little less surface damage, it was headed instead straight for the
only densely populated, industrial area.

I looked at Goil and saw that his morale could be trod on. He probably
already had computed his own monetary loss as well as the company
losses. But he wasn't saying a word. He was keeping his misery to
himself.

Let him stew until morning, I thought. By then he should be ripe for
the little package I was planning to hand him.

       *       *       *       *       *

By morning, the confidence that I had the night before had pretty much
dissipated. Nevertheless, I followed Goil from the dining hall to his
quarters, giving him only time to complete any personal necessities
before knocking on his door.

Some of my confidence returned when I entered the room. He looked as
if he hadn't slept any at all. The impending doom of his Mars holdings
had apparently dwelt with him most intimately the past night.

Goil said, "What's on your mind, Mr. Weston?"

"I had a talk with Willy last night. He wants to tell you everything."

Goil brightened slightly. "Fine," he said.

"I've taken the liberty of asking him to come here," I said.

Goil nodded.

This was a good chance for me to needle him a little more, so I said,
"The news reports are not good this morning. That freighter will have
to be abandoned sometime this evening if they don't get it off the
course it's on now."

Goil dimmed again. He said, "I heard the news."

"There is no way they can jettison that cargo either. Strange, isn't
it. Of all the other points in and around space, that ship has got to
pick Mars to smack into, and the only densely populated part of Mars
at that. Fate, I guess."

"Not so strange," said Goil. "It was enroute to Mars."

"Sure," I said, "but a course usually includes a series of corrections
for a haul like that."

Goil said, "No navigator-computer combination is good enough to plan a
one-shot course like that. It's just an unfortunate coincidence that
the industrial area is to be hit."

And those last words were just what I wanted to hear from him.

Willy knocked on the door and entered at Goil's request. Willy's face
was long, and the few steps that carried him into the room seemed to
draw on his last reserves of energy. He seemed a little grateful when
Goil bade him be seated.

Goil said, "All right, Willy. Sam says you have something to tell me."

"Yes, sir," Willy said dolefully, shifting his gaze so that he did not
have to look directly at Goil or me. He hesitated for moments, then
when the silence was too thick, he continued.

"I--I took that generator and that energizer as I told you yesterday."
Again he paused, patently dreading what more he had to say.

"What did you do with such monstrous, expensive pieces of equipment?"
asked Goil. "Of what possible use could they be to you, especially out
here in space?"

"Willy," I said, "why don't you start right at the beginning so Mr.
Goil can get a complete picture?"

Willy looked behind and around me, gulped a couple of times, then
started.

"OK. Well, Martha's birthday--Martha is my wife, Mr. Goil--her
birthday is in a few days. And I missed her last birthday and she
never forgave me for that. And I almost missed this one too, except I
got an idea. And that was after reading about those private satellites
a lot of the rich people have going around Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It was too late for me to send any sort of a birthday present to
Martha; besides, what could I get her out here? Anyway, I got the idea
that what a wonderful birthday present it would be if I could get
Martha a private satellite. Not one of those prefabricated ones, but a
natural, real one. The more I thought about it the better the idea
sounded. Then I realized that I had everything here; a million
asteroids to choose from, and I could slip one of the gravity
generators in the middle of it. And I could hitch the drive from the
smashed tug to it, and install a sub-space energizer. Except for an
atmosphere generator it would be equipped enough for a start. I could
finish equipping it later. So I got an asteroid and took a sub-space
energizer and a gravity generator from supply--they are
expendable--and got the drive off the wrecked tug. I installed them on
the rock."

Willy ended his story abruptly.

Goil sat looking intently at Willy and drumming his fingers on the
desk top. Finally he said:

"We can recover those major items. Maybe it'll go easier with you,
Willy. If you can show us where this rock is--"

Willy hung his head again. And the silence became solid. Finally Willy
squeaked out:

"I can't. I sent it off yesterday."

"Just how and when did you determine the rock should be sent?" asked
Goil.

"I--I got a course tape," said Willy. I could almost feel his sense of
guilt as he virtually implicated one more of his friends.

"Don't you know," said Goil in an all-too-quiet, ominous voice, "that
a jury-rigged contraption like that could never get near Earth with
only a one-time course like that plotted for it? That it takes precise
computations to get something like that to a destination? _With_ a
human navigator? Just how did you figure you could do it? I'm
curious."

"Well," said Willy warming up to the subject a little, "I rigged up a
timing unit. When it left here, it was on the taped course for Earth.
Then it went into sub-space. From the computations I got, I set
another timer that will kick it back into normal space at the right
time, and in an orbit around Earth."

The room was silent for a time. Finally the silence exploded with:

"You damned fool! You dangerous idiot! You've got just enough
knowledge to be able to do something like that, but not enough sense
to know it is hopeless and idiotic! I've heard enough. Now, get out of
here!"

Willy got out in a stumbling hurry.

       *       *       *       *       *

I stayed. Goil tried to glare me out of the room, but I would have
none of it. I was now ready to go into action. I was by no means
certain I would be right, but already deep in this mess, what more
could I lose by plunging?

With a lot more bravado than I really felt, I plunked down on Goil's
desk top a stack of sheets, a chart, and tapes. Then I put both palms
down on his desk and leaned over until I looked him squarely in the
face. I said:

"Do you know what is going to happen to that rock of Willy's, Mr.
Goil? It's going to come out of sub-space right smack in the path of
that freighter. It's going to knock that freighter right off course."

Of course, it sounded like a fantasy, and if I had been in Goil's
place, I would have thought it so. But Goil had been worrying over the
impending loss of his interests, and even the fantastic was something
to clutch at for the moment.

"What do you mean?" he asked.

I nodded to the stuff I had tossed on his desk. "Look at those. The
chart particularly. I got the course plotted by Artie Jones. I checked
the path and timing of both Willy's asteroid and the freighter.
Willy's asteroid is due to come out of sub-space in about six hours at
this point."--I pointed to an X I had marked on the chart--"And the
freighter will be at the same point at the same time."

Goil said nothing, but examined the chart and the computation figures,
and finally the tapes. He shook his head a number of times as if he
didn't want to believe but did not dare not to. Finally, he looked up
at me and said:

"The course and figures seem to check both ways. But I don't believe
it. That the rock and the freighter should meet in the same place at
the same time would be more than a coincidence. It would be a
miracle."

"More so than the 'coincidence' of the freighter headed straight for
Mars's only industrial area?" I asked.

Goil thought it over for a while. Then he said, "Yes. More than I can
imagine. We have the rock and the freighter, two moving bodies,
meeting in space by pure chance. Space is too vast for that sort of
thing. It can't happen."

"Mars and the freighter are two moving bodies in space that are going
to meet," I pointed out.

"Yes, but the ship was originally headed on a course to Mars. And Mars
is much bigger."

"True," I conceded. "But the asteroid is also on an interception
course with the freighter. And it is a lot bigger than the freighter."

Goil sat silent and thoughtful for quite a while. Finally, he said:

"I'm not gullible, Mr. Weston. Nor am I a fool. I have enough interest
in Mars to want a miracle to happen, aside from a natural desire to
see disaster averted. But what about you; what are you after? What are
you trying to prove?"

That was what I had been waiting for.

       *       *       *       *       *

I told him about the Research Institute of Human Influences, for which
I was a field psychologist, and how they located accident prones and
safety prones, among other types of odd personalities, and how we
observers gathered data in efforts to learn ways to nullify the
accident prones' influence, and to learn the whys and hows of the
safety prones, as well as ways to expand their fields of influence.

Goil just sat there, his face indicating neither belief nor disbelief.

"Willy has no idea he does what he does, nor why. He's completely
unaware of his influence. I can't imagine how his mind works to
rationalize for his behavior. I'd do just about anything, Mr. Goil, to
keep Willy from learning all I've told you. It would make him aware,
and that might sour things, probably even nullify his influence."

Goil said, "I'm not at all convinced that this is not some sort of
lunatic hoax. But as long as there is nothing I nor you can do for the
time being, I'm going to hold any further action in abeyance. Let's
see what happens. Even if by some miraculous coincidence the rock and
the ship should meet, that's not proof that your yarn is true."

"No," I said. "But other things have happened before. Nothing this
big, though. But always, there is this synergism of Willy's; a
compulsion to do some crazy thing, or to build some silly gadget, even
if he has to steal to do it. And the inevitable end that sometimes
quite obviously prevents injury, and other times leaving the results a
mystery. Once the purpose has been accomplished, Willy loses all
interest. I have histories, documented cases of Willy's influence.
Files of tape recordings of his synergisms in action. And these files
all show a definite pattern."

"Let's hear some of your recordings, and read some of your documents,"
said Goil.

And that was how we spent the next four hours.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course, I had juggled the computations I had shown Goil a little
bit. And made the course of the asteroid look like it would coincide
with that of the freighter. If I hadn't, Goil would never have given
me the time I needed.

Art Jones had kept the news of the freighter coming in all day. It was
still on course for Mars. About a half-hour before the freighter crew
was due to leave the ship, the rec room was crowded with men waiting
to watch the escape of the crew.

There hadn't been time enough to get a ship in the area that could
blast the freighter off course. And there hadn't been any ship even on
Mars equipped for such action, not even an old slightly serviceable
derelict that could be placed in the runaway ship's path for
deflection.

The long-range scope still had the runaway ship in focus. It looked
like a little painted miniature in the trideo, with a very slowly
moving spangled background. A faint superimposed image of Mars
appeared. The announcer was talking about forces, vectors, and other
navigational terminology, plus nonsensical chatter of probability
factors. The picture faded and was replaced with an artist's animated
conception of the impending tragedy. It showed the present location of
the ship, the calculated course and trajectory of the ship through the
atmosphere to the point of impact--right in the center of the
industrial area. It ended with a big question mark before the image of
the ship returned.

During the sequence of the collision course, I was trying in my mind
to figure out just how far off Willy's asteroid would be. I could
figure it roughly in my head, remembering the original figures I'd
gotten from Artie. The asteroid would be no fewer than a million and a
half miles from the runaway ship, at its nearest point. Besides, it
wouldn't emerge from sub-space until it was near Earth, a good seventy
million miles from Mars at that time.

It had taken some belligerent persuasion to get Artie to conjure up
the figures and tapes I gave Goil.

I felt a tap on my shoulder and glanced up. Simon, one of the tug
pilots, was pointing toward the back of the room. I looked back.
Artie was there with a worried look on his face looking at me. His
eyes moved quickly toward where Goil sat, and then back at me. His
head gave a little backwards jerk.

Feeling real unhappy all of a sudden as premonition nudged my mind, I
got up quietly and went back.

Artie had stepped outside in the hall. When he saw me step out of the
rec room doorway, he motioned me down the hall farther. Gloom was all
over his face, even in his motions. He said:

"Sam, I don't know what's going on around here between Willy, Goil,
and you. But I thought you'd like to know Goil was in to see me a
little while ago. Before I had much of a chance to think about it, I
gave him the figures and tapes for that course I plotted for Willy. I
don't know how Goil knew about them, but he asked for them directly."

"Which figures, Art?" I asked anxiously.

"Why, the ones I made for you. Is there something wrong, Sam?"

My alarm must have shown in my face. I said, "No, Art. I thought maybe
you might have given him that other course I asked you to plot."

"You mean that false course? Hell, Sam. I didn't know--"

"It's all right, Art. You didn't know." And I left him standing there
puzzled. I went back to the rec room.

I wasn't feeling so good by the time I got back. My seat had been
taken, so I wriggled myself a place against the back wall.

Goil knew all about the fictitious course I gave him. Right there he
had me cold. But he was too worried to want to do anything about it
then.

The time seemed to stand still. The crew still had some fifteen
minutes before they were due to abandon ship, so I left the rec room
to sneak out to the galley for a cup of coffee. When I entered, there
was Artie and Elmer already having coffee.

Artie said, "Sit down, Sam, and have a cup."

Elmer poured, and I gulped half the cupful down gratefully, then said,
"Aren't you two going to watch the runaway crack into Mars?"

"Sure," said Artie. "I've got a small monitor screen in the com room.
Want to join us?"

I did and said so. We all drank another cup of coffee and then went to
the communications room. The three of us could sit and comfortably
watch the small monitor.

A series of montages suddenly snapped off the screen to be replaced by
the lonesome ship. This time there was Mars in the near background. I
never could understand how the long-range scope mechanisms managed to
bend their energies so that they could literally see behind something
directly in front of them, but they could. That was how they could get
Mars in the background.

The excited announcer was saying that the crew would abandon ship in
four minutes since all hope of a course change was gone. And in
another three hours the runaway would enter atmosphere.

"Sure," Elmer said, "the crew will abandon ship. But where can they go
after they do? Mars, that's where."

"I guess all you can say about it is that they are going right out of
the fire into the frying pan," Artie said morbidly.

"Yeah," Elmer said. "They sure are. About all they can do is land on
Mars with the short range of the lifeboats."

"Oh, they got enough range, all right," Artie said. "Only they don't
have enough food and water for all the crew to reach some other
planet. They have no choice but to try Mars."

"That'll get them there a little while after the crash," Elmer said.
"In time to get in on the marsquakes and the dust storms."

"Yeah," said Artie, "if they make it through the atmosphere while it's
still being churned."

"Why don't you guys stow the chatter," I said brusquely. "Let us hear
what's going on."

The announcer was saying, "... in ninety seconds. All hope of
regaining control of the ship is past. The entire crew is now in the
four lifeboats ready to leave." Then he started a long countdown, a
full sixty seconds.

The scope magnified the ship more.

I found myself holding my breath. The countdown neared an end--ended.

And two lifeboats sprang from each side of the freighter.

The scope lost them for a moment, then picked up one pair. They were
almost invisible specks in the background.

In another five minutes they had joined the other pair of lifeboats,
and all four were now headed slowly toward Mars, apparently well
behind the mother ship.

The scope shifted back to the abandoned ship. The announcer was
saying:

"And now take a long last look at this--this compounded missile that
in a few hours may very well destroy a world unless a miracle--"

The scene, the words could not have been more perfectly timed even in
a class B trideo space thriller. The racing derelict was framed
against a background of ruddy Mars, then the next instant the area
completely around it seemed to blacken out. Then it started glowing,
increasing in intensity, expanding, throwing fiery arms wildly
outward. It became a nova of fury. The scope had it centered
beautifully. Even the coolest molten blobs could be seen being pushed
from the mass until the inner hell caught up with them and turned them
into vapor.

A quick-thinking engineer must have thrown a filter somewhere in the
scope's innards, for the scene became sort of an X-ray one in which
the glare of the light no longer impeded vision. The heart of the fury
could easily be seen as it expanded itself, feeding and growing on the
solid matter within its reach. The central fury overtook the lagging
perimeter forces, engulfed them, then blossomed out, thinned, and
became a diaphanous curtain rippling and shimmering in an uncertainty
of direction. It waned, leaving a residual flicker that might have
been only a product of imagination.

The entire magnificent show lasted ten minutes. For each second of
each minute of that time, I'll swear I held my breath! And everyone
else in the station at that time would say the same about himself. It
was that striking, that breath-taking.

Some seconds after the spectacle was over, there was a near-silence.
Then cheers broke loose. Such a confined din I hope never to hear
again. The dramatic suspense had been so effectively communicated for
so many hours, the miraculous sudden release seemed to demand an
over-compensating effect. Everyone seemed suddenly to believe it an
excellent reason to celebrate--and they certainly did!

       *       *       *       *       *

Speculation as to what caused the explosion ran riot. But to me it was
plainly Willy's influence reaching out to a company ship's crew and
Mars personnel. It might seem that I had gambled a little too much on
Willy's influence, but not really. I had observed and recorded that
particular synergism and had every confidence in the results. Willy's
Rube Goldberg had a combination of built-in errors which produced a
series of compensating course alterations that made the asteroid
de-energize and materialize right smack in normal space where the
freighter was--after the crew escaped.

The blackness that had been noticeable for an instant was, of course,
the asteroid coming out of sub-space. And with the runaway trying to
co-exist right in the middle of the asteroid, naturally everything
vaporized. Mars was saved.

So was Willy.

So was I.

Goil? Well, I nailed him right away; confessed my duplicity in the
course figures and tapes, and explained that I needed the time to let
things happen the way Willy's influence makes them happen. I don't
think Goil was totally convinced. But he must have been partly, at
least, for with all the system's experts arguing about just exactly
what made the ship explode, and with no two experts agreeing on an
explanation, he might have given some benefit of the doubt to Willy.
Anyway, he was so relieved that his interests in Mars were saved that
he smiled for the next three days, dismissed me as an incurable
visionary or some other sort of nut, and chewed Willy out for two
hours, then seemed to forget the matter.

Me? An appropriate length of time before the ship was abandoned, I
radioed to a stock broker friend of mine on Earth and put every dime
plus that I had into the mightily fallen stocks on Mars. Goil and I
are now both big holders in the company.

Willy? He never suspected his part in the episode. Last time I heard,
he was working on some fabulous government project as fifteenth
assistant engineer. I guess the government had heard about him
somehow. It seems that the fabulous project has working for it an
egghead whose brainpower is such a necessity that he is hired even
though he is a notorious accident prone. Willy, of course, neutralizes
him so work can progress at normal rate.


THE END

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Jack of No Trades, by Charles Cottrell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACK OF NO TRADES ***

***** This file should be named 30927.txt or 30927.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/9/2/30927/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
