The Project Gutenberg eBook, The History and Antiquities of Horsham, by
Howard Dudley


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The History and Antiquities of Horsham


Author: Howard Dudley



Release Date: January 17, 2010  [eBook #31003]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY AND ANTIQUITIES OF
HORSHAM***


Transcribed from the 1836 edition by David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org

               [Picture: View of Horsham, from Denne Hill]





                             THE HISTORY AND
                              ANTIQUITIES OF
                                 HORSHAM.


                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

                                * * * * *

                  By the Author of Juvenile Researches.

                                * * * * *

                      ILLUSTRATED BY WOOD ENGRAVINGS

                         AND LITHOGRAPHIC VIEWS.

                                 LONDON.

                                  1836.

                         [Picture: Coat of Arms]

                             TO THE RT. HON.
                         GEORGE O'BRIEN WYNDHAM,

                             Earl of Egremont
                          AND BARON COCKERMOUTH.

                           THE FOLLOWING PAGES

                     ARE BY HIS LORDSHIP'S PERMISSION

                          RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED

                                                    By his obliged servant
                                                            Howard Dudley.




ILLUSTRATIONS


LITHOGRAPHIC.

View from Denne hill       frontispiece
Interior of the nave       9
Horsham Church             6
Map of Horsham             68

WOOD-CUTS.

Town Hall                  5
Horsham Church             7
The Chancel                8
Braose monument            11
Delves do.                 14
Hoo monument               15
Brass figure               16
Arms of Foys               17
Marriott monument          19
Jamieson do.               24
Horsham gaol               27
Independent's chapel       29
Wesleyan do.               30
British Schools            33
Collier's do.              31
North Chapel               34
Chesworth House            35
Denne do.                  38
Warnham Church             39
Caryll monument            40
Warnham Court              43
Field place                44
Nuthurst Church            53
Itchingfield do.           58
Farthing Bridge            60
Slinfold Church            62
Tregoz monument            63
Blount monument            64
Rusper nunnery             Appendix
Brass figure               Do.

HISTORY AND ANTIQUITIES,
OF HORSHAM,
AND ITS VICINITY


The ancient town and borough of Horsham, which has generally been past
over in topographical accounts, as a place unworthy of notice; or lost in
the dazzling descriptions, of the "modern maritime Babylon of Sussex,"
must always remain a spot, dear to the lover of antiquities, and romantic
scenery.  The derivation of its name, has ever continued a matter of
great perplexity; which perhaps may be considered as a very strong
argument, in favour of the antiquity of the place.  Some persons
conjecture, that the appellation is derived from the two Saxon words,
hurst, and ham, the first syllable signifying a wood, and the second a
village or collection of houses: and this opinion seems to be supported
by the known fact, that this part of the county, was formerly one entire
tract of forest land: but again quite as good if not a superior
derivation, may be taken from the two words, Horsa, and ham, that is the
village of, or built by, Horsa.

Horsham has enjoyed the privilege of sending two members to Parliament,
ever since the year 1295: by the passing of the reform bill, however, one
representative was considered sufficient for the business of the borough.
The names of the persons first elected for the town, were Walter Burgeys,
and Walter Randolf: Robert Henry Hurst esq. is the present member.

The spring assizes for the county, had also long been held in the
Town-Hall of Horsham; but this privilege was selfishly abstracted from
the town, by the inhabitants of Lewes; and even the county gaol, which
has been stationed here, for time immemorial, is, we understand, to be
removed to the all devouring eastern rival: the quarter sessions however,
are still held here.

Still, notwithstanding, as respects the town, Horsham is greatly
improving: the number of buildings which have been lately erected, and
which are still erecting, are of a new and very handsome description: the
streets are neatly paved, with the large flat stones procured from the
excellent quarries in the neighbourhood; and the illumination of the
streets by gas, which is being carried on with great spirit and energy,
contribute very greatly to the general respectability and good appearance
of the place.

Horsham consists of 4 principal streets, crossing one another at right
angles, with a large square, stretching due N. and S., in the centre.
The upper part of this square is commonly denominated the Gaol Green, in
consequence of the prison, which formerly stood at the northern end, but
of which two large walls, now found useful in an adjacent brewery, only
remain.

                           [Picture: Town Hall]

The lower portion contains the large and handsome Town-Hall, of which the
annexed sketch will afford some idea: a few years ago, the appearance
which it presented was entirely different, being built on arches, in a
similar manner, to the Council chamber, at Chichester, and surmounted by
a stone with the inscription "Thirty six miles from Westminster Bridge,"
engraved thereupon: by the kind liberality of the Duke of Norfolk, it was
completely repaired, and greatly enlarged; and though no longer applied
to its original purpose, (except in the instance of the quarter sessions)
it is still found very serviceable for lectures, public meetings, &c. &c.
The north front is embellished by the arms of royalty, flanked by those
of Norfolk and Horsham.  On either side of the Hall, is a neat street,
only one of which is a thoroughfare; these meet on the southern side of
the building, in a very handsome and respectable walk, called the Church
Causeway, at the termination of which, is the ancient and spacious
church, (dedicated to St Mary) the approach is rendered particularly
picturesque, by an avenue of lofty lime trees, of some extent, which
leads in a perfectly straight direction, to the church-yard gateway: the
effect of the view from this avenue, is exceedingly pleasing,
particularly of a summer evening, when the rays of the setting sun cast a
beautiful golden tint, upon the venerable porch, which appears a
conspicuous object behind the portal.

                 [Picture: South view of Horsham Church]

The northern side of the edifice, though perhaps not quite equal to the
southern, appears to great advantage, though the modern windows, which
have been subsituted in several instances for others of great antiquity,
add greatly to diminish the general effect.

                        [Picture: Horsham Church]

On entering the church by the eastern gateway, the interior of the
structure appears to the highest advantage: the large and beautifully
simple communion window, reaching almost from the basement to the roof,
is by no means the least attractive object of attention; while the
handsome appearance of the altar, raised by a flight of several steps,
covered entirely with crimson cloths, the unusually large extent of the
communion rails; and the numerous beautiful monuments, in every
direction, afford a very elegant appearance, perhaps not to be equalled
by any other parochial edifice in the county.  Yet at the same time, the
venerable roof of oaken planks; the large yet highly sculptured beams
which have weathered nearly a thousand years; the tattered escotcheons;
the crested helmets; and the antique tombs, afford a view at once
pleasing and romantic.--Some attempt has been made to illustrate this
portion of the church, (the chancel) in the annexed engraving, but no
drawing can do justice to the original building.

                          [Picture: The Chancel]

The dimensions of the church are as below.

Length       146 ft.
Width        53 8 in.
Height       47 10

                           [Picture: The Nave]

The roof is supported upon wooden ribs, crossed by others of the same
materials: the joints are covered by ornamented plates of iron, of very
grotesque descriptions: in the nave, the ribs are almost double the
distance apart, of those in the chancel: the junction of the roof and
walls, in the latter portion of the edifice, are adorned with curious
little figures of horses, foxes, &c. &c. interspersed with stars, and
many other similar devices.

The entire edifice is supported upon eight columns on either side: three
constituting the chance, and the remaining five the nave: the galleries
are particularly neat, more especially that appropriated to the organ,
the whole of the pewing being covered entirely with green baize.  The
lancet windows, with which the church was formerly furnished, have almost
all been altered for others of a later date, except in the clerestory,
where they retain their original form.  The large east window, before
mentioned, was formerly adorned with no less than 14 coats of arms richly
painted.  The roof was put up, at the time that the Norfolks were lords
of the borough: in the year 1825, a curious old inscription was
discovered upon the summit of the walls, reaching from one end of the
church to the other, but it was very remarkable, that the centres of all
the letters, (which were about a foot in length) were entirely, and
apparently designedly effaced, so that not the slightest meaning could be
discovered from it.

In the chancel, is the curious and remarkable effigy of Thomas lord
Braose ob. 1396.  This noble and ancient family were formerly almost the
sole proprietors of the county of Sussex.  One of their residences was at
Chesworth, an ancient mansion to the south of the town, which shall
afterwards be described; and Bramber Castle also near Steyning,
originally appertained to these powerful barons.  The head of the figure,
"is defended by a basinet, ornamented by a draplet of jewels, his throat
by the ample carmail, attached to the helmet as in the time of Edward
III.  His arms are in plate armour, and his body in a shortened hauberk,
kept from pressing on his chest, by means of the plastron, or
breast-plate, within.  Over this is the juppon, bearing his coat of arms,
viz. seme of cross croslets, a lion rampant crowned.  Suspended from his
military girdle at his right hip, is his dagger, the sheath of which, is
ornamented in an architectural style, and in the same manner at the left,
hung his long sword, of which no traces now remain.  On his insteps, are
large pieces attached to the spur leathers, and terminated by indented
edges which conceal the chain mail beneath.  His jousting helmet,
surmounted by his crest, a demi-lion rampant, issuing from a coronet, is
under his head, but greatly mutilated, all below the oscularium, having
been destroyed." {12}

                        [Picture: Braose monument]

At a very small distance from the above mentioned monument, is a very
beautiful altar tomb of white marble, relieved alternately by slabs of
black: upon this is an admirable and most elaborately executed figure, of
a lady, in long flowing robes, her right hand reclines upon her breast,
while her left rests upon the Holy Scriptures, in a peculiarly graceful
manner: it is the work of Francis Fanelli, an Italian sculptor, of great
eminence in his day, and has escaped the devastation generally inflicted
on works of art in the parochial edifices of Sussex; the inscription is
as follows.

    Here lyeth (expecting a joyfull resurction,) the body of Elizabeth,
    late wife of Thomas Delves Esquire, son and heire apparent to Sr.
    Henry Delves of Dvddington in the Covnty of Chester, Barronet, who
    deceased the 2nd day of December 1654, being somewhat more than 25
    yeares old; then in childbed of Henry their 2nd son, who with Thomas
    their eldest son did both survive her.  She was enriched with many
    ornaments, both of mind and body, and memorable for virtue, in the
    several relations of her life, whereunto she was any way engaged,
    being religious as she was a Christian, dutiful as a daughter,
    affectionate as a wife, tender as a mother, discreete in her family
    as a Mistris, charitable in the relation of a neighbour, also of a
    sweet and affable disposition and of a sober and winning
    conversation.  She was the only child of Hall Ravenscroft Esq.r of
    this parish, by the mother descended of ye Staplays of this county.
    Her sorrowful husband, sadley weighing such a considerable losse,
    erected this monument, that an impartiall memorial of her might bee
    the better communicated to posterity.

                        [Picture: Delves monument]

On the south side, are the arms of the deceased with the motto "In Dieu
ma foy".

                         [Picture: Hoo monument]

On the other side of the church, in a portion denominated the Roffy
chancel, is a large, and beautifully sculptured altar-tomb, of Sussex
marble, with a light and curious canopy of the same material, supported
upon pillars: on the surface were formerly a brass inscription, and
armorial bearings, but all of these have disappeared, it is supposed to
cover the remains of Thomas Hoo Knt. lord Hoo and de Hastings, ob. 1455.

According to Dallaway, mention is made in the visitation book of Philpot
and Owen, A.D. 1634, of two other monuments, not at present remaining.
"Under the communion table,

    Hic jacet William Hoo armiger, qui obiit 2do mensis Sept. 1465

Arms, Hoo impaling a fess.

On a marble stone,

    Orate pro animab, Thomae Cobert et ejus uxor qui quidem Tho. ob.
    1495.

Arms, two shields, 1 Covert, impaling a phaon's head: 2 impaling, a
chevron, 2 roundlets, in chief a buck's head caboshed."

Under the organ gallery, is a curious brass of a man and woman, in the
antique dress of the time, with the following inscription, in Gothic
characters, below them.

    Here lyeth Richard Foys, and Elizabeth his wife: which Richard
    deceased in 21 day of April, MDLCIII.

Affixed to one of the columns supporting the organ gallery, is a small
slab of white marble, with a frame of black: the inscription in black
letter runs thus.

    In this seat is interred the body of Thomas Pyke Barber and
    Chyrurgeon, who departed this life the 16 day of Nov., in the year of
    our Lord MDLXXXI; and in remembrance of him, this monument was
    erected by his brother Wm. Pyke.

                         [Picture: Arms of Foys]

At a very small distance from this tablet, the annexed inscription can be
discovered upon a stone in the middle cross aisle.

    Here lyeth Robert Hvrst of Hvrst hill, who died A.D. 1483, Nicholas
    his son, A.D. 1533, and Richard son of Nicholas Feb. 16th A.D. 1592.

The other monumental inscriptions are to the following persons.

John Mitchell of Stammerham 1610, Mary his wife daughter of William
Gresham gent. of Surrey, 1610; Maurice Barrow gent. 1778; John Parsons
esq. 1702; Cecilia Maria his wife 1700; Mrs. Olive Eversfield, only
sisters to Mary wife of Charles Eversfield, of Denne place, 1704; Rev.
Geo. Marshall, 35 year officiating minister of this parish, 1819; Charles
Eversfield of Denne place, and Mary his wife; Sir Charles Eversfield
Bart., 1784; Mrs. Olive Eversfield 1803; Anna Maria Willemot Thornton,
1824; William Jamieson vicar of Horsham 1821; Edward Tredcroft, 1768;
Mary Tredcroft, 1794; Sarah and Henry Du Cane Cap. Richard Marriott,
1805, the beautiful female figure which surmounts this monument, is the
work of Westmacot, Tristram Revel, lieut. col. 1797; Rev. T. White 1788;
Thomas Brien sen. 1741; Mrs Mary Jenden 1802; John Smith esq. 1758;
Elizabeth Smith; 1780; Griffith Smith 1663; Charles Smith 1689; Adam
Smith 1789: Harriet Smith 1800; Mrs Martha Longhurst 1750; John Foster
1750; Elizabeth Foster his wife 1743; John Medwin eldest son of John
Charles & Mary Medwin, unfortunately killed by a fall from a gig, at the
foot of Picts hill near Horsham, 1806; Lieu. Henry Clough Medwin 1815;
Henry Ellis 1785; Mrs Ann Godwin 1822; George Cheynell 1747; Elizabeth
his wife, 1781; John Eversfield esq. 1669.  Besides these there are slabs
to the memory of the following individuals.--Thomas Waller: Thomas
Dunball: Mary Woodyear: William Norman: John Higgen: Thomas Buen: Henry
Waller: John Rowland: Hannah Howes: Ann Curtis: John Pilfold: Robert
Hall: William White: William Griffith: Henry Griffith: Ann Griffith: Hen.
Groombridge: Elizabeth Hewet: Henry Ellis: Henry Groombridge: Judith
Jeamison: Samuel, Sarah, and Catherine, Wicker: Matthew White: Francis
Read: James Waller: John Middleton esq.: Ann Chourn Isabella Ramsden; Sir
Bysshe Shelley Bart. of Castle Goring: Mary Catherina his wife: Catherine
their daughter.  All of these monuments, with the exception of six,
belong to the last century.

                       [Picture: Marriott monument]

The font constructed of Sussex marble, is octagonal, and handsomely
sculptured: date 1455.

                        [Picture: Font and cover]

The following inscriptions are noticed in the Burrel MSS. (British
Museum,) which at present do not remain.

                           In mortem Georgii Allen.

    Quod fuit esse, quod est, quod non fuit esse, quod esse,
    Esse quod est, non esse quod est, non est erit esse:
    Vita malis plena est, pia mors pretiosa corona est;
    Post vitam mors est, post mortem vita beata est.

In the window of the North chancel, was the following, in Gothic
characters.

    Orate pro anima, Wiliemi Attwood de Horsham et Aliciae uxor ejus,
    quae istam fenestram fieri fecit; A.D. 1428.

"Madam Eversfield (according to Dallaway) gave one silver flaggon, two
silver cups, one basin for oblation, gilt; pulpit cushion and cloth, with
gold fringe, and a branch of candlesticks to the body of the church.  Two
dozen of penny loaves, to be disposed of among the poor every Sunday,
that frequent the church, for ever; the gift of Mr Theobald Shelley."
"The same person with the Lady Matthews, gave this portion of bread to be
disposed of every Sunday for ever, for the encouragement of the poor to
frequent the church."  This is inscribed in front of the organ gallery.
In the parish registers mention is made of an attack of the plague, by
which this place was afflicted, though happily not to a very alarming
extent, they commence in the year 1560.  Over the vestry, (which was
built in the reign of Edward VI) is a very curious old room reached by
means of a spiral stair-case, terminated by a trap door: the oaken roof
depends entirely upon a large beam in the centre.  It is called the
Lollard's tower, and was most probably used as a place of confinement for
that unfortunate sect: the apertures for light are thickly guarded by
double iron bars, and in one place, on the north wall, the remains of an
iron ring are visible: the only thing of any consequence in this cold and
cheerless apartment, is a large oaken chest, curiously carved, with a
secret drawer of superior workmanship.  The beautiful service of
communion plate is also kept here.

                       [Picture: Jamieson monument]

In the Roffy chancel is the beautiful monument of Mr Jamieson; the figure
of the angel above, pointing upwards, is exquisitely sculptured, and
deserves much attention.  Dallaway mentions that there appear to have
been two chantries and a brotherhood founded in this church, whose
history is rather obscure, in some measure contradictory; the first he
adds, "was built by Walter Burgess who in the year 1307, obtained a
license to endow with 50 acres of land, a chaplain to celebrate divine
service daily in the parish church of Horsham, for the souls of himself
and his successors.  The other was denominated Butler's chantry, and was
founded by one John Body and others by the lycens of King Hen. VI, for
one chapleyn to say diligent service for ever, as th'aulter of St
Michauel in the church of Horsham; to pray for the soulles of King Henry
&c.; the said chapleyn to have for his wagis vijlr for the year, for
ever, which hath been continued accordingly till about viij yeares past,
at which time Sir Will, Brandon, clerk, then incumbent, sold the same
unto Sir Roger Copley, and after such sale by him made, he the said Sir
William, did sing after the space vj yeares, and the said Sir Roger
Coqley paid him his wagis.'"  "Horsham,--Butler's Chantry.--William
Brandon of th'age of --- yeares, was last incumbent there, but not
resident, since anno reg. xxvij who sold his interest to Mr Copley for
viijli xi s. ij d. {26}  At the west end of the building is a large massy
tower, lately put into thorough repair, this is surmounted by an
octagonal spire, 230 feet in height, and formed of wooden shingles
carefully fitted together.  The great bell of this church is the largest
in the county, and weighs nearly a ton and a half: the whole peal,
consisting of eight, is extremely melodious.

                                * * * * *

On the 17th of November 1231, John de Braose granted the church of
Horsham with all its appurtenances, to the prioress and nuns of Rusper,
for their exclusive use; by same deed it was also ordained, that on
account of the size of the parish, and the number of inhabitants, the
vicar who shall officiate in the church from time to time, shall have one
chaplain as his assistant, and two subordinate ministers, viz. a deacon
and sub-deacon, to officiate with him in the same church.  At the
dissolution of monastic establishments, in the reign of Henry VIII, the
Archbishop of Canterbury came into the patronage of the vicarage.

                         [Picture: Horsham gaol]

The county gaol is situated in East street, upon a very elevated site; it
was erected about 50 years since, by William Griffith, who ruined
himself, by contracting for the building: it is a neat and handsome
structure, and extremely appropriate for the purpose, on the South is a
small garden extending along the front of the building, which has two
court-yards, of about half an acre each, with a gravel walk surrounding a
fine grass-plot, and the whole is encircled by a lofty wall.  To prevent
confusion or danger in case of fire, every cell is arched over with
brick, and a separate room allotted to each debtor and felon.  The chapel
is in the keeper's house, where prayers are read daily, and a sermon
delivered every Sunday by the chaplain.  The annual salary of the keeper
is 180l.: that of the Chaplain 160l. and of the Surgeon 70l. per annum:
the matron and the three male turnkeys receive 8s. each weekly: the
internal management is regulated by rules made at the quarter sessions,
and confirmed by the judges of assize.

                     [Picture: Independent's chapel]

The Independent's chapel, is situated near the end of West Street, it is
peculiarly neat, both as respects its external and interior appearance:
an inscription upon an oval tablet in front, informs us, that it was
erected by voluntary subscription in the year 1814.  At the distance of
about a hundred yards from the above, is the Roman Catholic chapel, with
an embattled front surmounted by a cross: service is performed here, only
once a fortnight; proceeding on in the same direction, we arrive at the
Anabaptist chapel, a respectable building of some antiquity, a little to
the left of which is the Friends' meeting house, in a very pretty retired
situation.  The Wesleyan chapel was erected in Brunswick place, A.D.
1832, it is simple in its style, but exceedingly neat, elegant, and
appropriate: the last religious edifice in Horsham, is the Baptist's
chapel, situated in New Street, it much resembles the Independant's in
its exterior appearance.

                        [Picture: Wesleyan chapel]

"Richard Collier by his will dated Jan 23 1532, benevolently left a small
estate, at Stratford le Bow in the county of Middlesex to be sold, and
the product to be laid out in the purchase of a school house at Horsham,
where he was born." {31}  The children enjoying the privileges of this
charity, are annually selected by the vicar and churchwardens with eight
of the most "honest" inhabitants, they are allowed to remain till the age
of 14 and any number may at the discretion of the school wardens, be
instructed in the Latin language.  It is expressly ordered in the will,
that the children elected, should be the offspring of "poor people, in
especial of the said parish, and next about the same, to be educated in
reading, writing, arithmetic, and the principles of the Christian
religion."  The charitable founder also bequeathed to the Mercers'
Company, a house and premises in Cheapside London, for the support of the
master and usher, whose annual salaries are, 120l. for the former, and
80l. for the latter.  The school house is situated in a peculiarly
delightful and romantic situation, with a pleasant croft in front,
extending to the east side of the church yard; the accompanying wood-cut
represents the west front of the building.

                      [Picture: The British Schools]

The National School is held in the church porch, where great numbers of
the younger children of the poor are instructed.

A very neat building, denominated Denne School, has been erected in a
delightful situation, at the foot of the hill, from which it takes its
name, for the education of the girls of the neigbouring indigent persons.

In the back lane, the members of the church of England, have instituted
an infant school, which appears a very pleasant object in this hitherto
neglected portion of the town.

The Royal British Schools are also well worth the inspection of the
visitor: the boys are taught reading, writing, grammar, linear and
perspective drawing &c.

To the North of Horsham, on Hurst hill, is Moated House, formerly
belonging to the family of the Westons: this mansion was the residence of
Robert Hurst ob. 1483, whose monument in the church, the reader will
remember.

                         [Picture: North Chapel]

Nearer the town, is a very ancient building formerly belonging to lord
Hoo and de Hastings, whose remains are interred in the church: a farm
house at present the property of the duke of Norfolk alone marks the site
of this once splendid and princely edifice.

                        [Picture: Chesworth House]

Chesworth, one of the oldest houses in the county, was formerly as before
said, the residence of the noble family of Braose, this truly romantic
structure is situated a little to the south east of the town, of which it
is one of the chief objects of interest.  The unfortunate Thomas duke of
Norfolk, who fell a victim to the malignant jealousy of Queen Elizabeth,
was apprehended here, A.D. 1571.  It is said that the papers concealed by
Higford, and which led to his conviction, were discovered under the roof
of this building.  Several apartments of very spacious dimensions, but of
whose existence the inhabitants were totally ignorant, were discovered
through accident, by a maid servant about 20 years since.  The chapel now
used as a wash-house, is still quite perfect, and of great height:
several niches for the statues of saints, and receptacles for holy water,
may be discovered in the sides: through the falling of part of the wall,
a few years ago, several Roman coins were dug up, from which
circumstance, it has been by some persons imagined, that the place was
originally a Roman villa.

To the west of the town, is Hills place, or rather the remains of an
elegant residence, so called; it was formerly the property of the lords
Irvine, and was considered a very handsome specimen of the domestic
architecture of the age, in which it was erected.  It was taken down a
few years since, and no vestige left to mark its site, save the remnants
of a farm house in existence before the building of the mansion itself,
and part of a wing added to the structure, on the marriage of lord
William Ingram, one of the family.

                       [Picture: Hills place, 1787]

In one of the upper rooms, is a venerable escocheon, with the motto "In
coelo quies," serving to exclude the wind from the antique chamber.

On a lofty eminence denominated Denne hill, the visitor may obtain a very
beautiful view of the town of Horsham, with its adjacent hills behind,
the interesting church appears by far the most conspicuous object in the
wide extended landscape, while the small and winding branch of the river
Arun, which takes its rise in the adjacent forest of of St. Leonard,
contributes not a little to heighten the beauty, and diversify the scene,
of this truly delightful and extensive prospect.

At a short distance from the spot where this romantic view may be
obtained, the ivied tower, and venerable battlements of Denne house,
proudly rise upon the sight.  The spot upon which this edifice stands, is
particularly interesting, being generally supposed by antiquarians to be
the site of a Danish encampment, during a conflict with the Picts, who
made choice of an opposite eminence, still retaining the name of Pict's
hill, while the one we have just described preserves the appellation of
Denne (undoubtedly derived from Dane) hill.  The estate formerly
belonging to the family of Braose, was forfeited to the crown, with other
lands, on the attainder of Thomas duke of Norfolk into whose possession
it had fallen: in the year 1594, it was awarded by Sir William Covert and
Sir John Caryll to James Boath, by whom it was sold five years afterwards
to Stephen Barnham of London for 1250l.  Shortly afterwards however the
two sons of the last mentioned person, parted with it to Sir Thomas
Eversfield for the sum of 5500l.

                          [Picture: Denne House]

After passing through the hands of several of his descendants, it
devolved to William Markwick esq, who took the name of Eversfield, and to
whose grandson a minor it now belongs.

                        [Picture: Warnham Church]

Continuing along the London road from Horsham for about 3 miles and then
pursuing the road to the left, we arrive at the picturesque, secluded,
and delightful little village of Warnham, bounded on the east by Rusper,
west by Slinfold, south by Itchingfield, and north by Capel, and
containing in 1831, 952 inhabitants.  The village is lather extensive,
and consists principally of one long narrow street, running N. and S.,
the church on the west side is particularly neat, though exhibiting a
variety of style, and consists of a nave and south aisle, with three
chancels: the northern of these latter portions is divided from the south
aisle, by a handsome oaken skreen, carved in the Gothic style, and
formerly belonged to the Carylls.  On the north side is a curious old
mural monument, bearing the effigies of a man in armour and a woman
kneeling; below are 8 smaller figures intended for their children, with
another person armed, in the centre.  The inscription informs us that it
was erected to the memory of Sir John Caryll Knt., eldest son of Thomas
Caryll esq. of Warnham, and Maria his wife, daughter of George Cotton of
Warblington, ob. 1613.  The south chancel belonged to the Mitchell family
of Field Place, and contains monuments to the memory of Mary Mitchell
widow, mother of Edward Shelley esq., by Sir Timothy Shelley gent, ob.
1731; John Mitchell gent. 1711: John Shelley esq. 1799; Mary his wife
1759: Edward Shelley esq., of Field place 1747.  The centre chancel,
formerly belonging to the appropriation, is at present, in conjunction
with the other two, the property of Sir Timothy Shelley Bart.  In the
body of the church are slabs to Samuel Shuckford, 45 years vicar of
Warnham and Eartham, Ann his widow, and Matthew Napper gent.  In the
pavement of the south aisle, the side of an altar tomb, adorned with
shields and quatrefoils, and apparently of the time of Edward I, may be
discerned: the font is square, and of the same date; the pulpit stands
upon a basement of brick, which gives it a particularly singular
appearance: the neat embattled tower contains five bells, and is of later
construction than the rest of the building.

                  [Picture: Monument of Sir John Caryl]

Warnham Court, a handsome mansion in the style of Elizabeth, and a very
striking feature of the surrounding country, was erected about three
years since, by Henry Tredcroft esq.: the house contains about 50
apartments, and is built of brick faced with stone: the grounds are
tastefully arranged, and the park, though so recently laid out, assumes a
beautiful and verdant appearance.

                         [Picture: Warnham Court]

To the south of Warnham, is Field Place, the residence for several
centuries of the family of Mitchell.  The only daughter of the Rev.
Theobald Mitchell, married the late Sir Bysshe Shelley, by whose son Sir
Timothy, it is now possessed.  Percy Bysshe Shelley, the celebrated poet
and friend of Byron, was born here: a brief but interesting account of
his life, may be found in Horsefield's "History of Sussex" vol. 2nd.
under the description of Warnham.

                          [Picture: Field place]

To the east of Horsham, is a tract of land, containing between eight and
nine thousand acres, called St. Leonard's forest: although its nearest
point is seven miles from the upper part of Beeding, it is within the
limits of that parish: the chief part of the soil is poor, it contained
considerable quantities of iron stone, which was smelted, but as the
timber became exhausted, the smelting of the iron has been long
discontinued, and nothing remains to denote the former manufactory of
cast iron, but several large ponds in various parts of the forest, still
called Hammer ponds.

This forest has ever been the subject of the legends of neighbouring
peasants, woe (according to their account) to the luckless wight, who
should venture to cross it alone on horseback during the night, for no
soon will he have entered its darksome precincts, than a horrible
decapitated spectre in the shape of a former squire Paulett, disregarding
all prayers or menaces, leaps behind him on his good steed, and
accompanies the affrighted traveller to the opposite boundaries.--The
celebrated St. Leonard also, through whose efficacious prayers

    "The adders never stynge,
    Nor ye nyghtyngales synge,"

in its gloomy mazes is often the theme of the cottagers fire side
conversation.

But neither ghost, nor cast iron, nor saint Leonard himself, have gained
for this forest so much celebrity as its famous DRAGON, or serpent!  This
venemous reptile, which some persons have rendered into some obnoxious
proprietor, has been honoured with a long and minute description in the
following account.

    "True and wonderful, A discourse relating to a strange monstrous
    serpent or dragon, lately discovered, and yet living to the great
    annoyance and divers slaughters both of men and cattle by his strong
    and violent poyson, in St. Leonard's forest, and thirtie miles from
    London, this present month of August, 1614, with the true generation
    of serpents.  Printed at London by John Trundle 1614.

    In Sussex there is a pretty market towne, called Horsam, neare unto a
    forest called St Leonard's forest, and there in a vast unfrequented
    place, heathie, vaultie, full of unwholesome shades and overgrown
    hollowes, where this serpent is thought to be bred; but wheresoever
    bred, certaine and too true it is, that there it yet lives.  Within
    three or four miles compass are its usual haunts, oftentimes at a
    place called Faygate, and it hath been seene within half a mile of
    Horsam, a wondre no doubt most terrible and noysome to the
    inhabitants thereabouts.  There is always in his tracke or path, left
    a glutinous and slimy matter (as by a small similitude we may
    perceive in a snail) which is very corrupt and offensive to the
    scent, in so much that they perceive the air to be putrified withall,
    which must needs be very dangerous: for though the corruption of it
    cannot strike the outward parts of a man, unless heated into blood,
    yet by receiving it in at any of our breathing organs, (the nose or
    mouth) it is by authority of all authors writing in that kinde,
    mortal and deadlie; as one thus saith,

    'Noxia serpentum est admixto sanguine pestis.--LUCAN.'

    The serpent, or dragon as some call it, is reputed to be nine feete
    or rather more, in length, and shaped almost in the forme of an
    axle-tree of a cart, a quantitie of thickness in the middest, and
    somewhat smaller at both ends.  The former part which he shootes
    forth as a necke, is supposed to be about an ell long, with a white
    ring as it were of scales about it.  The scales along his backe,
    seeme to be blackish, and so much as is discovered under his bellie,
    appeareth to be red: for I speak but of no nearer description than a
    reasonable ocular distance; for coming too neare, it hath already
    been too dearely paid for, as you shall heare hereafter.  It is
    likewise discovered to have large feete, but the eye may be deceved,
    for some suppose that serpents have no feete, but glide along upon
    certain ribbes and scales, which both defend them from the upper part
    of the throat unto the lower part of their bellie, and also cause
    them to move much the faster.  For so this doth, and rids away as we
    call it, as fast as a man can run.  He is of countenance very proud,
    and at the sight or heareing of men and cattle, will raise his necke
    upright, and seem to listen and looke about with great arrogancie.
    There are likewise on either side of him discovered two great
    bunches, so big as a large footeball, and as some think will grow to
    wings, but God I hope will so defend the poor people in the
    neigbourhood, that he shall be destroyed, before he growe so
    fledge.--He will cast his venome about 4 roddes from him, as by
    woeful experience it was proved on the bodies of a man and woman
    coming that way, who afterwards were found dead, being poysoned and
    very much swelled, but not preyed upon.  Likewise a man going to
    chase it and as he imagined to destroy it with two mastiff dogs as
    yet not knowing the great danger thereof, his dogs were both killed,
    and he himself glad to returne with haste to preserve his own life:
    yet this is to be noted that the dogs were not preyed upon, but
    slaine and left whole, for his food is thought to be for the most
    part in a conie warren, which he often frequents, and it is found to
    be much scanted and impaired, in the encrease it had wont to
    afford.--These persons, whose names are here under printed, have
    scene this serpent, besides divers others, as the carrier of Horsam,
    who lieth at the White Horse, in Southwark, and who can certifie the
    truth of all that hath been herein related.--

                                                             "John Steele,
                                                      "Christopher Holder,
                                  "And a widow woman dwelling at Faygate."

Previously to the reformation, St. Leonard's forest contained two
chapels, one of which is mentioned as early as the year 1320.  No traces
of either remain at the present day.

                                * * * * *

Proceeding from Horsham along the London road, and passing Thornton
ville, a collection of houses lately erected by the person resident at
Springfield, we arrive at Coolhurst, the delightful and elegant mansion
of the Marchioness of Northampton: the vicinity of this seat was lately
rendered particularly interesting by a romantic and beautiful glen called
Dubbin's Green, one of the wildest and most secluded spots in the
district, but it is greatly to be lamented, the enclosing of the adjacent
common, has almost entirely destroyed the beauty of the scenery, and
robbed the visitor of a truly rural and picturesque treat.  Continuing
along the turnpike road for some distance, and then inclining to the
right, the pretty little village of Nuthurst, with its modest spire
peeping amidst the lowly cottages which constitute the single street is
display before the sight.  To the east of the parish is a portion of St.
Leonard's forest, and a part of the parish of Cowfold: to the west
Horsham, and part of Broadwater; to the north another portion of the
forest; and south Cowfold.  The district is peculiarly rich and
beautiful, abounding in springs of excellent water in every direction.
The church, of the time of Edward III, and dedicated to St. Andrew, is in
the early style of English architecture, with a low tower, containing 3
bells, and surmounted by a low shingled spire, at the west end.  The roof
is pannelled in a similar manner to the church at Horsham; the ribs and
knots of two pannels are gilt and painted.  The communion window contains
remnants of stained glass, representing the Salvator Mundi, and two
angels scattering incense.  The monumental inscriptions are to the memory
of Joseph Tuder esq. of Sedgewick park, 1774: Rebecca Nelthorpe his
niece, 1784; William Nelthorpe esq., 1791: Elizabeth Nelthorpe 1801;
Eliza Sarah wife of James Tuder Nelthorpe esq. of Nuthurst lodge, died at
Paris 1826, and was interred in the cemetry of Pere la chaise; John
Aldridge of New Lodge, 1803: John Warburton Aldridge son of the above,
1801: Samuel Aldridge 1773: Sophia Aldridge 1769.  The font is plain and
octagonal.

                        [Picture: Nuthurst Church]

Near Nuthurst in a very delightful situation, commanding extensive views
of the sea and south downs, is Nuthurst Lodge, the residence of James
Tuder Nelthorpe esq.: at a very short distance from the mansion, are the
remains of an ancient castle or hunting seat, surrounded by an oute and
inner moat, of a circular form, and traceable everywhere; the foundations
of the walls are quite visible, and one apartment of a sexagonal shape is
entirely perfect.  About 40 yards farther on, surrounded by copse wood,
and over hanging trees, is a small well of a circular form, and
surrounded by cut stone overgrown by moss: a flight of winding steps,
leading to it, from an adjacent eminence, adds a peculiarly romantic and
pleasing effect to this venerable work of antiquity, which is known by
the name of the Nun's Well.  No account is to be found of its history,
though it may perhaps have belonged to the neighbouring castle.  The
traditions among the inhabitants affirm, that a subterraneous passage
connects this castle with the nunnery at Rusper, which is 8 miles
distant, but no attempt has been undertaken to ascertain the truth of
this conjecture.  Passing over Tower Hill, an eminence near Horsham, we
arrive at the village of Itchingfield, or Hethinfield as it was formerly
called.  The earliest notice of this place, is to be found in an ancient
deed A.D. 1233, when "Hugh de Mabel and Susanna his wife, sold to Robert
atte Feching, one messuage and half a carucate of land, at Hethinfield."
The parish is bounded on the east by Horsham, south by Shipley, west by
Shipley, and north by Slinfold, and contained in 1831, 349 inhabitants.
The church dedicated to St. Nicholas is of the time of Henry III, or
Edward the I.  Its exterior is particularly rustic especially the low
tower at the west end, which is formed of entire trunks of trees fastened
together by wooden bolts.  Against one of the walls of timber in the
belfry is an ancient painting representing Moses receiving the ten
commandments on mount Sinai, it was most probably used as a kind of altar
piece.

                      [Picture: Itchingfield Church]

In the chancel is a mural monument to the memory of Richard Wheatly gent,
ob. 1668, and some members of his family, who were nearly allied to the
Mitchells of Field place.  There is also another inscription to the
memory of the Rev. Alexander Hay, former rector of the parish, 1724, also
several of his children.  Dallaway mentions that after the Scotch
rebellion in 1715, some of the attained persons took refuge in the woods
of Itching field, and were permitted to reside with their countryman
Alexander Hay; indeed we can hardly imagine a more suitable place for
concealment, than the parsonage house, situated as it was at that time,
in the centre of a dense forest, through which there was hardly any
passable road.

The last monumental inscription is for the Rev. Thomas Lavender a most
exemplary minister of this parish, for upwards of 60 years, he died in
the year 1776, at the age of 86.

The font is modern, but particularly neat and handsome; one of a very
ancient description, was lately dug up in the churchyard.

                        [Picture: Farthing Bridge]

Proceeding along the turnpike road to the west of Horsham and passing
Farthing Bridge, of which the annexed wood-cut is a representation, we
reach Broad-bridge Heath, a delightful, picturesque, and salubrious
plain, so called: by pursuing the centre road, the visitor will arrive at
Stroud, a small hamlet about 3 miles from Horsham; it is chiefly
remarkable for the elegant residence denominated Stroud park, belonging
to --- Commerell esq.: the grounds around the house particularly deserve
attention, and the sweetly retired situation of the fishing house,
erected upon the banks of a lake surrounded by the majestic and noble
trees for which this district is so justly celebrated, whilst the deep
silence which pervades the whole, interrupted only by the rippling stream
beneath, and the delightful choir of the feathered songsters, combine to
render it, in every sense of the word, a most enchanting and delightful
scene.

                        [Picture: Slinfold Church]

By taking the road to the left hand, on Broad-bridge heath, and again
turning to the right at Lion's Corner gate, the village of Slinfold, to
which the hamlet of Stroud belongs, soon appears in sight.  "Fold"
observes Mr. Dallaway, "is a termination frequently belonging to parishes
within the weald and in distinction to Hume seems to be applied to those
which were first cultivated in square inclosures, after the removal of
timber and underwood.  This observation belongs to the early Saxon aera;
and it is evident that the name of almost every vilor or farm within the
district is derived from them."  The church build at the end of the
village, was erected at the formation of the parish by bishop Ralph in
1230.  It has a nave and north aisle with a small sepulchral chapel
appendant.  In this portion of the church which belongs to the manor of
Dedisham, is a curiously sculptured female figure, destitute of any
inscription, but traditionally said, to belong to a member of the family
of Tregoz.--There are also two other mural monuments, with small painted
alabaster effigies of women in the ancient dress of their times.  The
first of which we give a sketch, appears particularly "en bon point," and
is represented kneeling on a cushion, in the act of prayer.  The
following inscription, now almost illegible, appears beneath.

       [Picture: Tregoz monument] HERE LIETH KATHARINE BLOUNT, YOUNGEST
      DAUGHTER OF RICHARD BLOUNT ESQ., OF DEDISHAM, (DESCENDED FROM SIR
    WALTER BLOUNT KNT.  LORD MOUNTJOY) AND MARY WIFE TO THE SAID RICHARD,
     DAUGHTER TO SIR WILLIAM WESTE, KNT., LORD DE LA WAR, WHICH KATHARINE
     DECEASED MARCH 1, 1617, IN THE 27TH. YEAR OF HER AGE.  SHE LEFT HER
      ESTATE TO HER 4 SISTERS, VIZ. ELIZABETH, ANN, MARTHA, AND JANE, TO
                WHOSE PIOUS MEMORY THEY ERECTED THIS MONUMENT.

The remaining monument is to the memory of mistress Jane Blount, ob.
1614.

                        [Picture: Blount monument]

In the pavement is a large slab of Sussex marble, with an inscription to
the memory of Richard Bradbridge gent., and Denys his wife, with their
children, ob. 1633.

The tower is massive, and like all those in the Weald, surmounted by a
spire of shingles, supported upon four upright beams of a length and
diameter very seldom seen.

This parish which is bounded on the east by Warnham, west by Rudgewick
and Billinghurst, north by Rudgewick, and south by Itchingfield,
approaches nearer in form to a circle than any other, and is intersected
in several directions by 3 turnpike roads.  From the excellent slate
quarries in the vicinity, slabs containing 100 square feet, and about 5
in thickness have often been raised.  Several rare botanical plants are
found in this parish, some indigenous, and others originally introduced
by Dr. T. Manningham a former rector, well versed in that science.

The late eminent antiquary Mr. Warton, observes in his history of
Kiddington, page 65, "About 5 years ago, (1775) on the edge of a lane in
the parish of Slinfold in Sussex, four miles from Horsham, I saw several
deep fissures in the Stane street, a Roman road, going from Arundel, if
not from the sea side through Dorking to London.  The dorsum not intended
for heavy carriages consists of sea gravel and sea pebbles abounding on
the Sussex coast, above 3 feet deep, and 7 yards long: these minute
materials must have been amassed with prodigious labour.

Springfield, a handsome brick mansion to the north of the town, is the
property of Francis Scawen Blunt esq., who now rents it to --- Thornton
Esq.




INNS AT HORSHAM

The King's Head Hotel       East Street.
Anchor Hotel                Town Hall square.
The Crown                   Carfax.
The Lamb                    Ditto.
The Swan                    West Street.
The Castle                  Ditto.
The Black Horse             Ditto.
The Punch bowl              Ditto.
The Green Dragon            Bishoprick.
The Queen's Head            East Street.
The Hurst Arms              North Street.
The Dog and Bacon           London Road.
The White Hart              North Parade.

COACHES.


Coaches pass daily to and from London, Brighton, Worthing, Windsor,
Oxford, and Reading.--The Horsham and London Star Coach leaves the Swan
inn West Street, at 7 o'clock every morning, and reaches the old Bell inn
Holborn about a quarter to 12: from thence it starts the same afternoon,
at a quarter past 3, and arrives at Horsham by 8.




GAS.


The streets are now well lighted with gas, considering that this is the
first year of their illumination.  The gameter is erected at the back of
Albion Terrace, another specimen of the improving state of the town.  The
good people of Horsham have lately been much annoyed by the dirty
condition of their streets, occasioned by the insertion of the gas pipes,
even to such an extent as almost to merit the ancient epithet of the
county, as we find in a very old verse, or rather ryhme of the
peculiarities of each shire.

    Essex ful of good hoswifes
    Middlesex ful of shyves,
    Kentshire hoot as fyre,
    Sussex ful of dyrt and myre.




PLANTS.


RHYNCHOSPORA ALBA

SCIRPUS CARINATUS

ERYOPHORUM POLYSTACHION

CONVALLARIA MAJALIS

LUCIOLA FOSTERI

POLYGONUM BISTORTA

ABOXA MOSCHATELLINA

MONOTROPA HYPOPITYS

PYROLA MEDIA

NYMPHAEA ALBA

CARDAMINE IMPATIENS

EUPHORBIA ESULA

CAREX CURTA

CAREX STRIGOSA

ASP IDIUM OREOPTERIS

ASPIDIUM THELYPTERIS

OSMUNDA REGALIS

LYCOPODIUM SELAGO

PHASCUM ALTERNIFOLIUM

GYMNOSTOMUM FASCICULARE

NECKERA PUMILA

CALICIUM FERRUGINEUM

ARTHONIA SWARTZIANA

VARIOLARIA VELATA

PARMELIA SPECIOSA

SCYPHOPHORUS PARASITICUS

CHARA GRACITIS




SAURIAN REMAINS.


The strata around Horsham, (which is situated in the Wealden formation)
are celebrated for the abundance of the exuviae, of large saurian
animals.--Many of the bones of the Iguanadon, an enormous reptile, which
was formerly an inhabitant of these districts, are now in the possession
of Mr G. B. Holmes, of Horsham, by whom these particulars are obligingly
communicated.  The animal which more nearly approximates to it, than any
other now in existence, is the Iguana Cornuta a native of the tropical
parts of America, and from its resemblance to which it has received its
name; but more particularly on account of the teeth of the Iguanadon,
which resemble those of no other animal than the Iguana, of which one
species (the Cornuta,) has, like the Iguanadon, a single horn.  If we
take the Iguana as our model, and attempt to reconstruct the enormous
Iguanadon in just proportion, from the relics which have been frequently
exhumed, we shall produce a monster 100 feet in length, which there is
every reason to believe is not an exaggeration.--Besides the Iguanadon,
we find the bones of the crocodile, the Plesiosaurus, the turtle, and
other amphibious reptiles; with the carbonized remains of
monocotyledoneous plants, arborescent ferns, and palms, &c.

                        [Picture: Map of Horsham]




WATER.


The water around Horsham is of a very superior quality, and extremely
abundant.  It is intended shortly to supply each house by means of pipes.
At Tower Hill, is a spring, by whose waters every thing over which it
passes is encrusted, in consequence of its depositing a small portion of
carbonate of lime, with which it is impregnated in passing the limestone
strata, through which it flows.




POPULATION


The population of Horsham, has of late years greatly increased, and at
present amounts to nearly 6000.  The following table will afford a view
of its advance during the present century.

1801       3204
1811       3839
1821       4575
1831       5105

ROADS.


Horsham, though at present remarkable for the excellent state of its
turnpike roads, was, before the year 1750, one of most extraordinary
instances of non communication in the kingdom: previously to the
abovementioned period, the London road was so execrably bad, that whoever
went there on wheels, was compelled to go round by Canterbury!

It is intended to make the great London and Brighton rail road pass
through the town, which cannot fail to encreas the business and traffic
of the place.




FAIRS.


The fairs of Horsham are on April 5th: Monday before Whitsunday, sheep
and lambs: July 18th cattle and pedalary; the Cherry fair; Sep. 5th.
cattle: Nov. 27th. cattle and toys.  Last Tuesday in every month, for
cattle.

"Nicholas Hostresham, whose name is contracted to Horsham, may justly be
placed in this town, as descended from it; families of note often taking
their names from their places of residence; and if that be admitted, he
will give some lustre to it, for he was a very learned man, and so famous
a physician, that the nobility coveted his company on any conditions, so
high an esteem had they for him.  It seems it was something of a peculiar
art in him, to cure and yet to please his patient, which he would not do
nevertheless it was consistent with the disease; for his aim was, to cure
and please if possible, but displease if unavoidable.  He was of a middle
temper, neither so rough as to affright, nor so gentle, as to humour his
patient into his own destruction; so that he was almost two physicians in
one man.  He died in the year 1448."

(From a survey of the county of Sussex, printed in the year 1730; at
present in the possession of Miss Cove, Albion Terrace.)

                             [Picture: Finis]




APPENDIX


Having principally confined the limits of the foregoing account, to a
circle of about 4 or 5 miles around the town of Horsham, we have omitted
previously to notice the priory of Rusper, a building of great antiquity,
and closely connected with that borough, by the endowment of the church
to its nuns.  Very little of the ancient edifice remains at present, I
shall therefore insert a very brief account of the nunnery, as given by
Sir William Burrell, in his interesting MSS. preserved in the British
Museum.

"On the north wing of the east front of the nunnery, towards the orchard,
the foundations of additional building, and the arch of a cellar are
visible, 58 feet in extent, and east of the present house.  It is
probable a similar wing was on the south aspect and thereby formed a
Greek II.  The ancient apple trees which cover the flank, render such an
idea very problematical."  Near the building is a very deep well, said to
have been used as a place of destruction for those members of the
convent, who had dared to break their vows of chastity.

Near Mrs Delves tomb at Horsham, is the headless brass figure of an
ecclesiastic, supposed from the letters T C in the cope, to cover the
remains of Thomas clerk, a former rector.

                        [Picture: Rusper Nunnery]

                         [Picture: Brass Figure]

                         [Picture: Brass Figure]




INDEX.


Assizes 3

Braose monument 10

Brotherhood at Horsham 24

Bells Horsham 26

Blount monuments 64

Church of Horsham 6

Covert monument 16

Chantries at Horsham 24

Chapels Dissenting 29

Collier Richard 31

Chesworth 33

Caryll monument 41

Castle at Nuthurst 55

Coaches 68

Dimensions of the church 8

Delves monument 13

Denne house and park

Dubbins Green 52

Eversfield donations 22

Endowment of the church 26

Foys brass of 17

Font at Horsham 21

Free School the

Field place 44

Forest St Leonard's 45

Do legends of 45

Do serpent of 46

Fairs 72

Gaol Horsham 27

Gas 68

Horsham derivation of the name 1

Hoo monument 14

Hoo Wm. brass of 16

Hurst Robert tomb of 18

Hills Place 35

Horsham Nicholas 72

Inscriptions in the church 18

Itchingfield village of 57

Inns at Horsham 68

Jamieson monument 23

Marroitt Capt. tomb of 19

Matthews donations 22

Members for Horsham 2

Moated House 33

North Chapel 34

Nuthurst village of 53

Do lodge 53

Nun's well 56

Pike T. tomb of 17

Plague attack of 22

Plants 69

Population of Horsham 71

Roman road 67

Roads 71

Railroad Brighton, intended direction of 71

Shelley donations 22

Schools at Horsham 33

Stroud park 61

Slinfold village of 61

Saurian remains 70

Town Hall the 4

Tower the Lollard's 23

Tregoz monument in Slinfold Church 63

Warnham village of 39

Do. Court 43

Water 70

                                * * * * *

                  Printed by Howard Dudley, Millbank St.




Footnotes


{12}  Dallaway page 355 vol 2.

{26}  Declaration of Chantries in the Augmentation office.

{31}  Dallaway.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY AND ANTIQUITIES OF
HORSHAM***


******* This file should be named 31003.txt or 31003.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/1/0/0/31003



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

