The Project Gutenberg EBook of The House by the Lock, by C. N. Williamson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The House by the Lock

Author: C. N. Williamson

Release Date: February 8, 2010 [EBook #31228]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE BY THE LOCK ***




Produced by Darleen Dove, Suzanne Shell, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  THE HOUSE BY THE LOCK




  THE HOUSE BY THE LOCK

  By
  MRS. C. N. WILLIAMSON

  _Co-author of
   "The Lightning Conductor," "My Lady Cinderella," etc._

  NEW YORK
  B. W. DODGE AND COMPANY
  1906




  PRESS OF
  BRAUNWORTH & CO.
  BOOKBINDERS AND PRINTERS
  BROOKLYN, N. Y.




CONTENTS

  Chapter                                                     Page
       I. THE LADY IN THE STAGE BOX                              1
      II. THE MAN WITH THE PALE EYES                            12
     III. A DEAD MAN'S HAND                                     22
      IV. THE HOUSE BY THE LOCK                                 30
       V. WAS IT A MYSTERY?                                     38
      VI. AN ADVENTURE IN THE PARK                              53
     VII. FRIENDS                                               67
    VIII. AN ANNOUNCEMENT                                       74
      IX. TOO LATE                                              83
       X. "IF HE HAD COMMITTED A CRIME"                         92
      XI. WILDRED SCORES                                        99
     XII. KARINE'S ENGAGEMENT RING                             116
    XIII. "KISMET AND MISS CUNNINGHAM"                         121
     XIV. AN EXTRA SPECIAL                                     133
      XV. A MYSTERY OF THE THAMES                              136
     XVI. INFORMATION LAID BY CARSON WILDRED                   143
    XVII. A DISAPPOINTMENT                                     152
   XVIII. A DESPERATE REMEDY                                   166
     XIX. "NOT AT HOME"                                        176
      XX. THE QUEST                                            188
     XXI. A PICTURE FROM THE PAST                              208
    XXII. FACE TO FACE                                         220
   XXIII. A COUNTERFEIT PRESENTMENT                            224
    XXIV. FIRE!                                                232
     XXV. "IT'S DOGGED AS DOES IT"                             239
    XXVI. A TELL-TALE ORNAMENT                                 246
   XXVII. TOO LATE!                                            269
  XXVIII. A WILD-GOOSE CHASE                                   276
    XXIX. AT THE HOUSE BY THE LOCK                             284
     XXX. CONCLUSION                                           298




THE HOUSE BY THE LOCK




CHAPTER I

The Lady in the Stage Box


"Hullo, old chap! Who would ever have thought of seeing you here
to-night? What's brought you back to civilisation again?"

I turned suddenly, surprised by the sound of a familiar voice in my ear.
It was the night of Christmas Eve, and I was just entering the lobby of
the St. James's, the first time, as it happened, I had seen the inside
of a theatre for two years.

For the fraction of a moment I could not remember where I had known the
man who addressed me so jovially. My way of knocking about the world
brought me into contact with so many people that it was difficult to
sort my gallery of faces, and keep each one mentally ticketed. But after
a second or two of staring through that convenient medium, my monocle, I
was able to place the man who had accosted me. He was a rich mining king
from Colorado, by the name of Harvey Farnham, whom I had met in Denver,
when I had been dawdling through America three or four years ago.

I pronounced his name with a certain self-satisfaction in having so
readily recalled it, and we shook each other by the hand.

"What's brought me back to civilisation?" I echoed, lazily. "I really
don't know--unless it was because I'd got tired of the other thing.
Adventure--change--that's what I am in search of, my dear Farnham."

"And you come back here from service as war correspondent in Egypt
(where I last read of you in the papers as having been carried down a
cataract for twenty-six miles before a launch ran out and saved you) in
the hope of finding 'adventure' in this workaday close of the nineteenth
century? That's too good."

I laughed and shrugged my shoulders. "Yes; why not? Why should there not
be as great a possibility of obtaining new sensations, or at least old
ones in different form, in London as anywhere else?"

It did not occur to me, as I idly spoke the words, that I was uttering a
prophecy.

"How is it," I went on rather curiously, "that you remembered me,
'honouring my draft on sight,' so to speak? It must be four years since
that very jolly supper you gave me in Denver one night, and I fancy I
have changed considerably since then."

Farnham smiled in his comical American way, which was a humorous
sentence in itself.

"Well, I guess it's not so easy to forget a face like yours. You are a
little browner, your eyes rather keener perhaps, your head held a bit
higher, your shoulders broader and drawn back more like a soldier's than
ever; but, so far as I can see, those are the only changes. You might
easily have forgotten me, and I'm immensely flattered that you haven't.
But the fact is, my dear boy, you are simply the most interesting man I
ever came across, in my own country or any other. You've always seemed
like a sort of hero of a tale of adventure to me; and, you see, one
don't let a chap like that drop out of one's recollection. I've always
eagerly followed your doings, so far as one could follow them in the
newspapers, and I read your African book with the greatest interest; but
somehow I never got to hear much personal gossip about you. Say, are you
married or anything?"

"Many things, but not married," I returned. "I haven't had time to think
of women. Besides, if I had, who would take me? No money, no prospects,
a man who can't be happy for a fortnight in one place! What a life I
should lead a woman!"

"Ah, that's one side of the picture, of course; but here's the other, as
the world sees it. You're a sort of popular hero--African traveller, war
correspondent, writer of books. Polar explorer, and I don't know what
besides, though you can't yet be anywhere near thirty-five. You've got
the figure of a soldier, and just the sort of dark, unreadable face that
women rave about. What does money matter with a chap like that? Nothing.
I wonder you've managed to escape the matchmaking mammas so long.
They're quite as keen on a celebrity, in my country at least, as they
are on a millionaire."

"Nevertheless, they have not given me much trouble," I said, smiling a
little, however, at the remembrance of one or two amusing episodes which
I had not the slightest intention of relating. "There, the way to the
box-office is clear at last. Once that fat old man is out of the way, it
will be my turn. Shall I get your stall for you, and so save time?"

"Yes, by all means, thank you. Are you alone, Stanton?"

"Quite alone. I'd almost forgotten what the theatre was like, and
determined to come and refresh my memory."

"I'm by myself, too. Say, old man, would it be a liberty if I asked you
to try and get stalls for us together?"

"Delighted, I'm sure," I answered, though, as a matter of fact, I was
not quite certain whether I was telling the truth or not. Farnham had
been well enough in Denver, but I did not know whether I should care to
pass in his society a whole evening, which I had meant to be one of
solitary enjoyment. However, he had left me nothing else to say, and I
responded with what alacrity I could, little dreaming that my whole
future was hanging on my words, and the result of my confab with the man
in the box-office.

The play was a popular one, and perhaps on no night of the year, save
Christmas Eve or some Lenten fast, could we have obtained two stalls
side by side a few minutes before the ringing-up of the curtain. As it
was, we were successful, and I walked into the theatre by the side of
the tall, thin, smooth-faced American.

We sat down, in the third or fourth row of the stalls, and, as the
orchestra had not yet come in, began to talk.

Farnham explained to me that he had "run over" to England on business,
intending to sell a certain mine of his, which, though vastly
profitable, was the one thing in which he had lost interest. The other
mines in which he was part owner were situated in his own state,
Colorado, while this particular one, the "Miss Cunningham," was in
California, and he was tired of journeying to and fro.

"I've had a good offer," he said; "indeed, I'm visiting in the house of
the man who has made it--a wonderful fellow, only one degree less
interesting, perhaps, than you. His name is Carson Wildred. Did you ever
hear of him?"

"No," I answered, though possibly not to know Mr. Carson Wildred was to
argue myself unknown.

"He seems to have plenty of money," explained Farnham, "and though he's
a newcomer in London, has got in with a number of good people. He has
two houses, one in Sloane Street and one up the Thames, a queer, lonely
old place, near Purley Lock, if you know where that is. I'm staying out
there with him now, as it happens, though I can't say I'm as fond of the
river as he is at this season. But when a few papers and a good round
sum of money have changed hands, a couple of days or so from now, I
shall bid Wildred and England _au revoir_. I expect to sail for
America at the end of the week, and jolly lucky I think myself to have
run up against you to-night."

Somehow, as he rattled on about his own affairs, my heart began to warm
towards Farnham. He was not a particularly brilliant fellow, though a
good business man; but he had such a whimsical face, with its bright
eyes, its good-natured mouth, and its laughable, upturned nose! He was
so frankly interested in life, so enthusiastic, so outspoken, so boyish
in many of his ways, despite his forty years! I found myself almost
inclined to be sorry that he was leaving England so soon.

"I should like you to meet Wildred," he went on. "I don't know whether
you'd fancy him, but you couldn't help thinking his a remarkable
personality. It would be interesting to see you two chaps together. He's
at the theatre to-night, by the way, with some friends of his--rather
swells. It was an old engagement, made before I went out to his house,
but he had to keep it, of course. They'll be in that stage box over
there, and as Wildred has been industriously raising my curiosity about
the beauty of one of the ladies for the past few days, I concluded to
drop in and take the only chance I was likely to get of a look at her.
And mighty glad I am that I did so make up my mind, or I should have
left England without clapping eyes on someone I'd rather see than all
the professional beauties in London."

As he finished speaking the overture, which had now been on for some
time, ceased, and the curtain went up on a very pretty bit of stage
setting.

There was no curtain-raiser, and the first act was well constructed and
interesting from the commencement. It was delightful to me to feel, as I
did, that I was no longer _blase_ of town life, or the mimic life
of the theatre, and I was inclined to resent the interruption when
Farnham nudged me, whispering--

"There's Wildred and his friends just coming into the stage box. By
Jove! what a pretty girl!"

I looked up, because I was sure the volatile American would give me no
peace until I had done so; and then, having looked up, I promptly forgot
the play and its _dramatis personae_.

Two years I had spent in Africa and Egypt, and I had not seen many fair
faces during that time of travel and campaigning. I was in a mood,
therefore, to appreciate the delicate loveliness of English women; but,
even had I been surfeited with beauty, my eyes would have lingered in a
species of wonder on the girl just seating herself in a corner of the
stage box. It is possible that I have seen other women as beautiful,
many more classically perfect of feature, but never have I looked upon a
face so radiant, so bewildering.

For the moment I scarcely glanced at the girl's companions, though I was
vaguely conscious that there was an older woman, and that two men were
taking chairs in the darker background of the box.

All the other figures on the stage and in the auditorium became
meaningless for me. There was the dazzling girl in white, and, so far as
I was concerned, no one else in the theatre.

The simple, snowy frock, without jewels or ornamentation of any kind,
was the most becoming frame which could have been chosen for the
picture. The oval face, with its pearly skin, its curved red lips, its
starry, long-lashed eyes (which might have been brown or violet, so far
as I could tell), and the aureole of waving, ruddy gold hair were all so
vivid in their marvelous effect of colour, that the dead white gown set
them off far more artistically than the most carefully-chosen tints
could have done.

The girl could not, I thought, have been more than twenty, and every
turn of the beautifully-poised little head, every dimpling smile, told
that she was full of the joy of life.

"What do you think of Wildred?" whispered Farnham, his lazy American
drawl waking me out of a dream.

I did not wish him to see how completely I had been absorbed, how
foolishly I had lost my head, and therefore I turned my attention to the
two men in the back of the box.




CHAPTER II

The Man with the Pale Eyes


_En passant_, my eyes dwelt for an instant upon a stout woman of a
certain age, whose figure was encased in a sort of armour of steel-grey
satin and beads, and whose carefully-arranged head was adorned by a
small tiara of diamonds, but they found no temptation to linger.

One of the men was old, grey-haired, and large of girth, with a huge
expanse of snowy shirt, and a head guiltless of hair. The other was
comparatively young, not many years past my own age, perhaps, and a
curious thrill, which I could not myself have explained, passed through
me as I looked, through half-shut eyes, at his face. Where had I seen it
before? Or did it bear but a haunting resemblance to some other, painted
on my memory's retina in lurid, yet partially obliterated, colours?

I had no doubt which of the two was Carson Wildred, Farnham's friend and
host. What he had said of the man's personality assured me of his
identity.

It was passing strange to me that I should be so strongly impressed by
the feeling that I had seen the face before, under startling and
disagreeable circumstances, and yet be unable to identify it. Something
seemed to be lacking, or changed, which broke the chain of evidence in
my mind. Surely I should have been able to remember that peculiar nose,
with the flattened bridge, now presented to me in profile.

It would be a sign of a lacking bump of observation to have forgotten
the angle of that protruding lower jaw, and the strong contrast between
the almost copper-coloured skin, jet black hair, and large, brilliant
blue eyes--so light as to appear almost white.

It was impossible, I told myself, that I had met the man before. His
remarkable and uncommon cast of features had no niche in my
recollection, and yet I _knew_ that in some crucial moment I had
looked into those pale and scintillating eyes.

A wave of repulsion swept over me. I could not remember when I had
experienced two such keen emotions as my surprised admiration for the
girl, and the dislike, almost amounting to disgust, which I felt for
Farnham's friend, Carson Wildred. Something deeper than mere annoyance
surged in my breast, that that dark personality should lurk so near to
the spotless whiteness of the gauzy drapery, which vaguely seemed to me
a part of the girl's self.

"Eh? What did you say? How do you like his looks? Peculiar face, isn't
it?" queried Farnham, close to my ear.

"Yes, it is peculiar," I answered, mechanically, snatching at the
phrase.

"And the girl! Isn't she something rather choice?"

"Very lovely. Who is she?"

"A Miss Karine Cunningham. Same name as the mine that Wildred is going
to take off my hands. Merely a coincidence, but I fancy it influenced
him in his wish to buy the property, perhaps. He is very much in love
with the girl, and rich as he apparently is, she can more than match
him, I should say. She's an orphan, whose father, though he came of what
you English call a 'good family,' made his pile in trade; and Sir Walter
Tressidy, who is in the box with his wife, was her guardian until she
came of age, about a year ago. She still lives with them, and Lady
Tressidy takes her about. All these things Wildred, who is never so
happy as when he is talking of Miss Cunningham, has told me; so you see,
I'm pretty well primed as to her antecedents, means, and so on. The girl
has thirty thousand pounds a year if she has a penny. Whew! Only think
what that means in American money. She could buy and sell me."

I might have truthfully replied that the young lady could have had me
without either buying or selling, since--for the first time since my
callow days--these few moments had taught me what it was to experience a
wild quickening of the pulses under the casual glance of a woman's eyes.

She had seen me. So much satisfaction at least was mine. Wildred had
doubtless pointed out his friend, and her gaze had passed on to
me--drawn, perhaps, by the compelling magnetism of the strange new
feeling which dominated me.

Wishing to avoid the appearance of rudeness, I would have looked away,
but I found myself for an instant unable to do so. It was ridiculous to
fancy it, and yet I could not help imagining that the girl's exquisite
face lighted up with an expression akin to interest as her eyes rested
upon mine.

It was for me a moment of intoxication, as I felt that those twin violet
lakes received, full in their depths, the involuntary outpouring of my
soul. A sensation as of being wrenched away from some safe mooring
passed through me as she withdrew her gaze, and, turning her head,
whispered to Lady Tressidy, who sat beside her. The latter then looked
at me, and unhesitatingly put up her sparkling lorgnettes.

Farnham had not failed to observe this little pantomime, and was vastly
amused thereby.

"This is what comes of being a celebrity!" he chuckled. "They've
recognised you from the pictures that were in all the papers a couple of
months ago, or perhaps by the photos that were published when your book
came out."

"Nonsense!" I said, rather irritably. "They're only annoyed, perhaps, at
our staring. Let's turn our attention to the stage."

I set the example which I recommended, but before doing so I gave myself
the indulgence of one more lingering glance, and saw that Carson Wildred
was eyeing me with undisguised interest.

Was I mistaken--was it only the faint emotion awakened by the mention of
a name not quite unknown to the public--or did the man share in my
half-recognition of him?

Whatever the feeling excited by the sound of my name or the sight of my
face, it was certainly not a pleasant one. The one look I ventured
showed me the pale eyes shadowed by a frown, and the gleam of white
teeth as they gnawed the lower lip under the slight dark line of the
moustache.

He had glanced from me to Farnham, and something in his look told me
that, for a reason to me unfathomable, he was displeased at seeing us
together.

At the end of the act we went out for a smoke and a breath of fresh air,
and as we were returning we met Wildred near the stairway which, at the
St. James's, leads to the boxes on one side of the house.

"I was looking for you," he said to Farnham, and the tones of the voice
roused the same vague, unpleasant memories that the eyes had stirred.

"And we were just talking of you," Farnham annoyed me by retorting. "I
should like to be the means of making you two known to each other. Of
course, Wildred, you have heard all about Noel Stanton. This is actually
he in the flesh, and he has been telling me that he believes he must
have seen you somewhere before."

Mr. Wildred tossed away a cigarette, and followed it with his brilliant
eyes. He was smiling, but his lips were tense, as his gaze came back to
me.

"It is my misfortune," he said, "to be obliged to assure you that Mr.
Stanton is mistaken. I know him as well as one can do without having met
him, through his book, and a world-wide reputation, but beyond that I
have not till now had the pleasure."

We looked into each other's eyes, and I knew the man lied, and that he
hated me. But the mystery of his personality and my share in his past
was as profound a mystery as before.

"Lady Tressidy sent me out particularly," he continued, "in quest of you
both, having recognised Mr. Stanton from his numerous counterfeit
presentments, and she hopes that you will come and be introduced to her
and to Miss Cunningham in their box."

Farnham looked at me doubtfully, fearing perhaps that I would refuse.
But, grudgingly as the message was evidently delivered by Wildred, I
grasped at the opportunity it gave.

I should speak to Miss Cunningham. I should know her. I might dare to
look at her, and I might touch her hand.

I have gone through some queer experiences in rather an eventful life,
and have generally managed to keep a cool head in emergencies. But my
head was not cool to-night. Everything was dark to me, except the one
lovely face raised smilingly towards mine, as some murmured words of
introduction were spoken in the box, a little later, giving me the right
henceforth to claim Miss Cunningham as an acquaintance.

I suppose I answered coherently when Lady Tressidy addressed me, and
talked without openly making an idiot of myself to Sir Walter. But I
remember nothing of the conversation between the second and third acts,
save the few words spoken by Miss Cunningham, and an invitation from
Lady Tressidy to call on one of her "At Home" days.

After I had gratefully accepted, I turned to the girl.

"Lady Tressidy has said I may come and see her," I ventured. "Will
you--may I hope to find you with her when I do?"

She looked up with a sudden, illumining smile that answered me. "Come
soon," she returned. They were her last words for me that night, and
they rang in my head as I left her, dizzy with the memory of her
loveliness.




CHAPTER III

A Dead Man's Hand


I had taken rooms temporarily at the Savoy Hotel, not knowing how long
it might be ere I should be moved in spirit to desert London; and that
night, instead of looking in at the club as I had meant, I went from the
theatre straight to the hotel.

There was a fire burning in my room, and I drew up a chair before it to
smoke an unlimited number of cigarettes, and to think of Karine
Cunningham.

I had parted from Farnham outside the theatre, and had made an
appointment to meet him next day at dinner, which he was to eat with me
at my hotel.

I felt no inclination for bed, nor was I in the least sleepy, and yet,
before an hour had passed, I must have fallen into a doze.

Suddenly I was awakened by the impression of having heard a sound. I
looked round me, half dazed still from my dreams. The fire had died
down, and I had left myself with no other light. Only a ruddy glow
lingered on the hearth, and a small clock on the mantelpiece just above
lightly chimed out the hour of two.

I must have dreamed the sound, I told myself, for all was silent in the
sleeping hotel, and even the rattle of cabs outside was dulled. Still,
the impression lingered, and I could hardly persuade myself that I had
not heard Harvey Farnham's voice calling my name, and finishing with a
gurgling, despairing cry for help, the horror of which had chilled the
blood in my veins, even in my sleep.

Though the fire was dead, the room was still warm, and I hardly knew why
I should be so cold. Nevertheless, I felt chilled to the bone, and I was
glad enough to get into bed as quickly as I could. Several times I was
on the point of falling asleep again, but, at just the critical point
between reflectiveness and sinking into the soft depths of slumber, I
waked with an almost convulsive start, and a remembrance of the cry I
had heard or dreamed. I was sure it must have been the latter, although,
I told myself, there might actually have been some fracas in the street
which, in my sleep, I had confused with a dream of Harvey Farnham.

Resigning myself to wakefulness at last, I began to plan out the
programme of the next week, and wonder how soon I might avail myself of
Lady Tressidy's invitation to call. She was at home on Sundays
informally, she had said, whenever she happened to be in town during the
winter, though Thursday was her "day" during the season.

Now, the Thursday following would be Christmas Day (this most eventful
night being Christmas Eve of last year), but I did not see why I might
not look in for a few moments on the ensuing Sunday. It had only been
because Sir Walter's affairs rendered a short stay in town necessary,
that they were spending Christmas in Park Lane. They would probably go
away in a few days, and I could not afford to lose my chance; for,
though I had admired many women in my time, I had never yet seen one
whom I wished to make my wife, until Karine Cunningham's lovely face had
risen--fair and sweet as a new moon that mingled its silver with the
rose of sunset--over my horizon.

I had laughed at men who gravely discussed the possibility of love at
first sight, but now I began to realise, half shamefacedly, that it was
not a thing to be convinced of through argument, but by thrilling,
magical experience. I would have staked my life that Karine Cunningham's
heart and mind were all that her face presaged of them, and I resolved
that, if she were to be won, I would put my very life into the attempt
to win her.

So thinking, and so resolving, I fell at last from waking dreams to
sleeping ones, hoping dimly, as I slipped over the edge of realities,
that they might be of Karine Cunningham. But they were not of her.
Hardly had slumber got its hold upon me, when I saw myself by the river,
looking down into a swiftly rushing tide. It seemed to be somewhere in
the country, though I had little thought for my surroundings; and I was
conscious that I was watching anxiously for the appearance of some
object, whose nature I did not accurately know. It had been daylight in
my vision at first--a cold, grey, wintry daylight--but suddenly night
fell, with the rapidity that all changes come and go in dreamland, and
the only light was a spot of phosphorescent radiance that lay just under
the surface of the water, floating gradually down towards me. I knew, in
my sleep, that my eyes were destined to behold some sight of horror, yet
I was bound, in a species of frozen fascination, to the spot where I
stood, forced to wait for the oncoming of the light and its revelation
of mystery.

Slowly it was borne along with the tide, until, having reached a bend in
the river opposite the spot where I was standing, it ceased to move. I
stooped down and saw that the pale light shone forth from a great white
diamond on the finger of a dead man's hand. The body was faintly and
darkly outlined; even the floating arm might also have been a floating
mass of blackened river weed; but the hand was white as alabaster, and
as I bent over it, staring down, one of the fingers moved and beckoned.
Then I woke with a loud cry--"Harvey Farnham!"

I had gone through a good many dangers in my roving life, and had passed
through many a queer adventure, believing that I could still boast
unshaken nerves. Neither was I used to dreaming, and the hours of sleep
were usually for me a long and peaceful interval of complete
unconsciousness.

Now, however, my forehead was damp with a cold sweat, and I could hardly
shake off the horror of the vision. It was ridiculous, I said to myself,
and yet, even with my eyes open, I could see the white awfulness of that
dead finger, as it beckoned me, shining palely in the light of the
diamond ring.

Exactly why I had shouted the name of Harvey Farnham as I waked, I could
not understand, unless--with the odd "hang togetherativeness" of
dreams--it was because I had happened to notice during the evening at
the theatre that he still wore on the last finger of his left hand a
very remarkable ring, which he had also worn, and of which he had told
me the history, when we had met four years previously in America. I had
thought it perhaps the very finest diamond I had ever seen in the
possession of a private person, and he had mentioned that it had been
taken from the first mine of which he had ever been the owner. He had
had it for some years, and, having grown stouter meanwhile, the gold
setting had cut rather deeply into the flesh of his finger.

He had laughingly alluded to this in Denver, saying that he had promised
a pretty girl that she should have the stone when he should be obliged
to have the ring cut off, and he meant to stick to it as long as he
could. Except for the fact of having remarked that he still wore the
ring, and that his finger looked as pinched as a woman's waist beneath
its clasp, I could not in any way have described Harvey Farnham's hand.
I had doubtless a general impression of its shape and contour in my
mind, but I did not now recall that there had been any recognisable
likeness between it and the dead hand my dream had shown me. Still,
though I was able to give myself a perfectly rational explanation of the
dream, and even of the impression of Farnham's voice earlier in the
night, I could not shake off a curious and unpleasant sensation of there
being some duty connected with the vision which I had left unperformed,
or which was yet to be exacted of me in the future.




CHAPTER IV

The House by the Lock


I arose on Christmas morning with the same feeling. There was absolutely
nothing arranged for me to do that day, as I had informed no one I knew
of my presence in London, meaning to be for the present somewhat of a
free-lance. I had wished not to be obliged to account to anyone as to my
goings and comings. I had not wanted any invitations to family
festivities on Christmas Day to "keep me from being lonely." My desire
had been to go exactly where the whim of the moment might lead me, and
without a moment's hesitation I had declined the invitation to
"Christmas dinner" which poor Farnham had dragged for me from his
friend, Carson Wildred. It might amuse me, Farnham had thought, as
Wildred's house up the river was a queer old place, interesting to
anyone who cared for that sort of thing, and they two were dining quite
alone. Wildred and he had had some final arrangements to settle up, and
as Christmas was such an "off day," so far as amusements were concerned,
it had been Wildred's idea that they should utilise it in this manner.
The other man took Farnham's hint, and civilly gave the required
invitation, of course, but even had it been offered with enthusiasm I
should not have been tempted to accept.

Now, however, I felt a curious inclination to call at the House by the
Lock, as it was named. I would not dine there, I told myself, but there
must be an inn in the neighbourhood, where I could obtain some slight
Christmas cheer, if I chose to embark upon the rather mild adventure of
going up the river on this wintry holiday.

It was years since I had been in England, and the thought of a solitary
stroll by the Thames along a country towing-path was not so dismal as it
might have been to those who had not tramped with the equanimity of
custom through African jungles.

Once the idea had taken root in my mind, I was impatient to carry it
out. I would go, I decided, almost immediately, lunching at the nearest
decent inn to Purley Lock, and turning up at Wildred's house at four or
five in the afternoon. I would spend an hour there, perhaps, and return
to town in time for dinner.

I had not got up particularly early, had breakfasted late, and by the
time I was inclined to start it was past one o'clock. I had over an
hour's journey to Great Marlow, the nearest railway station, with a
drive of some four miles to follow, before I could reach the Chimes Inn,
which I was told was the only one within some distance of Purley Lock.

It was a quaint old hostelry I found, and an agreeable landlord, who had
hardly expected guests at so out-of-the-way a place on Christmas Day,
and having finished his own midday repast, was very ready for a gossip
with me.

Oh, yes, he said, he knew the House by the Lock, quite well. It was in
reality situated at some little distance from the Lock itself, quite a
quarter-of-a-mile, but then it was the nearest house, and perhaps that
was the reason it had got its name. It was a very old place, but Mr.
Wildred, since taking it about two years before, had had a great many
alterations and improvements made both outside and in. He was something
of an architect himself, it seemed--this rich Mr. Wildred; at all
events, it was believed that he had made the designs for the
alterations, and having a great fad that way, had even helped the chaps
he had had down from London to do the indoor work and decorating. There
had only been two or three men, so that progress had been slow, and
everyone had wondered that such a rich man as Mr. Wildred was reported
to be should have had things done in so niggling a manner. But, since
then, they had concluded that he must have known what he was about, for
everyone who went there came away with great reports of the decorations.

I was not particularly interested in these details that my landlord had
to tell me.

Though, after all, there was an indefinable curiosity in my mind
regarding everything that concerned Carson Wildred.

I got away from the man's animated gossip in the course of half-an-hour
or so. I had a walk of a mile to take, having dismissed my fly, and
meaning, after I had paid my rather aimless visit, to tramp all the way
back to Marlow again. As I started, a clock on the inn table struck
four.

There was a long streak of gold along the horizon of the otherwise dull
grey sky, and a rising wind moaned drearily among the bare lower
branches of the trees.

The scene looked indescribably desolate, and yet there was a certain
beauty in it, too. I had been told exactly how to reach the House by the
Lock, and when, after passing the somewhat weedy-looking lock, I began
skirting along a species of backwater, and came in sight of a long,
low-browed house close to the river, I knew I had reached my journey's
end.

The place had the appearance of being only a restored remnant of an
ancient abbey fallen into decay.

Indeed, at one end of the house a ruined wall jutted out, with a row of
stone window-frames, half filled in with sombre trails of ivy; then in
the middle came the habitable part of the old house, with an imposing
front door, which might have belonged to some big Gothic Church;
magnificent windows, that reminded me of a certain dear old college at
Oxford, well-known in younger days; and beyond, to the left, was the
wing evidently added by Wildred. It was in wretched taste, I thought,
with its pretentiousness and its huge round tower at the end, utterly
out of keeping with the rest. Then, as I criticised, my eye was caught
by a puff of fiery smoke that suddenly rose above the battlements of the
hideous tall tower.

I could not quite understand this phenomenon, for the tower, so far as I
could see, had been merely built with the mistaken idea of being
ornamental. Though new, it was intended to present the effect of being
ruinous, having little dark chinks in lieu of windows.

Still, the smoke was there, belching out sparks not only from the apex
of the tower, but stealing in a belated puff or two from the chinks in
the wall nearest the top.

I thought of fire, and quickened my steps, meaning to mention to the
servant who should open the door what I had seen. The lawn stretched
down to the river, which was here, as I said, a mere backwater, and
having entered through a gate set in the side of a big brick wall, I
walked briskly up the short gravelled path that led to the house.

At least Wildred had had the sense to let this door alone, with its
carvings of oak, and its big ornamental hinges and knocker. The only
modern innovation was an electric bell, which I touched, and then,
grasping the huge knocker, I rapped out an additional summons, which
echoed drearily, as though through an empty house.

So near was I to the river, while I stood waiting on the door-stone to
be admitted, that I could hear the soft lapping of the water against the
shore. Darkness had fallen now, and an ugly recollection of my dream
suddenly sprang up in my brain. Just so, I remembered, had I heard the
water whispering, as in that hateful vision I had bent over to see the
dead man's beckoning hand.

It was long before my ring and knock were answered, so long that I had
my finger on the bell again. But at that moment I heard footsteps
walking somewhat uncertainly along an uncarpeted floor within. Still the
door remained closed; but at a long narrow window, which was the
duplicate of another on the opposite side of the door, I saw for an
instant that a face was pressed against the latticework of the glass.

"What ill-trained servants this man keeps," was my thought; and then,
somewhat impatiently, I rang again.

The door opened almost immediately into a dimly-lighted hall, when a
respectable, middle-aged man, out of livery, evidently a butler, stood
revealed. Yet I could have sworn that the face at the window, seen but a
second ago, had been that of a _woman, young, pallid, and darkly
bright of eye_!




CHAPTER V

Was It a Mystery?


"I should like to see Mr. Wildred and Mr. Farnham," I said, not feeling
it necessary to ask if they were at home. I knew that they had
definitely arranged to be so.

I glanced round me carelessly as I spoke. The hall was a huge one, dim
in the corners, with a fine stairway that ran down in the centre, and
was lighted by a great branching candelabrum held up by a bronze figure
on either side.

Doors, hung with _portieres_ of tapestry, opened here and there
along the hall, and in a fireplace at one side slow flames crept along a
freshly-heaped pile of logs.

"I am sorry, sir," said the servant, respectfully, "but both the
gentlemen have gone out for the day."

He did not look me in the face as he delivered this piece of
information, but allowed his narrow eyes to drop away shiftily.

"Oh, I am surprised at that," I returned, "for I have come by
invitation."

I hardly know by what impulse I mentioned this, and as a matter of fact
the invitation could hardly be supposed to stand, as I had last night
refused it. Still, it seemed to me extremely improbable that the two men
would have changed their minds about the day, after midnight, when I had
parted from them. They had mentioned refusing one or two invitations,
and there was really so little to do by way of amusement out of one's
own house, or somebody else's, on Christmas Day. Somehow, too, I felt
impressed that the man was lying. He had perhaps been told to say that
his master and guest were away in case of an intrusion, which they might
have had reason to fear; but this could hardly stand with me.

The fellow's smug face changed instantly.

"Oh, I see, sir, you are the gentleman Mr. Wildred was expecting.
He--they--it is possible they will be in quite shortly. Perhaps you will
walk into the room."

"The room," and with such a queer little emphasis on the former word,
sounded rather odd. It was but a trifling peculiarity of expression,
however, and I did not think much of it as I followed the butler along
the hall, passing through a door, before which he swept the curtain
aside with a flourish, and so into a passage which evidently led towards
the new wing. We went on for some distance, and presently arrived at a
closed door, which the butler threw open for me. "It is here that my
master requested you should wait, sir," he said.

I walked in, and he left me, shutting the door. It then struck me that I
had neither given him my name nor mentioned the mass of smoke and sparks
which I had seen vomited from the tower. I sprang to the door again,
meaning to call after the man a word of warning in regard to the fire,
but he was already out of sight. He could not have gone back the way
that he had come, or I should certainly have seen him walking down the
dimly-lighted passage, there being no door save that at the extreme end,
which he would not yet have had time to reach. I did not see how he
could have disappeared so suddenly, but returning whence I had come, I
looked about in vain for a bell.

I was sure now that this room must be situated in that part of the new
wing which adjoined the tower. In glancing at the house from outside, I
had fancied that the square, squat wall must be that of a studio, as
there were no windows, but a high, domed skylight on top. Now I saw that
though the outer building was square, the room within was octagon in
shape. It was, perhaps, a studio, as I had fancied, but there was
something of the free-and-easy negligence of an Oriental smoking-room
about it.

The walls were hung with embroidered Indian materials, and a low divan
ran down part way. Between the hangings were panels of sandal-wood,
ornamented with bits of mirror in the Burmese fashion, and half hidden
with curious foreign weapons, daggers, swords, and spears, and even a
Zulu assegai or two. On the floor stood a hookah, and on a small inlaid
table were a couple of curious little objects which I knew to be opium
pipes. In one corner, as though it had been pushed aside, stood an easel
with a canvas upon it, which was half covered with a piece of drapery.
The skylight was partly concealed with red silk blinds, drawn across the
staring glass, and from the centre of the dome was suspended a large
jewelled lamp. It was from this that all the light in the studio
proceeded at present, and though there was no fireplace, the room was
warm--indeed, insufferably hot. This fact, taken together with the
studio's proximity to the tower, made me feel more certain than before
that some flue in this modern portion of the house had caught fire. I
searched the panels for a bell, but found none, and at last lifted
several of the curtains that draped the larger part of the octagonal
walls. Under the first two that I raised only a blank space of dark wood
was visible, but under the third I was surprised to find a small,
secretive-looking door.

There was no knob or ring by way of handle, but close to the edge, and
about half-way between top and bottom, I distinguished a diminutive
keyhole, outlined with shining metal. I let the curtain drop again,
though lingeringly. It could be only a cupboard, or a particularly
secure wine cellar, perhaps, behind this dwarfish door, yet had I
discovered it in a house not English, but of a country less
conventionally civilised than our own, I should have told myself that I
had chanced upon the clue to a secret.

There was still a fourth curtained space (the remaining half of the
octagons being of the sandal-wood), and this, as it happened, was
directly behind the draped easel.

I moved towards it, not intending to pry into Mr. Wildred's domestic
economies, but still bent on unearthing an electric bell if I could do
so, when my eyes fell upon the partially-covered picture.

It was but a pinky-white, uncovered shoulder that I could see, with a
glimpse of red-gold hair at such a distance above as to suggest a
massive knot at the back of a woman's head, seen in profile. There was a
fraction of fluffy tulle sleeve as well, revealing the outline of a
rounded, girlish arm, and though the face was hidden by the drapery, I
was as sure as if I had seen it, that should I push aside the curtain my
eyes would fall upon the counterfeit presentment of Karine Cunningham.

With half-extended hand I paused. The painting was so far covered, and
it was in another man's house. Had I a right to assure myself whether my
supposition were correct? As I hesitated my ears were startled by what I
can only describe as the beginning of a sound.

It was low and inarticulate, yet it seemed to me that it was uttered by
human lips. It commenced with a tremulous, vibrating noise, such as
might have been made by a man groaning with closed mouth and between set
teeth.

I started, and looked over my shoulder, so close did it seem, that I
could almost fancy it had proceeded from a corner of the room behind me.
Still it went on, monotonously, and then suddenly rose with
ever-increasing volume to a yell of utmost agony.

Never had I heard such a shriek, not even in battle, when men were
stabbed or shot, or blown to pieces. So horrible, so long-drawn was it,
that I found myself strangely awe-struck and appalled.

"Great heaven!" I exclaimed aloud, sure now that close at hand fire must
be raging, and have claimed some inmate of the house as its victim.

Though I knew not where to find the servant who had admitted me, or any
other person, I flung open the door through which I had come, and ran
down the passage leading towards the main part of the house. In through
the second and wider one I went, opening a door here and there, but
finding only darkness and emptiness beyond.

I reached the large entrance hall at last, and shouted loudly--"Here,
you! John, James!"--not knowing in the absence of the master and his
guest whom to call upon.

No one answered, and after the horror of the unearthly cry that I had
heard, and now the sound of my own lusty voice, the silence that fell
seemed curiously brooding and ominous.

I shouted a second time, and was then rewarded by the sight of the
respectable-looking butler. His face appeared--or I imagined it,--even
more smug than before in its expression, and there was something
suggestive of injured dignity as well.

"Did you call, sir?" he inquired with an irritating meekness.

"I did, indeed," I returned rather sharply. "I've been looking
everywhere for a bell, but couldn't find one. I have every reason to
believe that this house is on fire, somewhere in the left wing, near the
room into which you took me, and it is certain that someone has got
caught in the flames. For heaven's sake, show me the entrance to the
tower, and come with me to do what can be done!"

The smug look was gone, chased away by one of blank amazement, which did
not, however, seem the sort of horrified surprise that might have been
expected to follow on my startling announcement.

"I'm sure you must be entirely mistaken, sir," he said. "There is no
fire, I'm quite certain of that. There--there may have been a cry, for
as it happens there's just been an accident--in the kitchen."

"An accident in the kitchen?" I echoed, incredulously.

"Yes, sir. You see, it was this way, sir" (the fellow stammered and
breathed hard between his words, as though he were anxious to gain time
for himself, I thought): "The cook--an awkward woman--set some
methylated spirit on fire, and upset the stuff over her foot. She--I'm
afraid she did give a scream, sir. You know what women are at such
times. But it's all right now. The flames were put out on the instant,
sir, and one of the other servants is helping cook bind up her foot.
Very kind of you to take this trouble and be anxious, sir, I'm sure."

He was glib enough now, but his shifty eyes were moving about, as though
looking with a certain apprehension for someone to arrive.

"I saw smoke and sparks coming out of the tower as I came up to the
door," I said, doubtful about accepting this halting explanation.

The fellow flushed to the roots of his black oiled hair as I watched
him.

"Did you see that, sir?" he exclaimed, ingenuously. "It's master's
laboratory up there, though you'd never think it from the outside, would
you? Something's gone wrong with one of the--the apparatuses, sir--I
don't know the name for it--and the fact is I did suppose you were the
gentleman who had come to examine into the trouble. He was to have
arrived to-day, and so I thought----But I see, sir, as you refer to the
sparks, and seem not to understand what makes them, I must have been
mistaken."

"Yes, you were mistaken," I returned, only half satisfied, yet not
caring to allow myself morbidly to scent a mystery where mystery there
was none.

"Would you step in here, sir, and wait for my master?" he went on
hastily, drawing aside the _portiere_ from a door close by. "I
shouldn't have given you the bother of going so far before, only I
thought you'd come on business which would take you to that part of the
house. This is the drawing-room, sir, if you'll be pleased to walk in,
and I'll fetch you your hat and stick from the studio."

I had no objections to make to this suggested course, though I was
conscious of a vague desire to return to the octagon room.

The butler noiselessly preceded me, turning up the lights, which had
been dim, and touching a match to four or five candles on the
mantelpiece. I saw then that I was in a large, old-fashioned
drawing-room, with plenty of ancient blue and white china, Sheraton
furniture, and a fireplace suggesting a design of Adams'.

I sat down beside it to finish my time of waiting, not quite sure
whether to be crestfallen over having made an unnecessary sensation, or
to be distrustful of the butler, with his shifty face. I scarcely heard
his decorous footsteps, as he moved away over the polished oak floor of
the great hall, but he had not been gone more than a moment or two, when
the sound of voices whispering together reached my ears.

I had always particularly sensitive ones, and no doubt my somewhat
precarious, wandering life had done much to sharpen them. At all events,
I was able to hear that which did not reach the ears of other men less
favoured in this regard, and now I caught a word or two spoken outside
in the hall.

"In the drawing-room ... 'tisn't he, after all ... confound your
stupidity! ... fool you are.... Well, it can't be helped now ... story
will have to do."

An instant later Mr. Carson Wildred had appeared at the door. I got up
as he showed himself, and advanced towards him, keenly watching his
face. It had been alert at first, as though he were anxious to ascertain
who the visitor could be; then, as he identified me, for the fraction of
a second a fire of fierce anger blazed in his pale eyes. Before I could
more than convince myself that it had actually been there, however, it
was gone. He came towards me, smiling cordially, and holding out his
hand.

"How do you do, Mr. Stanton?" he said. "This is an unexpected pleasure,
after your refusal of our invitation last night, but none the less
delightful. I suppose I'm rather late in wishing you a merry Christmas?
But better late than never, you know!"

"Thank you," I returned, grudging the necessity for taking the man's
hand. It was cold as ice, and he remarked upon it, laughing.

"Rather a chilly welcome that," he exclaimed; "but I've just come in
from a walk, and we've very seasonable weather, as they call it, to-day.
My butler--the best and most methodical of chaps, by the way--is in a
frightful state because you have been annoyed, it seems, while you have
been waiting for me. So sorry to have kept you. Accident in the kitchen,
it seems. Hope it won't interfere with our getting a decent dinner
to-night, for of course you'll stay?"

I fabricated an engagement for the evening on the spot, and explained
how I had felt like spending an afternoon in the country, and seeing
what the river looked like at Christmas time.

"I've only a few minutes to stay, really," I said, "for I've set my
heart on walking back to Marlow. Farnham knows I'm here, I suppose?"

"Oh, that's the pity of it," he ejaculated. "Farnham's away, after all.
You know what an erratic fellow he is? Well, he got tired of business,
and not dreaming you would come, ran into town to dine with some people
who had asked him the other day. The fact is, I fancy there's a fair
lady in the case. But he did say something about looking you up at the
Savoy, if he had time, and as trains are bad to-day, he meant to spend
the night in town."

As Wildred went volubly on with his apologies and explanations, I did
not take my eyes from his face. It was as open and candid in expression
as a face of his peculiar type could be, and yet, though there was no
earthly reason why I should disbelieve anything he had said, there was a
vague doubt in my mind as uncomfortable to bear as a haunting sense of
guilt.




CHAPTER VI

An Adventure in the Park


"Farnham promised," I said, "to dine with me to-morrow night, you know.
It is very much to be regretted that you have an engagement, but I hope
that you will remind him of his to me."

"I will do so, certainly," Wildred returned. "Not that any reminder
could be needed, for Farnham is one of your most enthusiastic admirers,
I should say."

We were vastly polite to each other during what remained of the
conversation, far more ceremoniously so than we should have been likely
to be had there been any solid liking on either side under the thin
veneer of friendliness.

In a few moments I had got away, despite Wildred's repeated request that
I should remain and share his lonely Christmas dinner with him. Somehow,
a mouthful of food taken in that house would have choked me, and I left
with the echo of the awful cry I had heard still seemingly ringing in my
ears.

I half expected that Farnham might look in upon me, as Wildred had
suggested, and therefore spent what remained of the evening after my
return to town at the hotel. But he did not come, and shortly after
midnight I threw down the book in which I had been able to retain no
great interest, and went to bed.

It was ridiculously early when I woke, and my first conscious thought
was a joyous one, that now only one day intervened between me and the
call I promised myself to make at Lady Tressidy's.

I had endeavoured to explain to my own satisfaction the presence of a
portrait which I believed to represent Miss Cunningham at the House by
the Lock. There were many ways in which it might have found a place
there, without betokening any great intimacy between the original of the
picture and Carson Wildred. It might have been an Academy success which
he had purchased; it might be even that the resemblance was merely one
of chance.

Still, try as I might to settle the doubts which, no matter how often
discarded, invariably came crowding back to my brain, I was already far
too deeply plunged into love to remember with calmness my glimpse of the
canvas under the drapery.

Of course it would be impossible for me to refer to it in talking with
Lady Tressidy or Miss Cunningham, if I were lucky enough to see them on
Sunday; but in some indirect way I might be able to induce one of them
to mention it. I could refer to my visit to the House by the Lock
perhaps, touching lightly upon my impression of the striking decorations
in the studio, or smoking-room, and then, if there were nothing to
conceal, and Miss Cunningham were aware that Mr. Wildred possessed her
portrait, it would be very natural that a word or two in regard to it
might pass her lips.

As I was on my way down to breakfast a little after ten, I met one of
the bell boys with a telegram, which he had been on the way to bring to
my door.

It was a long and elaborate message, and glancing down to the end of the
seven or eight lines I read Farnham's name. I then went back to the
beginning again.

"So sorry not to have seen you yesterday," the words ran. "Wildred has
come to town, bringing my luggage, on receipt of a wire from me saying I
have just heard of important financial business calling me to America at
once. Has told me of your visit. Very vexed can't keep engagement with
you to-night, and that this must after all be farewell, as am leaving
immediately for Southampton by boat train. Good-bye and good luck to
you. Will write you soon from other side, addressing Savoy Hotel. Yours,
HARVEY FARNHAM."

I cannot say I felt any very deep disappointment at the thought that I
should not see my friend from the States again. I liked him, and had
found him a pleasant companion, but had it not been for the strange and
unpleasant dream which had somehow gifted him with an artificial
importance in my mind, I should have cherished few regrets at his sudden
flitting. As it was, I had a curious sense of uneasiness, and an
inexplicable impression that in some undefined way I had done him an
injustice, or been careless of his interests, though in reality I was
very sure I had done nothing of the kind.

Still, I could not shake off the feeling, and with an odd restlessness
upon me I started almost immediately after breakfast for a long walk.

For some time I went on without paying very much attention to the
direction I had taken, but mechanically I had passed along the
Embankment, so on through crowded Piccadilly, and thus to the Park.

The dreary stretch of sodden grass, with stripped trees, and here and
there a patch of dingy London snow, did not look particularly inviting,
but I went in, wondering a little at my own aimlessness of mood.

I had intended to do a good deal of writing during the morning and early
afternoon, but I knew that, even had I stayed at home, it would have
been impossible for me to put pen to paper.

The ubiquitous cyclist was to be seen in great numbers and to the best
advantage. At this time of year the "smart set" was for the most part
conspicuous by its absence, but there were some pretty and neatly
costumed young women, and as I pursued my way slowly, idly looking at
those who passed, there was a flash of red-gold hair as a slender figure
in dark grey cloth shot by, and I knew, with a quickening of my heart
throbs, that I had seen Miss Cunningham.

She was going very well, and I was admiring the pretty back with its
girlish shoulders and slim tapering waist, when suddenly a woman, riding
in the opposite direction, swerved across the road on her wheel, before
Miss Cunningham had been given either time to slacken her speed or to
turn out of the way.

A collision was inevitable, and without waiting for it to happen, as I
knew it must, in another instant I ran forward with great springing
strides.

It was all over before I could reach the place. Both had fallen, and
several passers-by on wheels had stopped and collected in so close a
group that I could not see whether one or both had been seriously
injured.

In less time than is taken in the telling, however, I had elbowed my way
through the well-meaning crowd to find Miss Cunningham sitting on the
edge of the grass nursing a twisted ankle, her lovely face looking white
and troubled.

The cause of the accident was already on her feet, and in the midst of
such voluble apologies and explanations that I could only conclude she,
at least, had suffered slightly.

"Miss Cunningham," I said, warning the girl of my presence; and she
looked up with a tremulous little cry of surprise and perhaps relief.

"Oh, I am so thankful!" she exclaimed. "I was just wondering what I
should do. But--but you will help me, I know."

"If you will let me," I responded, rather too eagerly. "I saw the
accident from a distance. I hope you are not much hurt."

"I don't quite know," she said, ruefully.

By this time we had been practically left alone. Seeing that an
acquaintance of the young lady's had opportunely appeared upon the
scene, the others, whose proffered assistance could now be dispensed
with, had one by one moved away.

"Is it your ankle?" I asked, stooping down over the dainty foot which
showed beneath the short bicycling dress.

"Yes; it seemed to turn under me as I fell, somehow. And my poor
machine! I know it must have had a terrible smash. I feel far worse
about it than I do about myself. But the whole thing is a punishment, I
suppose. I oughtn't to have come out alone. Lady Tressidy never allows
it, and will be very cross with me when she hears what has happened, I'm
afraid. I shan't have a bit more sympathy than I deserve, when it comes
out. I hadn't meant her to know at all, you see."

I could not imagine how even a woman could find it in her heart to
reproach the owner of those beautiful appealing eyes and exquisite lips,
quivering now, between smiles and tears, like those of a mutinous child.

If I had dared tell her how deep was the sympathy I felt! But I was only
afraid lest she might read it, and more, in my eyes.

Sympathetic though I was, however, I could not control my joy that,
since the accident _had_ happened, I--and no other--had been on the
spot to offer aid which she might deign to accept.

"Don't mind about your bicycle," I said. "I'm sure it's all right, or
can easily be made so again; and if you'll let me enter into the plot,
perhaps between us we can think of a road out of the difficulty with
Lady Tressidy. But the first thing to do is to get you safely away from
this."

"I'm afraid I can't walk!" she warned me, laughing nervously.

"Of course not. A cab's the thing, with the invalided bike on top. But
may I be with you? I don't see how it is possible to let you go by
yourself."

"It will be very--unconventional, won't it?" she smiled. "But there are
times when conventionalities must be thrown aside, and I shall be
grateful if you'll take care of me, and do all the planning, please."
Then, womanlike, contradicting her own last sentence, she went on, "But
I don't see how we can manage about a cab. Of course there won't be any
here, and--I don't _very_ much want to be left sitting here all
alone."

"And you shall not be, for a moment," I said, joyful even at this small
sign that my presence was not actually disagreeable to her. "There are
plenty of people who will call a cab for us."

And I proceeded to put my statement to the proof.

Within five minutes an unusually presentable four-wheeler had appeared
upon the scene, the unfortunate bicycle had been handed up on top, and
the young lady had been tenderly helped inside.

"Tell him just to go on slowly for a few minutes while we talk things
over," she commanded, more cheerfully. "Do you know, Mr. Stanton, after
all I begin to hope my ankle is not so badly hurt; and though, as I told
you, I shall be in a sad scrape when I get home, and have to confess,
still--there's a spice of adventure in all this that appeals to me,
rather. It's a very long time since I have had an adventure of any
kind."

Poor child, she little guessed how many awaited her behind the lowered
curtain of the future!

"Never have _I_ had one which would be so wholly delightful," I
boldly said, "if I had not to think that you were in pain."

"Oh, it is really not so dreadful." She blushed brightly, but when the
lovely rose tint faded it left her pale even to the lips. "Suppose we
talk," she went on more sedately, "about the way in which you are to get
me out of my difficulty--for I think you've promised to do that."

I adopted her tone at once. "Let us begin with judicial questioning
then. Was Lady Tressidy at home when you came out?"

"No"--laughing--"or I couldn't have come--on my bicycle. She'd gone to
an anti-something meeting (Lady Tressidy is very fond of anti-something
meetings, as you'll discover for yourself when you know her). She won't
be at home to lunch either, and she need never find me out in my
iniquity, except that--even though my foot is not so _very_ bad--I
shall be sure to limp. She will enquire what has happened, and, of
course, though my conscience would not reproach me much for silence, if
that were possible, I couldn't tell a fib."

I would have been ready to swear that she was not one of the young women
who could rattle off what they might call "harmless evasions" with a
candidly smiling face.

"Suppose, then," I suggested, "that you allow me to take you at once to
a doctor, who will examine your ankle, and perhaps be able to anoint it
with some healing lotion, which may prevent the limping you so dread.
There used to be a man in this neighbourhood whom I knew by reputation
when I was in England last. I remember street and number, and it's not
very likely that he's moved away."

"A grand idea," she exclaimed; but though she tried to speak brightly,
even merrily, it was plain to see that she was suffering a good deal,
whether more physically or mentally I could not tell.

I put out my head and gave directions to the cabman, and when I drew it
in again to glance anxiously at the face which already I so passionately
loved, I saw that it was even whiter than before. The eyes were drooping
and the dark curling lashes almost swept the colourless cheeks. As
though she felt my gaze upon her, she looked up instantly, and made an
effort to smile; but the mischievous light which had danced in her eyes
when she first sank restfully back upon the shabby cushions of the cab
had been suddenly and utterly quenched.

"Miss Cunningham!" I exclaimed. "You have made nothing of your pain, but
I know that you are ill--that you are suffering."

"I am very foolish," she answered, in a low, unsteady voice. "It isn't
my ankle--though, of course, that hurts a little--but I think It must be
the shock, which I didn't realise at first. I felt quite bright until a
moment ago, but suddenly I am all weak and trembling. The truth is, Mr.
Stanton, I wasn't fit to be out this morning, especially alone, and I
didn't come simply from sheer bravado, as you might think, and for the
sake of doing what I'd been told not to do. I--I felt as though I
_must_ be out in the air, and in motion. I didn't sleep last night,
and I didn't eat any breakfast this morning, which may partly account
for this silliness of mine, perhaps. I thought I should feel better out
of doors, but it seems that nothing in the world can do me any good.
Everything I attempt must always end in disaster, and--oh, Mr. Stanton,
I am so very, very unhappy and miserable!"

To my amazement and distress, she covered her face with her little
gloved hands, and broke into a storm of sobbing.




CHAPTER VII

Friends


It was all I could do to resist the impulse to take the small trembling
hands in my own, to touch the bowed head with its glory of shimmering
ripples, to break into passionate words which must have alarmed her, and
put an end to my chance of winning her, perhaps for ever.

But to a certain extent I was able to control myself.

"What can I say--what can I do?" I stammered. "If there was only some
way in which it might be possible for me to help you."

"Ah, if--if!" she echoed, desolately. "Don't you think it strange that,
though we scarcely know each other--though this is only our second
meeting, and quite by chance, I turn to you with such a confession? I am
ashamed now"--and she impetuously dashed her tears away with a toy of a
handkerchief. "But the words spoke themselves before I could stop them.
You see, I have no one to talk to--no one to advise me. I think I must
be the loneliest girl in all this big preoccupied world."

"I should have thought you would have more friends than you could keep
within bounds," I said, hotly.

"Friends? Has anyone many friends? I have plenty of acquaintances, but I
think no friends. Let us not talk of this any more, though, Mr. Stanton.
I have forgotten myself."

"Forgive me--I can't obey you," I protested. "Just one word. As you
said, this is only our second meeting, and I have no right to ask a
favour of you, yet I am going to do it. I beg of you, as I never begged
anything before, that you will forget how short a time we have known
each other, and that you will take me for a friend--a friend in the
truest and best sense of that good, much-abused word. I swear to you
that you would find me loyal."

She looked up at me in the sweetest way, with eyes that glistened
through a sheen of tears.

"I believe that I should find you so," she answered, falteringly. "And,
oh, how I do need a friend--though you may think _me_ disloyal to
say that, when I have a home with those who--have meant to be kind to
me." Her eyes had dropped, but now she raised them again and met mine
earnestly. "Yes," she exclaimed--"yes, I _will_ have you for a
friend."

"Then won't you begin by making use of me at once?" I pleaded with an
eagerness I could no longer disguise.

"I--am I not making use of you now? Ah, I know what you mean! You mean I
am to tell you the things which I have let you see are troubling me? But
much as I need help and advice, _could_ I do that now, so soon? You
must already think me a very strange girl--half mad perhaps. Well, I
have had almost enough of late to drive me mad. Some time, in a few days
maybe, when we know each other a little better, I----But the man is
stopping. We have come to the doctor's you spoke of, I suppose?"

I neither blessed the cabman nor the doctor at that moment. Still less
did I do so afterwards, knowing that, if we had not been interrupted
then, it might well have happened that the whole course of our two lives
had been changed.

However, there was nothing to be done but ascertain if the eminent man
was at home, and able to give his attention to a somewhat urgent case.

The poor girl, too, was evidently suffering, and in a highly nervous
state, and it would have been cruel, now that the opportunity had
presented itself, to keep her for a single instant from the restoratives
doubtless at hand.

Dr. Byrnes was to be seen. I introduced Miss Cunningham to him,
described the accident, and left him to do what he could for the injured
ankle. Afterwards I had still the joy of driving to Park Lane with her
in anticipation.

I was only called when Dr. Byrnes was ready to send his patient away.

"Do you know what was the first thing that this young lady did before I
had time to begin my ministrations?" he jocularly enquired, and though
the girl looked up at him with imploring eyes, he persisted. "Why, she
fainted away, and if she had to do it, she couldn't have chosen a more
proper occasion. There I was, with all the known remedies at hand, and I
proceeded to use them, with the most satisfactory results, as you may
see. I don't think you will have any further trouble in going home; and
now that she has been well dosed and well bandaged, the best thing she
can do is to eat a hearty luncheon."

Once again settled in the cab, we were but a few moments' drive from Sir
Walter Tressidy's house in Park Lane, as I knew to my intense regret.
With wily forethought, however, I suggested going somewhat out of our
way to the establishment of a certain bicycle manufacturer and mender,
who would send for Miss Cunningham's machine, and repair it before the
accident it had met with could be conjectured by those not supposed to
know.

Try as I would I could not induce her to continue the conversation which
had been broken short. The brief interval that had passed since then had
severed the threads of intense emotion which had for the moment united
us, and she, evidently repenting her frankness, was visibly ill at ease.
It was only at the door that her manner warmed a little towards me
again.

"Yes, I believe I am quite all right," she said, in answer to a
question. "I shall not even have a suspicion of a limp." She held out
her hand to me, and did not try to draw it away, though I grasped it
rather longer and more tightly than conventionality might have approved.
"You will come--soon--to see Lady Tressidy and--me?" she asked, softly.

"I thought of calling to-morrow afternoon. May I?"

"I shall be glad--very glad. Never shall I forget your kindness to me
to-day. Don't think me any more--odd--than you can help. Good-bye."

Before I could begin to tell her how impossible it would be to think any
save the most reverent thoughts of her she was gone, and a cloud seemed
suddenly to darken my sky.




CHAPTER VIII

An Announcement


I would have given a year of my life to know what was the trouble and
anxiety which so wrought upon Karine Cunningham. She was young, and it
might be that her youth and her sex caused her mentally to exaggerate
what was in reality a trifle; yet, even with my slight knowledge of her,
I could not believe this to be the case.

Many conjectures passed in review before me, but that which seemed to
carry with it most weight of reason was the idea that her guardian and
his wife were attempting to coerce her into some course which was
distasteful to her. Naturally, the thought of an objectionable lover
occurred to me, and made my blood run the faster through my veins. I
could not forgive the unknown and possible for being a lover, even
though he were to her an objectionable one.

I longed for the next day to come that I might see the beautiful girl
again, but scarcely in the same way that I had longed for it before.
There could be no repetition of the half confidences of to-day, the
suggestions of friendship (friendship--what a mockery!), the adorable
glances which meant trust, and a gratitude which I had not deserved.

Lady Tressidy would unfortunately be present. My visit would ostensibly
be paid to her. Already I began to dislike her and fancy that her
conduct towards the young girl entrusted to her care must have been
mysteriously atrocious.

No, I could not expect much from the call, having been blessed with an
unexpected glimpse of heaven which it could not give back to me again.
Still, I thought of little else until the coming of the very earliest
hour at which I could show myself in Park Lane on the following day.

Yes, Lady Tressidy was at home, vouchsafed a solemn footman. My name was
announced, and I scarcely ventured to lift my eyes on entering the
drawing-room, lest they should tell me that Karine was not there.
Perhaps she was ill. Indeed, it seemed only too likely that she should
be so. I wondered I had not mentally confronted that probability before.

There were a number of guests assembled in the room, it seemed to me,
despite the fact that everybody who was anybody was supposed to be
spending the Christmas season far away in other people's country houses.

At length, when I had had a few words with my hostess, the crowd
resolved itself into a dozen persons at most, and seeing Karine at a far
end of the room surrounded by three or four vacuous-looking young men, I
desperately resolved to outstay everybody.

I had scarcely more than a glance and a smile from Miss Cunningham, and
then I found myself obliged to talk with simulated amiability to a
semi-young woman who was anxious I should know how often she had heard
of me and my "travels," and that she had read the two or three books I
had been idiot enough to write. Half an hour went by. I had been passed
on to other ladies, who seemed to my prejudiced eyes to bear an
astonishing family likeness, both in mind and face, to the first of the
series. Three or four people had gone. One or two new ones had come in,
but at last I had had the good fortune to escape from the latest on my
list of acquaintances.

I could still see Karine. She had got rid of one of her adorers, but had
a couple yet in hand, and it appeared to me that she would not be sorry
to bid them adieu.

At all events, her face was pale as a lily petal held against the light,
her sweet lips drooped wistfully at the corners, and I thought she spoke
but seldom. The smile with which she had greeted me had been fleeting,
and even as it lingered there had been an expression in her large soft
eyes which it galled me that I should be too dull to read. It had seemed
to say, "Something has happened since I saw you last. Why did you offer
me your friendship, when it was too late to give me any help?"

No doubt, I told myself, this was but a morbid fancy of mine. If I could
have known the true motive of the glance I should have interpreted what
appeared like unutterable sadness as mere boredom.

Instead of the earnest appeal or reproach, I imagined at most the eyes
intended to say, "I have talked long enough with these stupid men, none
of whom have minds above cricket or football. Relieve me of them,
please."

But I had not even been able to do that, though I had tried, for as I
attempted to oust the boldest of the group in my own favour, Lady
Tressidy had swept across the room, with sharp rustling of silken
linings and satin skirts, to claim me for an introduction to "an old
friend who had longed for years to know me."

At length, however, as I said, I had contrived an escape, and was
finding my way towards Karine, when, before I had reached her, I saw her
start, staring past me with a white, frozen look on her face that for
the moment blotted out much of its innocent youthfulness and beauty.

She was gazing in the direction of the door, with dark, dilated eyes,
and lips tightly closed in a line of scarlet that faded to palest pink.

It was as though into the midst of the gossip and laughter and brilliant
light had crept a spectre which she alone could see. Some such look I
had seen in the eyes of a dove which had been offered up as food for a
constrictor. Involuntarily I turned and glanced behind me.

No name had been announced, though I had heard the opening and closing
of the door, and now, as I faced round in that direction, I saw that Sir
Walter Tressidy and Carson Wildred had come in together.

Evidently this was not Wildred's first entrance, for like Sir Walter, he
had neither hat nor stick. He moved forward by his companion's side with
the unmistakably-assured air of the friend of the house, and I
instinctively understood that he had lunched with the Tressidys, and
since that time had been closeted on some business of importance with
his host.

Unreasoningly, I hated him for his privileges. With more of reason, I
hated him because I believed the look I had seen for a single instant on
Karine Cunningham's face was connected with his presence.

That look was gone now. When I removed my eyes from Wildred, and turned
again to her, her delicate, spiritual profile only was visible. Her head
was graciously inclined towards the monocled youth who stood nearest
her. She appeared no longer to see Wildred or Sir Walter Tressidy.

I was determined that the former should not approach her (as he seemed
inclined to do) if I could prevent it.

I hurried to her accordingly, and shut her away from the room, with a
pair of broad shoulders, and with an air of monopolising her which I
should not have dared at any other time to assume. But was I not her
friend? Had I not the right to protect her, if I could, from all that I
believed to be distasteful to her?

Presently, the callow youths, whose claims I had hardly considered,
seemed to melt away, and I was left alone with her. People were going,
and it was getting late, no doubt, but I did not yet mean to follow
their example. After all--despite my dismal presages--it did appear that
I was to have her for at least a moment or two to myself.

I had kept my word. I had outstayed them all--all but Carson Wildred.

"Have you quite recovered from yesterday's accident?" I asked, glad to
share even so insignificant a secret with her.

"Yes, oh, yes!" She spoke hurriedly, and her eyes had moved to the
distant group near the fireside--Lady Tressidy, Carson and Sir Walter.

"You haven't reconsidered your promise that I should be your friend?"

She turned to me quickly, and her eyes brimmed with unshed tears. "So
many things in my life, though it is not so very long as yet, have come
to me _too late_. Even--my friends--sometimes."

Before I could beg her to tell me what she meant, Lady Tressidy had
called her name, and she sprang up obediently. I followed suit, of
course.

"Come here, my dear girl. Mr. Stanton, this is quite a momentous day for
us, and I can't resist the temptation to take you into our circle and
our confidence," said the elder woman, graciously. "It is just settled
that this sweet adopted child of ours is to leave us--and at short
notice too. She and Mr. Wildred _are going to be married_."




CHAPTER IX

Too Late!


"Too late!" the words that Karine had just spoken echoed in my ears like
a knell of doom.

For a few tremendous seconds that seemed endless I stood paralysed by
Lady Tressidy's announcement, unable to speak. Then I turned and looked
at Karine. Her eyes seemed to have been waiting for mine, and for an
instant I held them with my gaze, until they fell, and veiled the answer
mine had asked, with long shadowy lashes.

Never, I thought, as my thirsty eyes drank in the beauty that was not
for me, could there have been another woman so wholly lovely, so
altogether desirable. I could have fallen on my knees before her, to
touch the hem of her dainty gown with my lips, and cry out my love and
longing for her. But instead I was called upon to say something civil,
and therefore hypocritical, to the newly-engaged pair, and then, as soon
as decency would permit my escape, to go out from her presence for ever,
and face the black loneliness of my darkened life.

Only a few days had passed since first I had seen the beauty of her
face, but already she dominated my every thought, and I knew that there
was no hope of surcease from the aching pain of having lost her.

Had I been obliged to stand by and see her give herself to any other man
than Carson Wildred, it seemed to me that the blow would have been more
bearable. But with my almost unreasoning aversion for and distrust of
him, the thought of a marriage between these two was like the sacrifice
of fair virgins to the foul, blood-dripping jaws of the mythical
Minotaur.

Slight as was our actual acquaintance, when measured by mere time, it
appeared the maddest conceit on my part to believe for a moment that had
I come earlier into her life I might have made a difference. But, mad as
it was, I did so believe. Some voice within me, which would not be
stilled or brook contradiction, cried aloud that I might have won her
love, that she might have been mine, that only some devilish tangle of
circumstances had circumvented the fate which originally had meant that
we two should be all in all to one another.

It was perhaps the hardest task I had ever been forced to perform when
after that ominous pause, which doubtless seemed far more prolonged to
me than to the others, I held out my hand, as I was expected to do,
taking Miss Cunningham's ice-cold fingers in mine, and wishing her
happiness.

Then I was obliged to turn to Wildred, in whose eyes I saw, or fancied I
saw, a malicious light of comprehension and triumphant defiance. But his
hand I would not take.

"It is hardly necessary to congratulate you," I said haltingly. "You are
one of the most fortunate men in the world."

"And the most undeserving?" It was he who added the words, as though he
had read them in my own mind; and there was a slight, sarcastic rising
inflection of the voice at the end of the sentence, as if he put it to
me as a question.

Of course, I vouchsafed him no answer, unless he found it in my eyes,
which have ever been telltales. But in that moment I would have laid
down my life could I have wrenched from my memory that episode of his
history, the secret of which it mercilessly withheld from me.

I have a dim recollection of saying something more or less conventional
to Sir Walter and Lady Tressidy, and then, at last, I got away.

I had fancied that not to have her face before my eyes, that not to
endure the pang of seeing them together, and to escape into the open
air, would relieve the tension of my feelings. But it was not so. The
moment the door had closed behind me the agony of the thought that I had
seen her perhaps for the last time, and the poignancy of my regret that
I had not been able to put to her one question which rang in my brain,
became well-nigh unendurable.

I walked rapidly away from the house, telling myself that the best thing
for me would be to leave England again at once. I had been a fool to
fancy myself homesick, and to come back--to _this_. So far my life
had been lived contentedly enough apart from the influence or love of
women. What strange weakness of the soul had seized me that I should
thus have yielded without a struggle to a single glance from a pair of
violet eyes?

Yes, assuredly the sooner I got away the better. There had been nothing
save a restless desire for home to bring me to my native land. There was
_less_ than nothing to keep me there.

Never to see her again--never again! I believed that my mind was made
up, and yet I think I would have cut off my hand for the chance of one
more moment with her--one more glimpse of her face to take away across
the sea, even though she neither saw nor spoke to me.

I walked aimlessly in the darkness, knowing not and caring not where I
went. I heard a clock strike eight, realising suddenly that I was far
from my hotel, and that I had wearied myself uselessly.

I must write some letters that night, crying off two or three
engagements that I had been foolish enough to make, and explaining that
I had been suddenly and unexpectedly called away. As I had walked I had
made up my mind whither I would go. India would be rather good at this
time of year, I thought, and I had always promised myself, when I should
find the leisure, to make certain explorations. There had also been an
idea smouldering in my mind for a year or two that with my knowledge of
the language, and a proper disguise, it might be possible for me to push
my way into the jealously guarded Thibet. Now was the very moment for
some such experiments as these.

I hailed a cab and drove back to the Savoy, from a distant and more or
less (to me) unknown region of London. Try as I might to keep my
thoughts from the one absorbing topic by dwelling upon the plans for the
future, the effort was useless. Karine's face was before me, and again
and again I heard her words, which might have meant so much or so
little, "Many things in my life--even my _friends_ sometimes--have
come to me too late."

As I entered the hotel, my eyes dazzled by the sudden brilliant light, I
could hardly for an instant believe that it was not an optical illusion
when I saw in the flesh the face which had been haunting me.

But it was indeed she; there was no doubting that. People were coming
into the Savoy for dinner, now so fashionable a way of passing the
deadly dull London Sunday evening, and in a moment I had guessed that
she and her party were of the number. I had even an impression of a
sentence begun by Lady Tressidy that afternoon, which would doubtless
have ended with the information that she and the others were dining at
my hotel in the evening, had she not been interrupted, and so forgotten,
as I had done.

There had been a dreary drizzle of rain outside, and I was conscious
that my long wanderings through muddy streets had rendered me
unpresentable. Still, my wish had been granted me. There stood Karine
Cunningham, in white from head to foot; a long soft evening cloak, with
shining silver threads straying over its snowy surface, hung loosely
about her, for she had fastened it at the throat, and I could see a
gleam of bare neck, hung with a rope of pearls, and the delicate folds
of chiffon belted in with jewels at her girlish waist.

Her head was turned aside and slightly bent, a light from above
streaming down on her uncovered hair, and transforming the copper into
gold.

Sir Walter and Lady Tressidy were close by--not six feet away--and all
were evidently waiting for someone--Carson Wildred, no doubt, I bitterly
told myself.

None of the party had as yet seen me. Sir Walter and his wife were
talking very earnestly together, and had perhaps moved a few steps from
the young girl that their words might not be overheard by her.

I knew that, if I were wise, I would at once take myself off without
announcing my presence, but a sudden impulse seized and overmastered me.
It was a desperate one, doubtless, but none the less alluring and
powerful because of that.




CHAPTER X

"If He Had Committed a Crime"


Karine stood, as I said, perhaps a couple of yards distant from her
friends, and their backs, at the present moment, were more than half
turned to her. It would be just possible for me to speak to her, without
being observed by them, if I were both extraordinarily cautious and
lucky. At any moment Wildred, who had perhaps gone to rectify some
vexatious mistake about a table, might return. If I meant to take the
step at all there was no time to be lost in doing so.

Without giving myself a second for further reflection, and with the
blood surging to my temples, I found myself, with a few strides, beside
her. Mud-stained boots and trousers were forgotten. I would waste no
time in apologising for my appearance.

What she must have thought of my pale and eager face, suddenly bent over
her, I do not know. I felt that a great crisis in my life, perhaps in
hers as well, had arrived, and my eyes must have shown something of that
which stirred so passionately in mind and heart, for she started with a
look almost of fear as she saw and recognised me.

She uttered no exclamation, however. If she had, Sir Walter and Lady
Tressidy would have heard and looked round, and my one chance, so
desperately snatched from Fate, would have been gone like a bubble that
bursts ere it has fairly expanded.

Without one spoken word I made her see that she must come with me, and
the quick realisation of my power over her, as she laid her hand upon my
arm unhesitatingly, thrilled me to the very core of my being.

Most women would have refused to come, or at least questioned my sudden
appearance and intention, but not so with her. She knew that I had
something to say to her which must be said, and it was her will to hear
it.

She had been pale as a statue of marble, as she stood leaning listlessly
against the wall in her white dress, but as she moved away with me life
and colour came back to her face. I led her down the hall to a small
public drawing-room, and not once did she hesitate or look back,
unconventional as was the adventure in which she was engaged.

Luckily, the place was empty, save for two elderly French women, who
gossiped and gabbled with their heads close together on a sofa in a
corner.

"What is it--oh, what is it?" questioned Karine. "Quick! there will only
be a moment, I know, for they will see that I have gone, and will soon
find me here."

Without any preface I came straight to the asking of the bald, crude
question which was in my mind to ask.

"For the sake of--our friendship, Miss Cunningham, forgive me, and tell
me whether you love Carson Wildred?"

She started and quivered almost as though I had struck her a blow, and
her large, frightened eyes studied mine for a long second without
answering. Then she said, simply, "No, my friend, I do not--love him."

"Yet you have promised to marry him?"

"Yes."

"And you mean to carry out that promise?"

"Yes, unless----"

"Unless what?"

"Something--happens to prevent me."

"If you do not love him something _shall_ prevent. Let me help you.
For heaven's sake, let me! Only give me an idea how it can best be
done--I ask no more. I will teach you what such a--friendship as mine
can have the power to do."

I hoped to give her courage by the passion and force of my words, but,
strangely enough, the bright eagerness died out of her face as I spoke.
In some way I had missed saying the thing which might have comforted
her. If I had only known--if I had only known!

"You are very kind," she said, gently and sadly. "I am not looking
forward to any great degree of happiness in my life, but I daresay,
after all, I shall get on as well as most women. I don't think anything
_will_ happen to prevent--what we were speaking of."

"Why, is it to come so soon, then?" I questioned, impetuously.

"In six weeks. It was all arranged to-day"--with a soft little sigh at
the end of her sentence.

"Tell me this: Are you in any way being forced into the marriage?"

"Not by people--exactly. Only by _circumstances_. I--I can't tell
you any more, though, believe me, I am grateful for all you mean, and
all you would do for friendship's sake." There seemed a faint ring of
stifled bitterness in the last three words, though wherefore it should
come I knew not. If she had resented the warmth of my "friendship" after
our brief acquaintance, what would she feel, I dimly wondered, should I
forget myself, and be coward and fool enough to tell her of my mad love
on the very day of her betrothal to another man?

With all my strength I held my tongue under control, and heaven knows it
was no easy victory, with those sweet eyes looking into mine!

"Tell me what _could_ prevent it?" I persisted imploringly. "If you
found that he was unworthy, would that----"

She half smiled, though without any mirthfulness. "There are so many
degrees of unworthiness, aren't there? And I am not near enough to
perfection to believe myself a judge."

"If _he had committed a crime_?" I went desperately on. And the
words on my own lips made me start as though with a sudden revelation. I
seemed to have assured myself of a fact which had actually taken place,
rather than uttered a mere suggestion. The conviction grew within me
that if Carson Wildred had not successfully altered his face and each
characteristic of his personality, I should at once be able not only to
remember, but to prove that my haunting half-recollection was intimately
connected with some criminal deed done by him.

"Ah, _then_! But it is wrong to wish that he should have been
guilty of any wickedness. I think, Mr. Stanton, that as I have promised
to be his wife we must talk no more of this--you and I. I have always
had a horror of disloyalty."

"I know," I said, "that I have done an unheard-of thing in thus stealing
you away from your friends to ask you questions which only the most
intimate friends could claim the right to ask, but----"

"Oh," she cried, impulsively. "Somehow you and I have bridged over
years. You are good to me--don't think I will misunderstand. I shall
always remember you, and--what you would have done for me."

"What I shall try _yet_ to do, in spite of all," I amended. "I
meant to leave England soon, but now--I shall stay."

"Yes--stay," she faintly echoed; "though you must leave me now. I--I
would rather _anything_ than that you were with me when they come
to me. I will make them some excuse for having separated myself from
them. Only go now--_please_ go."

As she spoke, outside in the hall we heard voices and footsteps coming
nearer.




CHAPTER XI

Wildred Scores


Karine's face grew paler than before.

Throwing up her head with a proud, spirited little gesture, she walked
quickly to the door, and passed into the hall.

I knew that this was to prevent her friends from entering and finding us
together, as they must otherwise have done; and there was nothing for me
to do (cowardly as this seemed) but obey her, and passively submit to
the carrying out of her scheme.

It had indeed been Sir Walter and Lady Tressidy and Carson Wildred whose
voices we had heard.

"Why did you run away? We have been looking for you everywhere, and
wasting _so_ much time!" I heard Lady Tressidy say fretfully.

"I was very tired of standing," the girl promptly returned, "and of
_waiting_, too"--with a certain imperiousness in her tone. "I
wandered away to fill up the time till Mr. Wildred should have
straightened matters in the dining-room."

She had contrived to satisfy their curiosity without telling an actual
falsehood, of which I knew instinctively she would greatly dislike
making herself guilty.

It did not seem to occur to them to enter the drawing-room where she had
left me; and when I was sure that they had passed out of sight and
hearing I came forth from the ignominious hiding-place to which her
command had condemned me.

In the exalted mood which had possession of me the thought of dinner
would have been abhorrent. For the rest of the evening I kept my room,
meditating many things, and becoming more and more desirous of learning
Carson Wildred's secret, if secret indeed he had.

At all events, I still had six weeks in which to work, with the hope
ever before me of saving Karine Cunningham from the man whom, by her own
confession, she did not love.

Strange and desperate expedients passed in review before me. How was I
to accomplish my object? The man had denied ever having met me in old
days when it had been mentioned to him that I fancied a previous
acquaintance had somewhere existed; and if I were to learn anything
satisfactory in regard to his antecedents I felt that it must be from
others.

He had made himself a name in a certain set in London, there was no
doubt of that; and I set myself to find out, step by step, how he had
contrived to do it--what was the actual foundation for the reports of
his wealth, his "smartness," his influence on many sides.

On the following day, Monday, I went to my old club, the Wayfarers,
which I had not yet troubled with my presence, and picked out a man
named Driscoll, who made a business of knowing everybody and everything.
Beginning with some conventional talk about the changes in England in
general, and London in particular, since I had seen it last, I managed
to mention Carson Wildred without appearing to have dragged his name
into the conversation for any special purpose of my own.

It sprang from some talk about a British Christmas, and I made as
humorous a story as I could about my having gone down to the House by
the Lock only to miss my friend and my dinner after all.

"Wildred can entertain royally if he chooses," said Driscoll. "I've been
to dinners he gave at the Savoy and Prince's, and Willis's Rooms, don't
you know, something really quite original, with flowers alone which must
have cost a fortune. People come to his entertainments, too--he can get
anybody he wants--from the duchesses down to the music-hall favourites,
even if he likes to get up a conventional river party, with a spread
down at that queer place of his you speak of--the House by the Lock."

"It is a queer place indeed," I echoed. "I wonder how he came by it?"

"Oh, if the stories are true, in a way as peculiar as the place itself,
therefore appropriate. It was owned, I know for a matter of fact, by an
Italian whose father was exiled, and came over here to live after '48, a
chap by the name of di Tortorelli, belonged to a good family and all
that, had the _entree_ everywhere. The son, a nice fellow except
that he was weak, loved nothing so well as baccarat. Somehow he and
Wildred got acquainted, when Wildred was little known, if at all, in
society, and the two played cards on rather a big scale at the house of
a mutual friend. Di Tortorelli had bad luck one night, lost a pot of
money, and finally, having nothing else left that was worth having,
staked the House by the Lock--very dilapidated, and in a shocking state
of repair.

"Well, that's the way Wildred got it, and there are those who do say
that after having won almost everything Tortorelli had, Wildred financed
him till his marriage with a rich American on the proviso that
Tortorelli should get him into the smart set. Those are only Wildred's
enemies, of course, for like most men of strong character he has a few,
though on the whole his generosity has made him extremely popular."

"Then he knew no one when he first appeared over the social horizon?" I
went on questioning.

Driscoll laughed. "I never heard of anyone who knew him before the day
when he first blazed forth as a social luminary about three or four
years ago. He took a house in town for the season, I remember--it was
the Duke of Torquay's--one of the finest in town, and let for a fabulous
sum. Then he and Tortorelli gave an entertainment together, somehow
securing several royalties, to say nothing of Paderewski and La Belle
Otero, and one or two other celebrities, who must each have cost him
anywhere from a thousand to two thousand pounds for the one night.

"After that, Wildred was made, of course, for the affair was a brilliant
success. By the way, that was the first time he ever met the beautiful
Miss Cunningham, who had just made a triumphant _debut_ as the
beauty of the season--in fact, most people think the most beautiful girl
who has been seen since the day when Mrs. Langtry created her first
sensation in London. Miss Cunningham was at the party with the
Tressidys, and _blase_ chap as he was even then, Wildred went down
at the first shot from a pair of dark eyes--violet?--brown?--no one ever
yet was sure of their colour. Of course she's a great heiress, but the
man must be blind and paralysed who couldn't fall in love with Karine
Cunningham for herself; and however he gets it, Carson Wildred has no
lack of money of his own."

"How does gossip say he gets it?" I went on to enquire with eagerness
which I concealed as best I could.

"Oh, gossip doesn't trouble itself much in that way!" Driscoll laughed.
"It only concerns itself to eat his dinners, for as a matter of fact,
though I can't exactly vouch for it myself, there isn't much secret
about the way the money pours in. It's the man's extraordinary luck! He
seems to have a lot of relations who are always good-naturedly going off
the hooks and leaving Wildred fortunes just when he needs them most. Old
fellows in the Antipodes, don't you know, who might really quite as well
be dead as not. It's all straight enough, of course, but the funny thing
is that if one hears one day that Wildred has come rather a cropper at
Newmarket or the Derby, or somewhere else, the news within the month is
pretty sure to be that another Johnny in Australia or elsewhere has
conveniently slipped his cable and left Wildred a cool fifty thousand or
so at the very least."

Hardly had the laughter prompted by his own words died on Driscoll's
lips, when to my astonishment the man of whom we spoke sauntered into
the room. He was looking at peace with all the world, and as nearly
handsome as it was possible for him to look, the contrast between him
and the podgy, elderly gentleman by whom he was accompanied being much
to his advantage.

"Talking of angels!" ejaculated Driscoll beneath his breath; "what do
you think of that for a coincidence?"

"Is he a member here?" I asked in an equally low voice, for I did not
wish Wildred to have the satisfaction of guessing that he had formed the
subject of conversation between me and my companion.

"No," Driscoll said, "but he often comes in with old Wigram, who's been
a great traveller, you know, and who now goes in no end for dabbling in
chemistry. That's Wildred's great fad, and makes the two, who are as
different as possible, rather chummy."

As we spoke on, still in somewhat cautious tones, the two newcomers drew
nearer to us, greeting several men whom they knew, and finally sat down.
The room felt the colder to me for Carson Wildred's presence.

Half an hour dragged along, and I was thinking of moving on, when, as I
passed Wildred with a slight inclination in return for his, somewhat to
my surprise he followed me.

"How do you do?" he said, with an attempt at an ingratiating smile.
"Now, if you won't think me rude for the suggestion, I'd be willing to
bet you a hundred pounds to a fiver that you and Driscoll were doing me
the honour of discussing some of my affairs, if not myself, when I
happened to look in just now."

Here was a good opening for a conversation unweighted by polite
fictions, and I unhesitatingly accepted it. "Yes," I replied, quietly,
turning more fully towards him, "we were talking of you and your
affairs."

"I readily divined that from the look on Driscoll's innocent old mug as
I entered. I am remarkably quick at reading other people's faces."

"I have flattered myself that I am the same--when the faces have not
been altered almost (if not quite) beyond recognition."

I looked full into his curious pale eyes as I gave him this hint, but
they did not fall before mine, and his dark, sallow skin could scarcely
be paler than its wont.

He returned my stare, and was not afraid to show me that my meaning had
made itself clearly understood.

"Why speak in riddles, my dear Mr. Stanton?" he asked, shrugging his
shoulders a little. "But as we have got upon this subject, suppose we
follow it up to the end--bitter or otherwise--and as you may not care to
take all your fellow-Wayfarers into your inmost confidence, I suggest
that we move out of earshot of the mob. Here are a couple of chairs, and
a table, far from the madding crowd. Shall we sit for five minutes or
so? Thanks. And won't you let me offer you a cigar? These are not bad
ones. A present from the Shahzada last year!"

I courteously refused the offer, watching him with some interest as,
pretending to be unconscious of or indifferent to my scrutiny, he struck
a match and lighted his cigar.

"I have already frankly assured you, Mr. Stanton," he went on, "that I
am not aware of having met you before the other night--Christmas Eve, I
think it was--at the theatre with my very good friend Farnham. But you
evidently wish me to see that you still firmly believe I
am--er--mistaken. Am I not stating the case correctly? But it is
certainly far from flattering to me that you should have almost
completely forgotten me, to say the least."

"I shall remember you again, sooner or later," I murmured.

"I sincerely hope so, if in any way we have come across each other in
the past, unknown to me. But I have been so well acquainted with you by
reputation for some years, Mr. Stanton, that I would be ready to swear
my memory could not have played me false."

I did not reply, save by a slight upward movement of the eyebrows, but I
was conscious that he was gazing at me intently.

"You do not like me," he remarked presently, in the same low, monotonous
tone of voice which we had employed so far throughout our disjointed
conversation.

It was my turn to shrug my shoulders. "I should not be apt to select you
as a friend."

"I wonder"--very slowly and lazily--"whether it be possible that I can
in any way, quite inadvertently, _have interfered with your
plans_?"

"Rather say," I broke out imprudently, "that it is possible _I_ may
interfere with yours!"

He laughed. "I wonder how?"

"In no definite way, unless--I should happen suddenly to remember
exactly where and how I have met you before. That little accident might
slightly hamper your career in general for the future perhaps."

"You are pleased to be insulting. And yet, somehow, I don't want to take
offence from you. I would much prefer to argue you out of your somewhat
unreasonable prejudice and mistake. Do you suggest, for instance, that I
am now concealing my identity under a disguise?"

So speaking he raised his hand with a pretence at carelessness, pushing
his dark hair from his forehead in such a way as to assure me without
doubt that he did not wear a wig.

"The moustache--allow me to give you an ocular demonstration--is equally
genuine," he sneered. "I don't sport a false nose, or I should have
procured myself a more desirable one, and my teeth"--with a disagreeable
grin--"are my own. Have I convinced you that I have not tampered with
Nature's handiwork, such as it is?"

"You might have waited, Mr. Wildred," I returned, "until I had accused
you of doing so before trying to prove the contrary. You know the
saying, 'He who excuses, accuses himself,' I suppose?"

"I have heard it, though fortunately it does not concern the case. Look
here, Mr. Stanton, you and I are sitting here among mutual friends,
apparently holding, so far as they can see or hear, an amicable
discussion. But the truth is I have wit enough to understand that what
you would like and what you mean is--_war to the knife_!
Fortunately for me, I am one of Her Majesty's most peaceable,
law-abiding subjects, and always have been so. I have as little to hide
in my past as any man can possibly have--less than yourself even, it may
be--and therefore I do not fear your prying, and can afford to laugh at
your impertinence.

"I will even have my family tree brought out for your benefit if you
choose, and will engage to show you the diary which I have kept for
years, and where you can see exactly how and where my time has been
spent for the last decade or so. Anything to please a famous, and
therefore privileged, man like yourself. Is it a bargain, Mr.
Stanton--will you accept my data if I provide it for you?"

"So great an anxiety to disarm the suspicions of a stranger might tend
to confirm and strengthen them," I said, slowly.

"As you will. I see you don't intend to take my overtures of peace in
the spirit in which they were offered. Well, you seem fond of proverbs,
so here is a Roland for your Oliver--'_forewarned is forearmed_.'
You will not have me for a friend; you are indiscreet enough to advise
me that you intend to make mischief for me if you can--_if you
can_, mind! My conscience is clear as to my past; and here and now I
dare you to do your worst!"

Leaning his elbow on the table, his head upon his hand, he faced me,
looking up sideways with a mocking brilliance in his pale eyes.

"It is my turn to give you warning, and it is this: _I make a bad
enemy_. Even had I some black secret, jealously guarded for
years--which I haven't--you would never drag it from me. I believe
myself to be a cleverer man than you, and if I had chosen the
_role_ of villain I should have been a successful one, there is no
doubt. You would not, Mr. Stanton. Had I something which it was vital to
my interests to conceal, I should have gone about it in such a way that
not the devil himself pitted against me should worm my secret from me.
Had I elected to commit a crime, it would not have been until after I
was ready with an absolutely infallible _alibi_.

"Now, if you are sensible, the very fact that I have made these
admissions will prove my innocence to you. It will be a waste of your
valuable time if you attempt to stand in my way, in _any quarter
whatever_." He rose lazily. "Good-evening, Mr. Stanton," he said, in
a louder tone, which he made both cordial and impressive for the benefit
of any listening ears. "This has been a most interesting chat with you,
one I am not likely soon to forget. I hope it may not be long before I
have the pleasure of meeting you again."

He had certainly scored. I was obliged, hot with indignation and
self-scorn, mentally to confess as much. He had kept his temper, and he
had got the better of me. If my time would only come!




CHAPTER XII

Karine's Engagement Ring


In the first hour of my anguish after hearing that Karine was lost to
me, I had come very near to registering a vow that voluntarily I would
not see her again. Now, however, since our memorable chance meeting in
the hotel, my resolve was different. I determined, on the contrary, that
I would see her as often as possible.

Even if I had to follow the Tressidys into the country on a pretence of
hunting, or some other flimsy pretext of the sort, I would be near her.
I had luckily kept my head sufficiently to breathe no word of love to
Karine. I had even dwelt with some emphasis upon my "friendship," as
though to assure her that she need fear no more, need dread no
persecution at my hands. I believed that she did not suspect my real
feeling for her, and certainly Sir Walter and Lady Tressidy had no
reason to fancy anything of the kind.

Wildred had suspicions, I was sure, but they could only have been born
of quick and jealous intuitions. He could make no charge against me, and
it was not likely, I thought, that he would choose deliberately to put
such an idea into his _fiancee's_ head, unless I were far less
cautious in my behaviour than I meant to be.

I could not conceal from myself that the talk I had had with the fellow
at the Wayfarers' had somewhat discouraged me as to the ultimate success
of my efforts to expose him, and as days went on I found it impossible
entirely to shake off the impression made by his words.

His personality was disagreeably magnetic to me. I had to acknowledge
its power, and in spite of myself there were moments when I felt daunted
by his defiance.

Had he not been very sure of himself he would not have dared to say what
he had said. I believed, as firmly as ever, that there was a black spot
in his past, upon which I could put my finger if only I could place him
in my mental gallery of photographs, in which his portrait had been so
mysteriously blurred or changed. But he and Karine Cunningham would in
all probability be man and wife at the end of six weeks; and six weeks
was, after all, but a short space in which to tear the mask from so
preternaturally clever a scoundrel.

I thought then (and even yet, I trust) that my resolution to save Karine
from this man, if I were able to do so, was not all selfishness.

Knowing nothing, yet suspecting much with haunting vagueness, it seemed
a horrible desecration to me that the beautiful, gentle girl should be
given up to Wildred. I had little enough hope for myself with her,
whatever might betide, for even had it been possible, under happier
circumstances, that she could have learned to care for me, she and her
friends would be sure to misunderstand and condemn my motives in working
against the man she had promised to marry.

Should I have the good fortune to show him to her and those in authority
over her, as the villain I believed him to be, I could not imagine
myself ever attempting to take selfish advantage of his downfall.

What I might do, or try to do, I told myself, must be without any hope
of future reward.

I had persuaded myself that the oftener I could see Karine, and impress
upon her the strength and disinterestedness of my friendship, silently
assuring her of my unforgotten resolve to help, the better it would be
for her. She had said once that she had "many acquaintances but no
friends," and she had seemed glad to welcome my friendship; so that now
I wanted her to see I did not mean to fail her--that, after all, it
might not be as she had thought, _too late_. At least, I succeeded
in convincing myself that these were my only motives in calling again
within the week on Lady Tressidy.

It was Thursday, and the family was to flit away to the country on the
following afternoon. I was informed of this by the footman, whose duty
it was to tell me that his mistress was superintending her packing at
the moment, but would be down almost immediately. Meanwhile, Miss
Cunningham was in Lady Tressidy's boudoir, and would see me.

I could scarcely believe in my good luck, and in her courage--or good
nature.

She had been writing at a little davenport by the window, but rose to
receive me, and extended her hand. To the other--the left--she had
transferred the pen, with the ink still wet, and so it was that as she
greeted me my eyes fell upon a ring which had not before adorned her
finger.

It was the third of the left hand, and to my amazement I recognised the
magnificent diamond--still in the old setting--worn for so many years by
Harvey Farnham.




CHAPTER XIII

"Kismet and Miss Cunningham"


Had I paused for an instant's reflection I must have felt that it would
be impossible for me to take any open notice of the ring, but so great
was my surprise at seeing Harvey Farnham's treasured possession on Miss
Cunningham's finger that involuntarily I uttered a slight exclamation.

Biting her lip she hastily withdrew the hand, dashing the pen she had
been holding with a petulant little gesture on to the desk where she had
been writing.

"Why do you look so astonished," she cried, a certain bitterness in her
voice, "at seeing me wear the sign of my bondage?"

She tried to laugh as she spoke, giving an effect of lightness to the
words, but the effort was a failure.

I would not let her continue to think that she was right in the guess
she had made as to my emotion.

"It was not wholly that, Miss Cunningham," I returned. "Say, rather I
was surprised at seeing you wear this particular ring."

"It _is_ a remarkable one, isn't it? Far too gorgeous and
conspicuous to please me, for myself; but Mr. Wildred was anxious for me
to have it. I believe it has been in his family a long time, and has
been handed down from generation to generation of betrothed
brides--happier than myself." The last three words were spoken almost in
a whisper, but I heard and understood them as I would have understood
the faintest murmur from those lips so dearly loved.

Some dim awakening thought, scarcely clear to my own consciousness,
stirred in my mind at her strange announcement. I could not resist
further questioning.

"Did Mr. Wildred tell you that the ring was an heirloom in his family?"

"Yes. There is a romance attached to it."

She sighed faintly, as though at the death of romance in her own young
life. Then, more quickly--

"Why, Mr. Stanton? Why do you ask me that?"

I could not tell her why; but my heart was bounding with a new
excitement.

"Forgive my curiosity," I said evasively. "I am interested in all that
concerns you."

She turned from me, ostensibly to arrange her scattered papers on the
little davenport, and, relieved of the thraldom of those lovely eyes, I
endeavoured to collect my scattered thoughts.

Somehow I felt that I was on the eve of a discovery which might be of
vast importance in both our lives. How had Wildred obtained that ring
from Harvey Farnham? Why had he lied about it to Karine? That he was a
villain and a schemer I was sure, though I had had no possible means of
proving it. What if this seemingly small matter should put a clue into
my hands.

So clever a scoundrel should not have committed himself to a lie thus
easily disproved, I thought. Only _necessary_ lies were worth the
risk for a man of acumen such as his. But even the most crafty of
mortals is fallible, I reflected, and liable to make some insignificant
mistake, which, like one stone wrongly placed in the foundation of a
vast building, renders the whole structure unstable. Possibly Wildred
had found a stealthy pleasure in weaving a pretty romance round the ring
which he had chosen as the sign of his betrothal, and in weaving it he
had forgotten that I, as an acquaintance of Farnham's, might have been
conversant with its real history. Or, perhaps, he had not counted upon
the fact that Karine might retell the version he had given her to me.

I know how greatly Farnham had valued the marvellous diamond, in its
quaint setting, and I remembered how, only on the night of our last
meeting, he had reiterated to me his determination to keep it. It was
too small to be removed save by cutting, he had said, and I had
satisfied myself by observation that he had not exaggerated.

He must, then, have gone so far as to have the ring cut from his finger
before sailing for America, that he might leave it as a parting pledge
of friendship with Carson Wildred.

The rich, red gold circlet hung loosely enough, however, on Karine's
slim little finger, and a sudden strong desire that she should allow me
to look at it caught hold of me.

"Would it be asking too much," I said, "to have the wonderful heirloom
in my hand to examine for a moment?"

Without a word she slipped the ring off and gave it to me, almost as
though it was a relief to feel its absence.

In a flash a certain recollection had leaped into my mind. There was an
inscription inside, Harvey Farnham had told me. If the ring had been cut
doubtless the words written within would show some trace of the violent
treatment to which the band of gold had been subjected; and I wished,
for a reason I hardly dared admit to myself, to ascertain if this were
the case.

I moved towards the window and, ostensibly catching the light upon the
facets of the matchless stone, peeped into the circlet. To my surprise
the words inscribed on the gold were "Kismet and Miss Cunningham." They
were absolutely unbroken, not a letter blurred, and the surface of the
ring gave the appearance of having been untouched since first it was
fashioned. I was certain that it had not been cut. This being so, how
had the thing been removed from the finger of its owner?

"You are wondering at the words written inside, aren't you?" Karine
asked, coming a little nearer to me. "It does seem extraordinary that
they should be there, doesn't it, when you think that the ring was made
many years ago, and was not intended for me at all? But--Mr. Wildred has
explained the mystery, which is a part of the history of the heirloom,
and accounts for his being particularly anxious for me to wear it."

I, too, could have explained the "mystery." I had been told by Farnham
that the stone had come from the first diamond mine in which he had been
interested. It had been fancifully dubbed "Kismet," and the gold mine,
which he had lately sold to Carson Wildred, had (as he had informed me
that night of our meeting at the theatre) rejoiced in the name of the
"Miss Cunningham." Doubtless the inscription was intended to commemorate
the fact that the gold forming the ring had been taken from the one
mine, the diamond from the other. But, knowing all this, I was none the
less anxious to hear what Karine might have to say.

"It does sound an odd coincidence," I remarked. "Will you tell me the
story?"

I had a very specific object in carrying on this conversation; but as
for Karine, I could feel that her part of it was sustained merely for
the sake of keeping me from treading upon more dangerous ground. Yet
despite this nervous anxiety of hers, I could see--or I flattered
myself--that she was vaguely surprised and piqued that I should be
willing to discuss so trifling a subject during the fleeting moments
before Lady Tressidy might be expected to appear.

"You may hear the little romance if you like," the girl said, a faint
wistfulness in her sweet voice. "Sixty or seventy years ago, Mr. Wildred
tells me, a very dashing ancestor of his fell in love with a Miss
Cunningham. That is not a very uncommon name, you know. He was
penniless, and she an heiress. Her father would have nothing to do with
him, and told him he need not hope to win his daughter unless within a
year he could afford to buy her the finest diamond betrothal ring ever
seen in the country.

"The lover vowed it was 'Kismet' that he should marry Miss Cunningham,
and swore to return and claim her, by slipping such a ring on her
finger, exactly twelve months from the day he was sent away.

"He had the most extraordinary adventures in search of a fortune, always
ending in failure, until the last month of the appointed time. He was in
India, working in the diamond mines, when one day he found this very
stone.

"He sailed at once for England, had the ring made, and the words you see
engraved inside. As he had said, he arrived on the very day appointed,
but only to find the girl coming out from church after her marriage with
another man. He threw the ring at her feet, and flung himself away; but
at her death it was sent back to him again, and though he never married,
he gave it to his brother's bride on her wedding-day. Since then it has
remained in the Wildred family."

I could have laughed aloud at this sentimental tale invented by the man
(whom I now believed had somehow contrived to steal the jewel) to
account for the commonplace words it would have been difficult to erase.
Had I laughed, however, my laughter would have been bitter indeed,
ending in an even increased desire to save from him and his trickery the
girl I loved.

It is needless to say that I did not laugh, but something of what was in
my mind must have been visible on my face, for Karine, as she finished
her story, looked up at me searchingly. "What are you hiding from me,
Mr. Stanton?" she anxiously questioned. "It is about the ring--and if
you are my friend, as you say, you will not keep it a secret from me."

"It _is_ about the ring, Miss Cunningham," I replied impulsively.
"I can't tell you all, for the facts have hardly yet grouped themselves
in my own brain. But if they have such bearing upon your happiness as I
have some reason to think, you shall know them as soon as I can make
them clear to you. Will you trust me meanwhile--will you try to remember
that I am striving to collect facts which may help to release you from
the necessity for an unworthy marriage? Never for one moment since I saw
you last have I let slip the hope of saving you from what you confessed
must be a blighted future. Now, I may be mistaken, but I believe that I
begin to see my way!"

She looked at the ring, which I had returned to her, with startled,
dilating eyes. "Something connected with _this_!" she murmured.

"Yes. It is as if I had placed my eye to that little circlet, looking
through it as through a spyglass towards my goal. I shall work after
this, Miss Cunningham, as I could not work before, because I have now a
fixed starting-point. It may be an intricate tangle that I shall have to
unravel, it may be a tedious task, yet----"

"There are only six weeks--_less_ than six weeks to do it in!" she
murmured, but a faint colour had sprung to her cheeks, a light of hope
to her eyes.

"Is it not possible," I begged, "if I find myself near success, yet
stopped temporarily midway by some unforeseen obstacle, that you can
delay your marriage? Let me have that to hope for. It will help me to
win."

She shook her head sadly, and the rose-flush died.

"It is useless to think of it," she said. "You may imagine, since I have
confessed so much to you, that it was not _my_ plan to name such an
early date. It was Mr. Wildred who suggested it--indeed, he insisted,
and unfortunately he is in a position to insist."

"Has nothing changed since we met at the Savoy?" I hurriedly asked.
"Can't you explain to me the power which you admitted then that this man
holds over you?"

"No, _nothing_ is changed, Mr. Stanton! The reason that I cannot
explain is--a part of his power, if you like to call it that."

"Heaven knows I do _not_ like it!" I exclaimed, almost savagely.
And as the words fell from my lips Lady Tressidy entered the room. She
had finished superintending her packing, and the sight of her was a
sudden sharp reminder that next day she would take Karine away.




CHAPTER XIV

An Extra Special


Lady Tressidy was so full of plans for the future--Karine's future with
Carson Wildred--that my soul sickened of her chatter, and I took myself
off as soon as it was decently possible to do so. With no further chance
of private talk with Karine much of my incentive for remaining was gone,
at all events, and I was anxious to think out the puzzle regarding the
transfer of the ring.

To recapitulate, Farnham had announced his intention of keeping it until
the necessity arose for having it cut from his finger. Still, it seemed
he had not kept it, and it had not been cut off. The conviction was
strong within me that Wildred had obtained the jewel by foul play. Yet
how could he have done this, short of severing from the hand the finger
that had worn it?

Strange fancies flitted luridly through my brain. In a few days more
Harvey Farnham would have landed in New York, and I could reach him
there at the hotel he had mentioned as his favourite; or in Denver,
Colorado, if he had chosen to pursue his homeward journey without a
night's delay.

I counted the hours which must pass before I could attempt any such
communication, and they seemed to rise like a high wall between me and
my hopes and my suspicions.

As I walked homeward, involuntarily hastening my footsteps, I heard the
newsboys crying out some item of intelligence for the evening papers.
"Extry Speshul! Extry Speshul!" "Mysterious Discovery in the Thames!"

So preoccupied was I that the words passed into my ears without making
any definite impression on my mind; or, if they did, it was the mere
rhythm of the different shouting voices that impressed itself upon me.

So often were they repeated from all sides as I walked on that at length
the short sentences began to form a species of intoned accompaniment to
my thoughts, without assuming a separate importance in my consciousness.

Suddenly, however, a grimy infant of tender years and appalling
precocity flourished a pink sheet, smelling of the printer's ink,
directly under my eyes.

"Buy a paper, guv-nor!" he cajoled me. "Hall abeout the 'orrid murder
and the 'eadless man."

I seldom read evening papers, and to-night, of all nights, I had little
inclination for such irrelevant mental diet. But I flung the child a
copper, and found the halfpenny journal thrust into my hand.

I would have tossed it from me carelessly, but the headlines relating to
the latest sensation caught my eye.

Then, forgetful of the crowds who stared at me in my agitation, I strode
nearer to the white ball of electric light which had shone down upon the
page.




CHAPTER XV

A Mystery of the Thames


It was the name, Purley Lock, which had fastened my attention. "Horrible
Discovery near Purley Lock!" the headline announced. I read on, rapidly,
but thoughtfully. Two boys from Great Marlow had, it seemed, been
wandering beside the river bank, between that village and Purley Lock.
Straying along a small backwater, leading out from a larger one, they
had noticed a peculiar object caught among a number of reeds. One of the
boys had curiously poked at it with his stick, bringing it nearer to the
shore, when it appeared to be a heavy, almost formless, mass sewn up in
a rough sack. The boys, being frightened, had run home with their story,
and a member of the local police force, going to the spot, had found the
children's suspicions confirmed. The unclothed body of a man, partially
consumed by fire and lacking the head, as well as otherwise mutilated in
a seemingly aimless way, had been doubled up and sewn in the sack.
Weights had evidently been attached to the horrible bundle, but had in
some manner become detached. So far no clue whatever, either as to the
identity of the murdered man, or that of the murderer, had been brought
to light. The body had been in the water for some days, but might still
have been recognisable had the head not been removed.

The horror of my dream on Christmas Eve came back to me as I read. No
doubt there had been many river mysteries and "shocking discoveries" in
the Thames, and perhaps I had read of them, dismissing them from my mind
with the alacrity with which one does rid one's thoughts of such sordid
tragedies, when they do not happen to concern oneself or one's
acquaintances. But this tragedy I could not so dismiss.

I could even picture the very spot where the boys must have seen the
sack caught among the dry and rattling reeds. "A small backwater leading
out of a larger one, between Great Marlow and Purley Lock." The larger
one was doubtless that on which Carson Wildred's house was situated; the
smaller one--a mere alley of water, leading away under a drooping tangle
of willow and chestnut branches--one had to pass in walking from Purley
to the House by the Lock. I was sure, as I recalled the place in memory,
that the scene of the discovered mystery could have been no other than
this.

Having read to the end, I folded up the paper and put it away in a
pocket of my greatcoat for future reference. Then I began walking slowly
on towards the Savoy Hotel.

Had it not been for the odd chance which had induced two boys to stroll,
in the middle of winter, along the bank of an insignificant outlet of a
Thames backwater, what a fine place, I told myself, this would have been
for the concealment of a crime! Even without the weights, which had
probably become detached from the sack by tangling among the roots under
the surface of the water, the body might have been expected to remain
hidden for months--at least, till the coming of the spring.

Then, as I so reflected, my mind turned to darker thoughts. Had a crime
been committed by the inhabitants of the House by the Lock, what a
convenient hiding-place would that adjacent waterway have been! I had no
reason to fancy that such a crime had been done, and yet--my thoughts
went back to the day on which I paid my somewhat memorable visit to
Wildred and Farnham.

Suddenly came the recollection of the awful cry I had heard as I waited
in the curious octagonal room, looking at the covered portrait of
Karine. The sound had been explained, but there had been a certain
flurry and clumsiness in the explanation, I had thought, even then.

I remembered the smoke and sparks which had so mysteriously risen from
the tower, and the heat of the octagonal room adjoining it. All this,
too, had been accounted for. I had not cared at the time to invent
romances to fit into the strange appearances, which I had assured myself
were doubtless strange only in appearance; but now I could not help
dwelling upon them with an almost morbid persistency that would not be
set aside.

I thought of the woman's face which had for an instant gazed at me
through the narrow window beside the door. I reminded myself of the
surprise on the features of the decorous male factotum when he had
learned that I was not the man expected by his master, and I went over
word for word, as nearly as I could, each sentence whispered by Wildred
and his servant in the hall.

What if there were some ghastly connection between the apparent mystery
in the House by the Lock and the half-charred, headless body found
to-day in the Thames!

I was ready to accuse my own enmity towards Wildred, and my vague
suspicions of him, also my merciless desire to fasten some stigma upon
the man, of being potent factors in these mental suggestions of mine.

But I could not banish them even if I would. Continually throughout the
remainder of the evening and night I pieced together various theories,
all more or less defective, and next morning the desire was strong
within me to go and see the headless corpse.

There were at least twenty chances to one against my being able to
identify it, or finding in the pitiful remains of a tragedy any clue
such as I sought. But strange fancies steeped my brain with their potent
fumes, and I knew that I should not be able to rest until, at least, I
had absolutely proved myself mistaken.

Permission to view the body at the mortuary was easily obtained at the
local police station, when I had given my name, and mentioned that I had
come for purposes of identification.

Fortunately for my self-control, I had looked upon many a gruesome sight
during my somewhat chequered career, though scarcely one more hideous
than this which I had deliberately sought.

It would be worse than useless to enter into a detailed description of
what my eyes turned from with loathing. There was only one possible way
of identification, however, that of finding some mark upon the partially
charred body, or _something lacking_ which might be suggestive of a
theory.

I had a theory, which as yet I had scarcely dared dwell upon in my own
mind, so wild, so improbable did it appear at any other time than dead
of night, when all strange things seem possible. But now, as I judged
what the height and size of the body must have been, and let my glance
travel almost fearfully to the left hand, I saw that which tended in a
ghastly manner to confirm it. All the four fingers were missing, having
been cut off between the second joint and knuckles.

Harvey Farnham had worn the ring given to Karine Cunningham by Wildred
on the little finger of the left hand; and in the light of this
discovery my dream of Christmas Eve came back to me as a prophetic
vision.




CHAPTER XVI

Information Laid by Carson Wildred


The case being one of great local importance, having thrown the
countryside into a whirl of excitement, the inspector himself had
thought it worth while to accompany me on my journey to the mortuary. My
name was familiar to him, he said, with a look of interest and curiosity
in his eyes; and this being so, doubtless he had not been averse to the
chance of keeping watch upon me when I went to gaze upon the body of the
mysteriously murdered man.

If he were interested in me, I was, at least, equally interested in him,
or rather in the opinions which he and brother members of the police
force might have formed.

Reticence was, of course, supposed to be observed by so important a
functionary as the inspector, but I saw that in his round, good-natured
face which caused me to hope he might be amenable to a little
judiciously applied flattery. I therefore extolled the arrangements of
the local authorities, and ended by saying that, as the sight I had just
witnessed had considerably upset me, I should be glad if he would do me
the favour of having something with me at the private bar of the
adjacent inn.

"Well, sir, it's against the rules, you know," he said, smiling
sapiently. "But I certainly consider it an honour to be invited by so
celebrated a gentleman as you, Mr. Stanton. And--if you'll go first,
sir, I'll just look in a little later and find you at the private bar."

I followed the prudent suggestion, and was presently joined by the
inspector, who appeared relieved at finding himself shut in and alone
with me.

We had whisky and soda _ad libitum_, and then I cautiously began:
"The fact is, inspector," I said, "I was particularly anxious for this
chance of a little friendly chat with you. I have certain suspicions
which may be, of course, without a grain of foundation. What I mean to
say is, I have grave fears that the murdered man is the friend I thought
it possible I might identify. Who the murderer may be in any case
remains to be seen, but if the body is that of the person I have in my
mind, I might be able to put a clue into the hands of the police. 'A
word to the wise,' you know, inspector! But first I am hoping for a
little help from you before I run the risk of incriminating one who may
be innocent. Quite between ourselves, allow me to ask what your police
surgeon has had to say regarding his examination?"

The inspector looked dubious, then brightened visibly. "You being the
man you are, Mr. Stanton," he said, sociably, over his third glass of
old Scotch, "I can't see that there'd be anything amiss in my answering
you so far. Our surgeon, Mr. Potter, reported that the corpse was that
of a well-nourished man of somewhere between forty and forty-five years
of age, all the organs healthy, though there were traces of opium in the
system--not, however, enough to have caused death. The head had been
severed from the neck by a skilled anatomist, who knew exactly where to
strike; but it had been separated after death, not before. Also the
mutilation of the left hand had been done in the same way. I suppose
that is roughly the sort of thing you wanted to know?"

"Exactly," I returned, "and every detail you have mentioned goes to
strengthen my suspicions. Being an amateur, I was obliged to judge
principally by size and height. The surgeon's report fits in with my
theory precisely. Still, it does not comprise everything. It would be a
great assistance if I might know whether the police have yet had any
reliable information to work upon."

We had grown very friendly, indeed, almost fraternal now, and the
inspector kindly allowed me to refill his glass. "Do you know who Mr.
Carson Wildred, of the House by the Lock, is, Mr. Stanton?" he enquired,
confidentially.

The question surprised and excited me. Was it possible, I hastily asked
myself, that already the police were on the same track that I was
following? If so, Wildred must have shown himself a less impenetrable
villain than I had had reason to suppose him.

"Yes, I not only know who he is, but have a slight personal acquaintance
with him," I said conservatively.

"Well, sir"--slowly, and with some unction--"Mr. Wildred has been the
only one so far--not counting what you yourself may have to say
presently--who has given any information of value."

"Indeed? _He_ has given information?" I could not eliminate the
astonishment, and perhaps something of the disappointment, from my
voice.

"Yes, sir. As you know Mr. Wildred, you're probably aware that his
country house is close by our town, and close, too, to the spot where
the body was found. He was in yesterday evening, as soon as the matter
had got noised about, and asked to see the body."

"Incredible!" The word sprang to my lips, but I forced it back, and
refrained from uttering it.

"He was unable to identify it, but he spoke to having seen something in
the neighbourhood of the small backwater not far from his house, just
before Christmas, which seemed likely to throw light on the matter. The
surgeon's idea is, as I think I forgot to mention, sir, that the body
had been in the water since Christmas time, or thereabouts, which made
Mr. Wildred's supposition the more feasible.

"It seems that the gentleman had a friend staying with him at the House
by the Lock until a week or so ago--a Mr. Farnham, an American--who has
since sailed for home. They were in the habit of taking a daily walk
together, whenever they were not in town, and a week before Christmas
noticed that close to the little backwater two men were living in a
tent.

"It was a quiet place enough in winter time, and the fellows might have
expected to escape observation, perhaps, but it was the smell of their
smoke which first attracted Mr. Wildred and his friend to the spot, and
as it was his land Mr. Wildred at first was inclined to order the chaps
away. He thought better of it, though, as he seems a good-natured
gentleman, and said it didn't really matter to him whether they stayed
or went. A strict watch was kept on all the locks up at the house,
however, as it occurred to Mr. Wildred the men might have some queer
design. A day or two went by, and the tent was still there, but on
Christmas, when Mr. Wildred and Mr. Farnham were walking out, they heard
the sound of loud voices, and went near enough to see that the two men
were quarrelling outside.

"He says he wishes now he had interfered, but it didn't seem worth while
at the time. That night there was an unpleasant smell of burning, which
came up to the House by the Lock, with the wind from that quarter, and
was noticed by all the servants, as well as Mr. Wildred, who asked the
butler about it at dinner. Next day, when Mr. Wildred sent down to find
out, the tent and the men were both gone."

"I suppose," I said, "that you have already taken means to ascertain
whether there are any remaining traces of such an encampment by the
backwater?"

"Certainly we have. That was done immediately, sir, and the ashes left
by a big wood fire were found close to the water; also four rough stakes
for the tent ropes, and--a coal sack--much of the sort in which the body
up there at the mortuary was sewn. There was something else, too, sir. I
wouldn't mention it thus early in the proceedings to anybody for whom I
hadn't the respect I have for you; but even as it is, I must have your
promise it shan't go any further till it comes out in the proper course
of events."

I gave him my promise, hiding my impatience as best I could.

"Well, Mr. Stanton," the inspector went on, lowering his voice, though
there was nobody within earshot, "in the wood ashes was found what looks
like a most important clue. Nothing less, sir, than the calcined bones
of four human fingers, _cut from the left hand_!"

"By Jove!" I ejaculated involuntarily, springing to my feet, and
beginning to walk nervously up and down. I hardly knew whether to feel
that I had been brought to a dead stop in my operations and suspicions,
or to tell myself that Carson Wildred was the most cold-blooded, and, at
the same time, the cleverest scoundrel who had ever walked the earth.




CHAPTER XVII

A Disappointment


"You seem surprised, Mr. Stanton!" exclaimed the inspector.

"I am surprised," I echoed, "and I intend to explain why presently.
Meanwhile, I suppose you are trying to get on the track of the second
man who lived in that tent?"

"That's what we are doing, sir--hard at it."

"You will never find him," I said.

"No, sir? May I ask what makes you so sure of that?"

"Simply because my opinion is that he does not exist--never did exist."

The inspector's jaw dropped. "But--but Mr. Carson Wildred----" he began,
when I turned on him and cut him short.

"Did your experience never show you a case where a man, himself a
criminal, invented proofs and clues for the purpose of putting the
police upon the wrong track?"

He too started from his chair, forgetting to set down his glass of
whisky. "Good heavens, sir, you don't mean to accuse----"

"I don't accuse. I am not yet in a position to do that. I only suggest,
and should be myself a criminal if I did not try to throw such light
upon the matter as I can. Sit down again, inspector, and let me tell you
what I know, and what I suspect."

He sat, or rather dropped into his lately-deserted chair, and his
horrified expression, his drooping attitude, went far towards showing me
what an exalted position Carson Wildred occupied in the esteem of the
neighbourhood.

"I can't seem to realise it, Mr. Stanton," ejaculated the inspector.
"Such a man as Mr. Wildred! So respected, so charitable, has given so
much to the church! Why, you must be making a mistake."

"You shall judge for yourself whether I have any evidence to offer worth
building upon," I returned. And then I told him everything, beginning
with my chance meeting with Harvey Farnham at the theatre on Christmas
Eve. His face grew graver and graver as I went on, and when at last
(having dwelt with due insistence upon the mysterious proceedings
attending my call at the House by the Lock) I mentioned the reappearance
of the ring on "a young lady's finger," he shook his head regretfully.

"You've made out a fairly good case against Mr. Wildred, sir," he
observed. "Would it be indiscreet to ask whether you've any
_personal_ enmity against the gentleman?"

"I don't like him," I admitted. And then I went on to describe in a few
words my haunting impression of having been disagreeably associated with
him in the past.

"I would wish," I added hurriedly, "to keep the name of the lady now in
possession of the ring entirely out of the question if possible. It must
only be brought in, inspector, at the last extremity should no other
means remain of detecting a murderer. As for the ring itself, to save
trouble in that direction, I think I could if necessary engage to get
hold of it, and I am quite ready at any time to swear to its identity
with the one worn by my old friend Farnham."

The inspector thoughtfully scratched his head. "It'll be a nasty
business to examine Mr. Wildred's house, in case your friend Mr. Farnham
should prove to be all right over in the States. But we can't lose any
time. What you've told me to-day is very serious, sir, and must be
attended to at once. A couple of detectives will call at the House by
the Lock with a search-warrant before nightfall. I can assure you of
that. Until some definite conclusion is arrived at, Mr. Stanton, I
suppose you would prefer that your name didn't appear in the matter?"

"I don't care a hang whether it appears or not," I retorted recklessly.
Perhaps if I had been a little less reckless--but it is never profitable
to dwell on and brood over the mistakes of one's past.

The inspector assured me that a detective should call that night at the
hotel in Great Marlow where I had volunteered to remain, and give me all
particulars concerning the examination of the House by the Lock. The
appointment made was for eight o'clock, by which time, allowing for
obstacles and unforeseen delays, all was sure to be well over.

Though the inspector had promised that the New York police should be
communicated with, a great restlessness was upon me, and I resolved
myself to cable to America.

It was possible that the _St. Paul_, the ship in which Farnham had
been supposed to sail, was arriving at New York that day, though the
chances were, as the weather had been rough, that she would not have
made one of her record trips. However, there could be no harm in wiring,
and if the ship had got in all waste of time would be avoided.

I wrote out a despatch to the office of the American line in New York,
to be answered (reply prepaid) the moment the _St. Paul_ got in. In
this I enquired whether Mr. Harvey Farnham, of Denver, Colorado, had
been among the passengers. And not contenting myself with this I cabled
Farnham, both to Denver and New York, and to the manager of the Fifth
Avenue Hotel in the latter place, where I had been told that he usually
put up.

The answers to these messages I requested to have sent me at the hotel I
had chosen for my headquarters in Great Marlow.

The hours which must intervene before I could possibly hope for a return
I spent at the Wayfarers', and there I heard of Wildred, who had lunched
at the club with his friend Wigram, and later had been interrupted
during a game of billiards by a telegram. He had used some strong
language, and hurriedly excusing himself, had left in the midst of the
game.

Things had evidently been put into train early, I told myself with
satisfaction, and I concluded that the despatch had either gone out from
police headquarters or been sent by that stealthy-faced, invaluable
major-domo of Wildred's.

By half-past five I was in the train again, carrying with me all that I
could want for the stay of a day or two in a strange hotel, and before
eight o'clock I had dined and was anxiously awaiting the appearance of
the detective. I had hardly dared to hope as yet for any answer to my
cablegrams, still I was disappointed to find upon my advent in Great
Marlow that nothing had arrived.

Every step along the corridor outside the private sitting-room I had
taken made me start like a nervous woman, fancying each time that a
knock on my door might follow and the wished-for message be handed in to
me.

I did not believe that I should hear from Farnham, because my conviction
was steadily growing that his murdered body lay unidentified in the
mortuary not far away. But I did expect to hear from the ship's company
to the effect that no such passenger had been on board the _St.
Paul_. Should this intelligence arrive, there would be so great an
increase of the circumstantial evidence against Wildred that I believed
the police would be justified in making an arrest. Wildred once arrested
and obliged to stand his trial for the crime of murder, Karine
Cunningham would be saved.

Eight o'clock struck, however, and I was reluctantly obliged to give up
all idea of receiving any news from America for the night. Five minutes
later, as I restlessly paced the room, the wished-for knock sounded, but
there was no cablegram to be presented on a tray. A young, fresh-faced
man in plain clothing stood there, who I knew before he spoke must be
the expected detective. His information might prove of equal importance
with the tidings from America, and I received him cordially.

With his first words, however, my heart went down like lead. It was not
that I was eager to see a presumably innocent man proved a murderer for
the sake of my own selfish ends, but thoroughly believing Wildred to be
a consummate scoundrel, I was anxious that he should be found out in
time to prevent disaster.

"I think sir," said the young man of the cheerful countenance, "that
we've been on a false scent to-day."

I got him to sit down, and launched him upon the full tide of narrative.

"Mr. Wildred was away when we first arrived at the House by the Lock,
sir," he went on, "but we should have made use of our search-warrant
without waiting for his return had not the passage and the octagonal
room you described, as well as the tower, been shut off from all
communication with the older part of the house by a heavy iron door, of
which Mr. Wildred invariably carries the key. This his butler explained
by saying that the door had been placed on account of his master's
chemical experiments, which were sometimes of a slightly dangerous
character, unless great precautions were used, and in case of an
explosion or other accident the safety of the living-rooms might be
assured by means of the iron door. The only way of opening it would have
been to employ dynamite, the lock being impregnable; and as the grounds
for suspicion against Mr. Wildred were not yet strong enough to resort
to such violent means, there was nothing to do but wait. He was wired
for to London at once."

"Naturally he would prefer being on the spot," I said, with something
like a sneer. "All the same, I am very sure that there _is_ another
means of communicating with the octagonal room and the tower besides the
main door through the passage." And I mentioned the mysterious
disappearance of the servant, which had on Christmas Day led me to
believe in the existence of a secret way of exit.

"We did look about for something of the sort, and even went down a
cellar," said the detective, "but saw not the slightest sign to suggest
a hidden door."

"Well, go on then to Mr. Wildred's return," I exclaimed impatiently. "I
am anxious to learn why it has been decided that I put you on the wrong
track."

"When he came home he admitted very frankly that he had been annoyed at
the bother occasioned by our telegram, but appeared by that time to have
recovered from his vexation, and to be inclined to laugh the matter off.
He let us know in a moment that he guessed how the information had come,
but we said nothing, of course, to confirm his suppositions.

"In the first place he opened the iron door, explained its workings as
though he took some pride in its mechanism, which he said he had
invented himself. Then he showed us into the octagonal room, which he
had had fitted up as a studio and smoking-room combined. The little door
you had seen behind the drapery merely led into a cupboard containing
boots, an artist's model--a jointed figure of wood--and other odds and
ends. It was concealed only because it was not 'an object of beauty,'
Mr. Wildred said.

"We then proceeded to the tower, where the chemical experiments are
made. There is a small room, reached by mounting a winding skeleton
stairway of iron, and there we were shown Mr. Wildred's apparatus. I
know something of chemistry myself, having had a fad that way when I was
a boy, and I could see that everything he had was straight and
above-board. A big fireplace in the room accounts for the sparks you saw
when you approached the house that day, and Mr. Wildred voluntarily
mentioned that there had been something wrong with the flues, so that
his experiments could not be conducted properly, and he had sent for an
expert to come down from London to look at everything. The man had been
expected on Christmas Eve, then on Christmas, as Mr. Wildred considered
the matter urgent, and finally arrived the day after. Mr. Wildred gave
us his address without waiting to be asked to do so. That accounted for
one more point in your story, sir--the man who was so anxiously looked
for, the man the butler seemed at first to take you to be.

"We then said we had been informed that screams or groans had been heard
issuing from his house on Christmas Day. Mr. Wildred laughed, remarking
that, judging from what he knew of our informant, he had been waiting
for us to come to that point.

"And he repeated the explanation which had been given you, asking us
also if we would care to see the scar (which was not yet quite healed)
made by the burning methylated spirit on the cook's foot or ankle.

"We thought it best to do as he suggested--indeed, if he had not, we
should have proposed the same course ourselves, for the sake of making
assurance doubly sure. The cook was sent for, a very handsome young
woman, sir, bright and ready with her answers. She described the
accident, and whipping off the shoe and stocking from the right foot,
showed us a red mark which spread from the ankle down over the whole
instep."

"So the cook was a handsome young woman, was she?" I asked,
suspiciously, remembering the face which had peered at me through the
narrow window by the door. "Had she great black eyes, a very white face,
and a quantity of dark hair?"

"She had, sir. That would describe her very well. A woman not more than
twenty-five or six, and evidently of a superior class."

I turned this bit of information over in my mind. To be sure, I could
not at the moment make anything of it apropos of the case in hand, but
afterwards I was to remember it under somewhat startling circumstances.

"So you see, sir," the detective continued, "every point you made was
met, and in our opinion, frankly and sufficiently met. Nothing was found
which could possibly justify an arrest, and unless unfavourable reports
are received from the New York police, the case against Mr. Wildred will
have to be dropped. The inspector is having an interview with him
to-night, and doubtless some details with which we, in enforcing our
search-warrant, had no concern will be satisfactorily cleared up. I mean
to say, details relating to the American gentleman, his ring, and his
departure for the States. Should we hear from New York that he has not
returned, why of course, in spite of appearances at the House by the
Lock and failure of circumstantial evidence, suspicion will be renewed
again."

There was absolutely nothing more to be said. Deep as was my chagrin, I
held my tongue as to my opinion of the way affairs had been managed, and
parted with the young detective with apparent nonchalance.

Naturally, I slept little during the night, and was awake even before
the early knock which sounded at my door.

"Two cablegrams for you, sir," said the waiter, when I had bidden him
come in.




CHAPTER XVIII

A Desperate Remedy


I took the envelopes from the man and told him he might go. Now for it!
I thought. Now to see whether the edifice I had builded had but a
foundation of sand, or whether Wildred had merely been clever enough to
pull wool over the eyes of the police.

My heart was thumping with excitement as I opened the first envelope.

"_St. Paul_ in to-night. First-class passenger on board named
Harvey Farnham."

I laid the bit of paper down dazedly and took up the other. It was from
the manager of the Fifth Avenue Hotel, in New York. "Mr. Farnham
telegraphed to keep room for him. Is spending day or two with friends."

I did not know what to think. It all sounded straightforward enough, and
it was not credible that either the official in the office of the
American liners, or the manager of an hotel, could be in collusion with
Carson Wildred. Still, I was far from being satisfied.

For the moment I had done all that I could do. If Farnham was stopping
with a friend, whose address was unknown to me, I could not at present
expect to receive an answer either to my New York or Denver cable. In a
day or two the police would hear something from the other side, and
meanwhile I must possess my soul in patience.

This was a thing easier said than done, especially as, when aimlessly
glancing at a weekly paper in the club next day, I came across a
paragraph which gushed in the conventionally nauseous manner over the
forthcoming marriage of the beautiful young heiress, Miss Karine
Cunningham, and Mr. Carson Wildred, the "well-known millionaire and
popular man of Society."

Days never dragged as they did with me until I received the promised
intimation from my friend the inspector that tidings had arrived from
the police in New York. It was all right, so far as my friend was
concerned, and I need have no further fears regarding his safety. The
body found in the Thames was certainly not that of Mr. Harvey Farnham,
as he was in New York, and had actually been interviewed there. He had
been very ill in crossing, and had had the misfortune to fall down the
companionway on shipboard, in a heavy gale, spraining his ankle. He
would not be able to resume his journey and proceed to Denver for some
time to come, but had laughed at the idea of any foul play. When
questioned on the subject of the ring, he said that he had given it to
his friend, Mr. Wildred, at parting, and jokingly added that he had
experienced great difficulty in getting it off.

In these circumstances, as there could be no further doubt of Mr.
Farnham's living presence in New York, no possible shadow of suspicion
need any longer rest upon Mr. Carson Wildred, who had throughout done
all in his power to further the investigations. The search for the man
from the camp near the backwater would therefore be carried on upon the
same lines as before.

A hot sense of injustice burned within me. I had been thwarted on every
side, not, I believed, by the revelation of truth, but by Carson
Wildred's superior cunning. He had boasted to me that, in the
_role_ of villain, he would have been more successful than I; and I
was quite ready to agree with this statement. All things seemed against
me, and yet something which I took to be instinct cried aloud that my
dream had not deceived. I could not understand how it was that the New
York police had been made to believe in the identity of a man falsely
representing himself to be Harvey Farnham, yet I was convinced that in
some devilish way even they had been cozened. No other man living,
perhaps, could have undertaken so huge a scheme, with so many different
strings to pull at one and the same time, and successfully carry it
through, save Carson Wildred. But Carson Wildred _had_ attempted
it, I concluded, and having gone so far, there was every reason to
suppose he would triumph if I--who alone of all men seemed personally
interested--did not set myself to the finding of a new method for
blocking his game.

I could, I thought, understand what his motive for so foul a murder
might have been. He had just purchased a valuable gold mine from
Farnham. Should Farnham be made to vanish without fear of suspicion
falling upon Wildred, the latter might not only be the owner of the
mine, but repossess himself of the purchase-money, which must have
comprised a very large sum.

There was no further hope from the police. They had done their duty, had
satisfied themselves on every point, and it would have been unjust to
expect that they should continue to exert themselves in favouring my
apparently wild view of the situation.

In the midst of the cogitations which followed upon the receipt of the
inspector's letter another cablegram was handed in to me. This time it
purported to be from Farnham himself, merely saying, "Many thanks for
kind enquiries. Have turned up here smiling, but too seedy to write at
present. Glad to hear from you.--Fifth Avenue Hotel."

One more blow aimed at my theory! But I refused to be knocked down by
it. For Karine's sake, for my own sake, I would follow my convictions
across the sea, and never rest until I had settled all doubts for
myself.

It was then Friday. In five minutes after reading this third and
apparently conclusive cablegram I had resolved that on the following
day, Saturday, I would sail for New York.

It was only by a severe mental wrench that I arrived at this almost
desperate decision, for I stood between two fires, either one of which
might reduce my hopes to ashes.

Going to America meant leaving Karine Cunningham, at this critical
juncture, to the mercy of the enemy. I had offered her friendship, and
such protection as I could give, against those who were bent on forcing
her inclinations; and with a look in her sweet eyes, and a soft quiver
in her voice which I could never forget, she had asked me "not to go
away." If I went, and any harm should come to her during my absence, I
could never forgive myself, never again know a moment's peace of mind.
And yet--if I stayed, what was there to hope for either of us? I had
shot all my arrows, and they had glanced off, blunted, from Wildred's
apparently invulnerable armour. I had lost the chance of gaining
assistance from the police, so far as I could see, and unless some
miracle should suddenly come to pass, I should be obliged to stand by
while Karine Cunningham gave her unwilling self to Wildred.

Whatever her secret reason for consenting to do so might be, she had
plainly let me understand that she meant to marry the man, unless Fate
especially intervened in her behalf.

There was no hope that she would let me save her by carrying her away. I
had not even the slightest reason to suppose that she cared for me, save
as a friend, in the midst of what otherwise she had said would be
friendlessness.

My hands were bound, therefore, so long as Carson Wildred was able to
hold up his guilty head before the world, and pass himself off as a
blameless member of society.

Between the horns of this dilemma--and heaven knows they were both sharp
enough--I could only choose the one on which Karine and I seemed less
likely to be torn; and therefore it was that I elected to go to America.

I did not feel that I could bear to leave without a word to her. How
could I tell in what light my absence might be made to appear? From the
vague hints she had dropped as to her relations with Sir Walter and Lady
Tressidy, I hardly considered that it would be safe to write to her.
Such a letter as I must send, should I write at all, if read by eyes for
which it was not intended, might bring Karine into serious trouble. It
was true that Lady Tressidy had appeared to be inclined towards
friendliness with me, but she had then no suspicions of my attitude to
Karine.

I would go down into the country and call upon Lady Tressidy and Miss
Cunningham, I resolved; and if I had no opportunity of speaking with my
beautiful girl in private, I would contrive to slip into her own hand a
note previously prepared.

My decisions, when made, are usually soon acted upon. Within a couple of
hours after receiving the inspector's letter and the message from New
York my passage was engaged for the following day. A curious mood was
upon me as I began my preparations. Hardly more than a fortnight ago I
had been congratulating myself on the prospect of a considerable stay in
London. My ideal existence had for the moment been an utterly aimless
one. I was sated with excitement and what is popularly called
"adventure," and had only wanted to rest and amuse myself. I had meant
to be a man about town until I should again tire of the life, drifting
agreeably here and there, taking pleasure as it came, troubling myself
little either about other people's affairs or my own.

And this was the result of my plan. There seemed a certain unreality
about it all. I felt like the puppet of circumstances, or one who moved
through strange mazes, half conscious that he merely dreams.

By two o'clock everything was arranged for my departure on Saturday, and
I was at Waterloo, taking my ticket for Haslemere, which was the station
nearest to Sir Walter Tressidy's country place.




CHAPTER XIX

"Not at Home"


I had a long, dreary drive after leaving the train, though in other
circumstances I might have been charmed with the loveliness of one of
England's fairest counties. As it was I merely chafed at the endless
hill, up which the horse slowly plodded, half inclined to think that
after all I should have done better to trust to my own feet or come on a
bicycle from town.

The curtain of twilight was falling by the time my fly entered the long
avenue that led to the house. Here and there lights shone out from the
windows, and as the vehicle drew up before the door I caught a glimpse
of something which set my heart throbbing.

It was only a ruddy gleam of firelight on a golden head, which shone for
an instant in the warm light like burnished copper; only a rosy glow on
a girl's white dress, a shimmer seen between the parted folds of dark,
rich window drapings.

For a second, no more, the vision was granted me. A tall, slender form
rose from its kneeling position before the fire, and in so moving passed
beyond my line of sight. But my pulses leaped, and I rejoiced in the
good fortune which had brought me at an hour when Karine was not absent.

I stepped quickly from the cab and would have given much for the right
of a greater intimacy--a right to go to the window and knock, begging
the girl I loved to let me in, to grant me the heaven of ten minutes
alone with her, before the necessities of convention called upon me to
ask for Lady Tressidy.

I imagined what it would be to have this right; I pictured myself
tapping at the panes of the long French window, I saw the dainty girlish
form coming toward me, the start of surprise, the flush which I might
read as I would, the raising of the latch, and the two warm little hands
held out to me in welcome.

But it was all a dream, vanishing as quickly as the rainbow colours in a
bubble, and leaving only the darkness of the dull winter twilight
behind. Such privileges were for a happier man than I: I was at best
only her "friend." Never could I hope, whether success or failure
crowned the effort I was impatient to begin--for more than that.

Instead I walked soberly up to the door and knocked, telling the cabman
that he might wait--and wishing that he might have to wait for long.

Presently in answer to my summons a footman appeared (a fellow I
remembered to have seen at the town house when I had called), and it
struck me that, as I enquired if Lady Tressidy was at home, he eyed me
more piercingly than a well-trained servant usually eyes a guest.

"I am sorry, sir," he answered with a slight hesitation, "that her
ladyship is out at present. What name shall I say when she returns?"

"Mr. Stanton," I unsuspectingly replied, though it did dimly occur to me
that the man might have left me to give him my card. It seemed almost
too good to be true that Lady Tressidy should be away from home, for now
I felt practically certain that I should have the unexpected joy of
seeing Karine alone, speaking to her far more unrestrainedly than I
could do in the presence of her hostess, and explaining in a way
satisfactory to us both, my intended absence.

"I am sorry," I hypocritically remarked, "not to see Lady Tressidy; but
I have come some distance, and perhaps Miss Cunningham would spare me a
few minutes."

"I--I am afraid, sir"--still stammering uncomfortably--"that Miss
Cunningham is away with her ladyship."

I was astonished at this piece of information, for I was absolutely sure
that it was Karine whose shining halo of hair and white gown I had seen
in that rosy space between the window curtains. Of course the footman
might honestly believe that she was not at home; but I did not mean
lightly to abandon the chance of a few words with her.

"I think you are mistaken about that," I boldly said. "Please be good
enough at any rate to enquire."

The fellow's face reddened, contrasting unpleasantly with his powder,
but he persisted in his story.

"I am quite sure I am right, sir," he went on more firmly. "Miss
Cunningham is with my lady."

My impulse was to slip a couple of sovereigns into his palm, and insist
that he should ascertain if Miss Cunningham were not after all at home,
for I was beginning to be suspicious of a plot to thwart me. If such an
one existed I could not think that Karine had been a party to it, for
though of course she could not care to see me, in at all the same way in
which I yearned for a sight of her sweet face, I believed that she would
not wish me to be sent away from the house humiliated. My hand was
moving toward my pocket, when suddenly I reconsidered. If I took such
strong measures to secure a _tete-a-tete_ with Karine, it might
appear that we were in collusion, and trouble thus be made for her with
Lady Tressidy and Sir Walter. I could not risk causing her uneasiness,
especially as I was going far away; and with a pang I saw that I was in
a trap.

There might be one way out, however, and I took it.

"I will wait," I announced, "until the ladies return. Or possibly Sir
Walter----"

"Sir Walter won't be here for a day or two," promptly responded the man.

So thoroughly miserable did he look, though his manner gained
confidence, that I thought he must still be new to a service which must
foster a certain amount of conventional deceit.

"As for the ladies, sir, unfortunately they are not expected back this
evening until--until the last train--too late, as you can understand,
sir, to receive any visitors, as at all events they can't reach the
house until after eleven."

I bit my lip with futile indignation against Lady Tressidy, and against
Fate--never against Karine. It was evident that the footman had received
the most stringent orders as to what he must do in case of so
undesirable an emergency as a visit from Mr. Noel Stanton. He had
probably been asked if he was certain of being able to recognise me
again, had answered that he believed he would be so, but on suddenly
being called upon to face the responsibility, had made his little bid
for ascertaining my name as early as possible in the game, by way of
rendering assurance doubly sure.

Of course the dutiful servant was not really to blame for following out
his instructions to the letter, yet I felt that I hated his smug face
and plastered head, and would have liked to frighten him with menaces
and strange foreign oaths.

I dared not give him the note which I had written, meaning if necessary
to slip it into Karine's own hand unseen, for it might easily be that,
despite any bribe I offered, it would never reach the dear eyes for
which it was intended.

"I will write a line on my card, then, to be handed to the ladies, whom
I regret not having seen," I said with what dignity I had at my command.
And stepping past him into the hall, despite a visible gleam of
consternation in his eye, I deliberately took out a pencil and
card-case, slowly scribbling a few words.

My hope was that if Karine was really in the drawing-room she would come
forth, and the Gordian knot of the dilemma would be cut.

But having mentioned my imminent departure from England on private and
urgent business, and added that, though I had been anxious to see Lady
Tressidy and Miss Cunningham for the sake of bidding good-bye, it would
be, more strictly speaking, only _au revoir_, as I intended
returning within the next four weeks, I could think of nothing more to
say. And still the drawing-room door, near which I was standing, was not
opened.

I should have been glad to underscore the last six words, but did not
venture to do so for obvious reasons, and could only hope that Karine
might see them or hear them read, and partly understand.

I conspicuously placed a sovereign on the card as I gave it to the
footman, remarking quietly that I would wish the latter to be delivered
in the presence of both ladies if possible. Then I seemed to have come
to the end of my resources, until a desperate idea seized me.

Had I not been virtually certain that Karine was to be kept from seeing
me, without her own consent to such an arrangement, naturally I would
have accepted my _conge_ with a good grace, and gone away, a wiser
as well as a sadder man; but as it was, and considering the importance
for her future as well as my own, of a hasty explanation between us, I
was ready to snatch at almost any expedient, not prejudicial to her, of
obtaining a word with Karine Cunningham.

I turned from the door and got into the cab, which the footman politely
opened for me as if only too glad to speed the parting guest. The
direction, "to the station," was given, the gravel crunched under the
wheels and horse's hoofs, the door at which I had been received so
inhospitably shut me out of paradise, and no doubt the servant
triumphantly watched me drive off. Half-way down the avenue, however, I
thrust my stick from the window of the rattle-trap vehicle and stopped
the coachman.

"I have forgotten something," I curtly said. "You needn't go back; wait
here, and I'll return again in a few moments."

The fly was standing just out of sight from the house, and rapidly
leaving it behind me I strode over the frozen grass of the lawn, taking
a shorter cut than the avenue would have been.

In considerably less than five minutes I had once more arrived in front
of the window through which I was as positive as ever I had seen Karine.
Only a short time ago I had dreamed of doing such a thing as this as a
delicious impossibility, only belonging to a world of romance which I
could never enter. But here I was actually bent on the accomplishment of
the deed.

The falling darkness had protected me, I felt confident, from being seen
by anybody in the house as I crossed the lawn, and I approached with
boldness, which only left me as I reached the window.

The curtain hung apart as before, and I could see the fireplace with the
lights and shadows travelling fantastically along the polished floor and
wall. The white irradiated figure was no longer visible, but
undiscouraged by this fact I gently tapped, trusting that Karine might
be in another part of the room to which my eyes could not reach.

If she were there my knock would startle her perhaps, and she would draw
near in curiosity to see what had made the slight suspicious noise; then
I could make my presence known, leaving apologies till later, and
afterward--well, afterward the rest must depend upon her.

But I knocked once, twice, thrice, each time a little louder, a little
more insistently than before, and there was no response, no sound, no
movement. After all I was thwarted, and had but one comfort in the midst
of gloom--I had not been easily repulsed, I had done what I could, and
need not feel, when I was far away, that I had let myself be outwitted,
outgeneralled, without an effort to resist.

Fate had decided that I must go to America without a word, without a
look into Karine Cunningham's eyes; and drearily returning to my waiting
cab I commenced once more the tedious drive to the station.

Never had I felt more utterly disheartened; for, after all, I could not
be _quite_ sure that Karine had not acquiesced in the order to
exclude me from the house. It seemed that she must have heard my voice
in the hall, that if she had chosen she might easily have contrived some
means of seeing me while I was briskly taxing my ingenuity to reach her.
I guessed at Wildred's powerful influence in the affair, and was ready
to fancy others; but, as I was to learn long afterward, I brought
forward every reason for Karine's mysterious inertness save the right
one.




CHAPTER XX

The Quest


It was a piercingly cold day when I landed in New York--such cold as I
had not felt since I had finished my last American visit, four years
ago.

Everyone else among the many first-class passengers seemed to have some
welcoming friend to greet him on shore save only myself. I would not let
myself acknowledge that I felt discouragement, but a certain gloomy
sense of the hopelessness of my undertaking would obtrude itself, as I
rattled over the badly-paved streets of New York in the chill seclusion
of my cab.

I had myself driven straight to the Fifth Avenue Hotel, which was
becoming almost an old-fashioned hostelry now among its many tall new
rivals of incredibly many storeys in height, and walking up to the
"office" prepared my most affable manner, to win the confidence of the
smart "clerk" or book-keeper.

"Good-day," I began agreeably, wishing that in former visits to New York
I had stopped at the Fifth Avenue Hotel, so that now, for my quest's
sake, I should be accorded the welcome of an old friend.

"Good-day," was the brisk reply. "You want a room?"

"I should like first to enquire if Mr. Harvey Farnham, of Denver,
Colorado, is stopping here," I said. "My principal object in choosing
this hotel was to meet him, but if----"

"Gone three days ago," broke in the gentleman with the waxed moustache,
who evidently did not wish to waste time on a traveller more inclined to
parley than to patronise the house.

This was the first setback I had experienced on American shores, but so
many had been my portion on the other side of the Atlantic that I had
had time to grow accustomed to them. I had prepared my mind for as
numerous rebuffs here, yet in spite of that I felt the bitterness of
disappointment settling bleakly down upon me. Already I had been given a
sign that Wildred's cleverness had projected itself across the width of
ocean.

"Ah, indeed, I'm sorry to hear that he has left. Is he with friends in
town, or has he gone to Denver?" I questioned, with as bland an air as I
could well command.

"Can't tell you whether he's gone to Denver, I'm sure, sir. But I think
it's almost certain he's not in town, and somehow or other I've got the
impression that he mentioned he was going west."

"I suppose his health improved more rapidly than he expected, then," I
went on. "I understood before crossing that his accident on shipboard
had laid him up for awhile, and that it would be some time before he
felt fit to undertake the journey home."

"He did seem rather seedy," vouchsafed the clerk. "But he was pretty
well able to take care of himself. Shall I put you down for a room?"

"Yes," I answered indifferently. "I suppose you may as well--for one
night."

It was already late in the afternoon, and I had certain investigations
to make before I renewed my interrupted journey in the direction Harvey
Farnham was believed to have taken--going toward the setting sun.

I knew well enough that I was seriously handicapped as a detective by my
complete amateurishness, and possibly a little by my own keen personal
anxiety, which did not tend to cool my head or my pulses when coolness
was needed; but though I would fain have had advice from some clever
professional expert, the reports of the New York police had certainly
not been such as would encourage me to seek assistance from the force.
It appeared to me that I must "dree my weird" alone.

In the handsome, typically American room that was allotted to me I sat
down to map out my future course, as well as I could see it.

Either the brisk-mannered young "clerk" had shown a slight reserve in
answering my eager questions regarding Harvey Farnham, or I had been
morbidly sensitive enough to fancy it in his face and way of speaking.
Doubtless, when the police had been acting in the affair under advices
from London, he had been subjected to a previous catechism concerning
the western millionaire's movements, and if that were the case it was
only natural he should be cautiously inclined. But once I could win his
confidence and thoroughly convince him that I had no connection whatever
with the police, I ventured to hope there might yet be a chance of
learning at least a little more from him than I had been able to glean.

Perhaps it was something in the nature of a sop to Cerberus that I
should have asked for one of the best rooms in the house; and then,
beside, my name written in the visitors' book (or "hotel register," as
it is the fashion to call it in the States) evidently had some meaning
for the young man round whom my hopes centred, for his manner had
decidedly changed for the better when I visited him again after dinner.

He was not particularly busy at the moment, and appeared in the humour
for conversation, asking me of his own free will if it were possible
that I was "Noel Stanton, the traveller."

I did not deny this impeachment, and, moreover, showed myself willing to
be "drawn" on the subject of my explorations. I even went so far as to
relate an adventure at some length (a thing I am thankful to say I have
never been guilty of before or since), told an anecdote which made the
young man laugh, and flattered him to the best of my ability, by asking
his opinion about an American political crisis of the day. Then, by
gradual steps, I led the talk toward the great West in general, Colorado
silver mines in particular, and so at last reached the subject of Harvey
Farnham, one of the most prominent of the financiers of that State.

"I was much disappointed, I confess, at not finding him here," I
remarked, "and shall on his account cut short my visit to New York.
Farnham and I have known each other for some years; and, by the way, I
remember his saying that in his opinion this was the best-managed hotel
in New York. I believe he usually stops here when in town, doesn't he?"

"So it seems, sir," answered the clerk, very civilly now, having decided
to be patient with my humour. "However, I had never seen him until he
turned up the other day. I haven't been in my present position very
long."

"I suppose you did see him though?" I persevered. "How was he looking
after his accident--seedy at all?"

"He was very _thin_, if you mean that," laughed my informant. "He
limped about with a crutch, too, and as he had bumped his forehead in
the same fall which sprained his ankle, he wore a green shade that
covered his temples and his eyes." I grew attentive at this. It appeared
to me that here was a point in my favour.

"I should like to have a talk with one of his old friends in the hotel,"
I said; "the manager, for instance. No doubt he knows Mr. Farnham very
well."

"He does, but he's out of town on business for a day or two. I think
you'll find, though, that our bartender and Mr. Farnham were about as
chummy together as anyone in the house."

Apparently at my leisure, really with great impatience, I repaired to
the extremely handsome "barroom" of the Fifth Avenue Hotel, and here the
oracle was very communicative.

Having mixed me a peculiarly American drink called "gin fizz," the
bartender was willing to chat of Mr. Farnham.

"I guess he must have been pretty bad this last time," he said, in
response to my first question, "for he didn't trouble the barroom much."

"He did come in, however, did he not?" I asked anxiously.

"Oh, yes, he came in once or twice, but I thought he acted rather grumpy
and queer."

"Did you have a good look at him either time?" I pressed on, with
eagerness.

"Pretty good. Almost as close as you are now, I guess."

"And did he appear the same as usual, with the exception of the green
shade over his eyes?"

"Well, I reckon he did. I was kind of busy both times, and I don't know
as I took much notice."

"Still"--and I called up a laugh--"you'd have known whether it really
_was_ Mr. Farnham, or a stranger passing himself off in his place?"

The bartender stared at me for an instant, and, had he spoken his inmost
thoughts, probably they might have been appropriately expressed in the
slang phrase, "Ah, what are you givin' me?" "Well, it might have been
his grandfather's ghost, I daresay," he facetiously remarked at length,
"but, anyhow, there seemed to be a strong resemblance between Harvey
Farnham and him."

I set down my glass untouched. A cold conviction was growing within me
that I had been mistaken; that, villain as Carson Wildred was, he had
not, after all, been guilty of the one great crime which I had
attributed to him. It seemed almost impossible that this keen-eyed man,
accustomed to Farnham's comings and goings for several years, could have
mistaken another for him.

Next morning when I had put together the few things that I had had
occasion to unpack, and was "tipping" the pretty chambermaid who
"chanced" to come to my door as I was departing, a sudden inspiration
seized me, and I called the young woman back again as she was
disappearing.

"By the way," I said, "did you happen to attend a Mr. Harvey Farnham,
who was here a few days ago, and who has often stopped in the hotel?"

"Oh, yes, sir," she answered, "I know him quite well, and a very
pleasant, generous gentleman he is--or rather" (and her face changed at
some recollection), "or rather was."

I caught her up eagerly. "_Was?_" I echoed. "Wasn't he the same as
usual this last time?"

"No, that he wasn't, sir. I thought to myself, thinks I, 'Mr. Farnham
must have been disappointed in love or something,' he was so grumpy and
dull. Always before when he came he had a good word for me, 'How do you
do, Ginnie?' or a smile and a nod, but now he went by me without a sign,
for all the world as if he'd never seen me before, though I've been here
since I was seventeen; that's six years ago. When I spoke to him first,
why he looked up and answered in a mumbling way, never even saying my
name. But then, poor gentleman, I suppose he was too sick to think of
anybody except himself."

"Did he look strangely?" I went on to question.

"Oh, I don't know about that, sir, except for the green shade he had to
wear over his eyes; I suppose his face was much the same. Only I didn't
get many chances to see it, and all his jolly ways and smiles were gone,
so that made a difference. I was so glad when I saw his baggage coming
up, for there's never been a gentleman so popular with us girls as Mr.
Farnham; but except for his giving me something when he went away, he
might almost as well not have been in the hotel."

"Would you have recognised his voice," I asked, "if you had not seen
him?"

"I would when he was well and like himself, sir, in a minute, but not
this time, because of the bad cold he'd got on the voyage, which he said
was the worst he'd ever had. He did nothing but cough and wheeze, and
could only speak in a hoarse sort of whisper."

These details were all I could extract from "Ginnie" the chambermaid;
but before I left the hotel it occurred to me to examine the visitors'
book for Farnham's name, wishing to look at the handwriting which, if
his, I felt sure I could not fail to recognise. As I searched the pages
vainly I thought with some compunction of Farnham himself, remembering
how I had hardly known, on the evening of our unexpected meeting in
London, whether or not to be genuinely pleased to see him. I had feared
to have too much of his society during the few hours at the St. James's
Theatre; yet ever since, by a strange irony of fate, I had been doomed
to pursue him, to think of little that was not in some way or other
connected with Harvey Farnham and his affairs.

Evidently he had not considered it worth his while to write in the
visitors' book on this occasion, though I found that he had scrawled his
name when staying in the hotel some months before. This counted for
nothing definite, of course; and as for the taciturnity of which the
chambermaid complained, the ailments from which my poor friend was
reported to have been suffering were quite enough to account for that.
Still, through her words and those of the man in the bar, I had gained
my only real evidence--if evidence it might be called--and as such I
treasured the scanty information.

Having by dint of some exertion found the cabman who had driven Farnham
from the hotel to the railway depot, I made sure that his luggage had
been "checked" to Denver, and so set forth again with a feeling that I
had something to go upon.

Never had a journey seemed to me so endless. After Chicago the
interminable plains got upon my nerves, and I looked out eagerly for the
first range of the snow-clad Rockies.

The trip had taken the best part of three days, and it was early morning
when I arrived in busy Denver, where the dry cold wind and the whirring
shrieks of electric trams made me feel that I had left the place but
yesterday. Much was changed, and many more tall, handsome blocks of pink
stone had been erected during my four years' absence; still I easily
found my way to the building where Harvey Farnham had offices.

It was just past breakfast time, but the business world of Denver,
Colorado, and the "great West" is astir at an hour which would appear
unusual in England. I asked for Mr. Farnham, and was told by a young
clerk that he had returned to Denver three or four days previously. He
had not been at the offices, as he was somewhat unwell as yet, but if I
chose I could see Mr. Bennett, who would tell me when he might be
expected.

I remembered Bennett, now that I was reminded of his existence, as an
energetic young fellow high in Farnham's confidence, who probably knew
as much about the mining and other financial interests as did his
employer. I said therefore that I would see Mr. Bennett by all means.

He came in to me briskly in a few moments, surprised, and, he said,
delighted to meet me again. Yes, it was quite true that Mr. Farnham had
returned, but was as yet unable to be troubled by business affairs.

This settled the matter, then, I assured myself. There was nothing left
for me to do but rejoice in Farnham's safety, curse my own idiocy for
harbouring fantastic suspicions, despite all evidence which should long
ago have overthrown them, and proceed to retrace my six thousand mile
journey across the continent and the Atlantic.

I should at all events have the satisfaction, I bitterly reflected, that
I had done my best to serve Karine's interests and my own, and I should
arrive in England in plenty of time to see her married to the man I had
vainly attempted to prove a murderer.

I became for the first moment conscious that I was desperately weary,
that I had eaten little during the past few days, and slept less. I had
not troubled myself to breakfast that morning--devouring food had seemed
so utterly irrelevant--and now for an instant, as Mr. Bennett's words
rang in my ears, a curious sudden dizziness overpowered me. I felt sick
and faint, and realised that life was a failure, with nothing worth
living for in future, since Karine Cunningham would soon be Karine
Wildred.

"You look ill, Mr. Stanton," remarked Bennett. "I guess you've had a
tiresome journey. I know what a bad run that is between Chicago and
Denver."

A nasty run, indeed! But it would be much worse going back again,
leaving the house of cards, which I had come so far to see, lying in
ruins behind me. Still, I continued to beat into my brains the fact that
I rejoiced in poor old Farnham's safety.

"I believe I am a bit knocked out," I said, "though I ought to be able
to stand a trifle like that and think nothing of it. I should be glad to
see Mr. Farnham. I suppose such an old friend as I might venture to call
in on him, even though he isn't feeling as fit as I should like to think
him. If he's not likely to turn up here presently I might drive to the
house, and he'd give me breakfast, I daresay."

I saw before I had finished my second sentence that Bennett was slightly
disturbed. He flushed to the roots of his flaxen hair, and his face wore
an expression which betrayed a suppressed desire to whistle.

"You can bet he would give you breakfast, or anything else he had, Mr.
Stanton," the trusted man of business said heartily, yet with a certain
irresolution. "But the fact is, he ain't at the house this morning. He's
gone away again."

"I thought he was unwell," I interpolated, in surprise.

"That's so. He's a sick man, not hardly fit to be about, but for all
that he's off. He ought to be back again in--well, in a few days,
however."

"A few days!" I echoed.

"More or less. By George! he will be mad when he knows he's kept you
waiting. For, of course, you _will_ wait, won't you, Mr. Stanton?"

"I should certainly like to see him before I go back to the East," I
said; and I spoke no more than the truth, for, putting my cordial
feeling for Farnham out of the question, it might be that valuable
information concerning Wildred's past could be wrested from him with due
diplomacy. "Still, I hardly feel like hanging about Denver for an
indefinite length of time, doing nothing. I shouldn't mind a little
journey, as I've come so far. If he's at any of the Colorado mines,
perhaps I might run out and join him; I've been there with him before,
you may remember."

"You might indeed, sir," returned Bennett, still embarrassed, "if he was
in any such place, which he isn't. To tell you the plain truth, Mr.
Stanton, as I'm sure Mr. Farnham would wish, if he could dream it was
_you_ I was talking to, why, this little journey of his is strictly
on the 'Q. T.' I guess from what he said there's a lady mixed up in it."

Exactly what Wildred had said, when explaining his friend's absence on
Christmas Day from the House by the Lock! I remembered the coincidence,
though I could hardly see that it bore with any importance on the
present case. Farnham might hold several feminine trump cards to play at
the end of a trick for all I knew, or had a right to know.

"I tell you what to do, Mr. Stanton," Bennett continued, recovering his
wonted self-possession. "You just go up to the house, and make yourself
at home there till Mr. Farnham gets back. You know what a big place it
is, and how glad the chief is to fill it with his friends, especially
such friends as you. Then, by the end of next week, anyhow----"

I interrupted him impatiently. "What, will he be away till then?"

"I should think it was probable from what he said before he left, sir."

"I wish," I exclaimed desperately, "that you could see your way to
making things a little clearer for me. I don't want to pry into
Farnham's affairs, of course--that goes without saying. But perhaps,
without any betrayal of confidence, you might let me know exactly what
he did tell you in regard to his return."

"Well," said Bennett, with a short laugh, "seeing it's you! The fact is,
Mr. Stanton, it'll be a considerable relief to my mind to talk over the
matter, and ask your opinion as to one or two points that have been
rather troubling me."

He glanced up into my face, almost for the first time since we had begun
the discussion, and I saw that I was to hear something which he
considered of importance.

Of how great importance it was to prove for me, I did not dare to dream.




CHAPTER XXI

A Picture from the Past


"The fact is," said Bennett, "I haven't quite known what to make of Mr.
Farnham since he's been back on this side the herring-pond. Of course he
hasn't been well, but that would hardly be enough to account for the
change in him. Did you see him, may I ask, Mr. Stanton, when he was in
England?"

I informed him that I had done so, not thinking it best to volunteer the
statement that I had only met him once.

"And did he seem like himself?"

This was rather turning the tables upon me. I was not prepared to answer
many questions, but without hesitation I replied to this one, saying
that, in my opinion, Farnham had seemed uncommonly jolly and well.

Bennett looked thoughtful. "He got home here in Denver at night," he
said, "after telegraphing from New York he was coming; I went to call at
his request--another wire--not a letter--and he saw me in bed. Mr.
Farnham is fond of plenty of light and noise as a rule, but in his
bedroom he had refused to have the electricity turned on, and there was
only a lamp on the table, as far as possible from the bed. I called out,
'How do you do?' in my usual tones, but he answered me almost in a
whisper. There were some important papers which had been waiting for him
to sign, and I had taken them with me, thinking he'd be anxious to
attend to them--he was always so keen and prompt in business--but he
seemed quite angry when I suggested it, and said he wasn't to be
bothered about anything of the sort for a week.

"Next evening I saw him again for a few moments, and there was the same
dim light, the same whispering. He was going away again immediately, he
informed me, and when I objected that he didn't seem up to travelling,
he answered that when there was a lady in the case there was no question
of a man being 'up to' things. I might send his letters to the Santa
Anna Hotel, San Francisco, he went on, until further notice, which I
should receive by telegraph in about ten days if his plans went well.
Just as I was going he said, kind of laughing and yet partly in earnest
too, 'Well, Bennett, if you don't hear from me at the end of that time,
you'd better begin to look me up. The game that I mean to try and win is
a dangerous one. There are others who want the lady beside myself.'

"Now, if there was a town on the face of the earth that Mr. Farnham used
to hate, that town was San Francisco. It was because he hated the
journey, and never wanted to take it again, that he sold his mine out in
California to the English gentleman, Mr. Wildred. I wouldn't have
supposed that there was a woman alive would have got him to go to San
Francisco, and I used to think, too, that Mr. Farnham didn't care much
for women; but no doubt the longer one lives the more one learns, and
the more surprises one gets in such matters. I needn't say much about
his being away from Denver for a few days, even at the office, he hinted
to me; and with that we parted. Next morning early he left, and not a
line have I had except a wire, merely announcing his safe arrival at the
Santa Anna Hotel."

I listened in silence. Before Bennett had finished speaking my thoughts
were far away--as far as San Francisco.

"By Jove!" I exclaimed aloud, with a rushing of blood to my brain that
pulsed to bursting in the little veins at my temples. "_The Santa Anna
Hotel!_"

"Do you know it, Mr. Stanton?" enquired Bennett, evidently surprised at
my sudden vehemence.

"I was there once many years ago," I said. "The name has brought back an
old association to my mind which I had thought was lost."

I knew now where I had seen those strange light eyes of Carson
Wildred's, and what was the deed with which they had connected
themselves in my mind. After all, perhaps, I had not come to America for
nothing!

My memory travelled back over a space of ten years. I had then come back
to San Francisco after an expedition into distant wilds with a party of
friends shooting grizzlies in the Rockies. I had stopped at the Santa
Anna Hotel, a small hostelry lately built, having an English landlord,
and therefore greatly frequented by Englishmen.

On the night of my arrival there had been a serious disturbance in the
house. Three men who had been stopping at the place got quarrelling over
a game of cards which they were playing in a private parlour. Two, who
were the hosts, and were entertaining the third, had set upon him with
intent to kill, being accused of cheating. I and several of my friends
had run out from the billiard-room, hearing a yell for help, just in
time to see a man in evening dress stagger, bleeding, from the opposite
door. "I'm killed! That devil has murdered me!" he exclaimed, and fell
forward on his face.

At Bennett's mention of the Santa Anna Hotel the whole scene had come up
before me as vividly as though it had been enacted but yesterday. The
open door, showing a brilliantly-lighted interior; cards scattered on
the carpet; a young man--almost a boy--standing, as if frozen with
horror, by an overset table; a large bowie knife, common to the country,
apparently fallen from his right hand to the floor.

At the door itself an older man, who had followed the victim, no doubt
with the intention of keeping him from making an outcry or escaping into
the hall. But he had been too late, and the expression of his face as he
met our eyes was hideous. Though the knife had to all appearance been
used by his companion, it was at _him_ that the murdered man had
pointed before he fell and died. _He_ was the one apostrophised as
"that devil" by the death-stricken wretch; and though he had had a high,
aquiline nose, red hair, and bristling auburn brows that met across his
forehead, the eyes had been those of Carson Wildred.

They were eyes not easy to forget, especially as they blazed defiance
into those of the men who sprang forward to lay hands upon him. "There
stands the murderer, gentlemen, as you see," he had said, making a
gesture towards his young companion, a boy of eighteen or nineteen, who
seemed too astonished and horrified to move. Despite the evidence of the
fallen knife, however, not one among the men who witnessed the end of
the scene believed that the youth was guilty. Murder was in the eyes of
the other, and must have betrayed him, even if the last words of the
dead man had not accused him.

California was somewhat wilder in those days than it is at present, and
men were more ready to act upon impulse. So it was that, as two of us
gripped the fierce, red-haired fellow, another of the party flung some
whispered word to the boy, who had only spoken to murmur brokenly, "God
knows I'm innocent!"

What that whispered word was no one knew save he who spoke it and he to
whom it was addressed. But whatever it might have been, it seemed to
rouse the young man to life and a realisation of his position. With a
leap he was at the long window and had sprung out on to a verandah,
which ran round three sides and three stories of the house. The room was
on the first floor, and it was easy enough for an active young fellow to
let himself down by one of the twisted pillars which supported the
verandah of the lower storey.

It could not have been so easy to escape those who half-heartedly
followed; but the boy must have found some safe sanctuary near by, for
not only did he evade his pursuers, but was never found or brought to
trial.

The other, an Australian, calling himself Willis Collins, known as a
gambler, suspected as a card "sharper," was less fortunate. But for the
cry of the dying man he might have cleared himself; but his reputation
was against him to begin with; it was proved that the other was a young
Englishman who had lost his money through Collins, and been duped by
him, and altogether matters went hardly with the elder of the two
confederates. He was tried and condemned (not for murder, as it
happened, but manslaughter), and sentenced to imprisonment for twenty
years.

The incident had passed out my mind until, on a visit to America six
years later (four years previous to my present one), a man who had been
of our bear-shooting party in the Rocky Mountains had chanced to mention
that the fellow had very cleverly succeeded in making his escape from
the prison where he had been confined.

I had had no personal interest in the affair, and though it had made
considerable impression upon me at that time, through being called up at
the trial as a witness, I do not suppose I had summoned it to my
recollection for many a long day until now, at the mention of the Santa
Anna Hotel.

It was no wonder, I told myself, that I had not been able to decide
where and how I had seen Carson Wildred previous to the night when
Farnham had introduced us to each other at the theatre. Unless I could
collect proofs not at present in my possession, it would even now be
useless to instill my conviction into the mind of anyone else.

Carson Wildred had a peculiarly flat nose; Willis Collins had had a
particularly high one. Carson Wildred's hair was inky black; Willis
Collins's had been a bright auburn. Wildred's face was smooth; Collins's
mouth and chin had been concealed by a heavy though close-cropped red
beard. So far as I knew there was but one man living who could have
effected so radical a change, not only in the appearance, but in the
actual conformation of features, in the countenance of any human being,
and that was an old fellow in Paris, who had gained a reputation and a
fortune among men who had reason to cut loose from the moorings of their
past. I had met this famous (or infamous) person in a curious way, and
had heard some strange stories from his lips. If I had made his
acquaintance, why should not Collins or Wildred have done so and
profited by the friendship, as fortunately I had neither the desire nor
need to do? I determined that, unless my present researches were more
successful than I now dared expect them to be, I would, on my return to
the other side, run across to France, and endeavour to piece together
the bits of this old but newly-discovered puzzle.

Meanwhile, however, I had other work, and work closer at hand.

"While you've been talking, Mr. Bennett," said I, "I have been coming to
a conclusion."

He smiled. "I'm glad of that, sir," he returned. "I have risked
betraying Mr. Farnham's confidence that I may ask you what you think of
that last hint of his, which, to tell the truth, has troubled me very
much, coming, as it did, on top of so many queer actions. Although he
was, or pretended to be, half in joke, ought I to let him stay away
without taking any measures to find out whether his life really was
threatened in California, and trying to help him out of a scrape if
necessary? Of course, if it was all straight he'd be furious to have a
watch set on his actions, and would never forgive me the indiscretion.
Still, I haven't heard from him, as I said, since the day of his
arrival, and neither my mind nor my conscience is very easy, Mr.
Stanton. The question is, What would you do if you were in my place?"

I was delighted at this, and turned half away, that he might not see my
change of countenance.

"It's rather a difficult position," I said, slowly, "for _you_. But
there's a simple way out of it, without the necessity for you to run any
risk of losing Mr. Farnham's favour. I've been to the Santa Anna Hotel
before. There's no reason why I shouldn't go again if I choose, and no
reason why I should mention having spoken with you at all if I meet my
old friend. I'm something of a nomad, you know, and if I'm in England
one month, and turn up in Kamtchatka the next, nobody is ever in the
least surprised."

"But have you been thinking of going to California?" asked Bennett, half
relieved and half dubious as to the course proposed.

"Oh, yes, I've been thinking of it," I promptly answered. But I
neglected to add that it had only been during the past five minutes.




CHAPTER XXII

Face to Face


It was very nearly dinner time, two days later, when I drove up to the
Santa Anna Hotel in San Francisco. Far away the bay could be seen and
the Seal Rock, with the light of a great yellow moon touching its dark
outlines and mingling with the blue, wintry twilight.

The neighbourhood was greatly changed since my last visit, but the hotel
remained much the same. My first thought, after greeting the bluff old
compatriot who kept the house, was to look at the visitors' book.

My heart gave a quick thump as I came on the name of Harvey Farnham. It
was not in his handwriting, which, though I had not seen it for some
time, I remembered quite distinctly.

"Ah, gentleman's ill," said the proprietor, when I cautiously questioned
him. "Had his arm in a sling--got my clerk to put his name down for him,
I recollect, as I was standing by. Mr. Farnham has been out a good deal,
however, since he arrived, and, indeed, is out at present. He usually
comes in about dinner time though."

This was an incentive to me not to miss that meal. I got into my evening
togs in a hurry and was in the dining-room before anyone else, save a
hungry-looking old man.

It was not a good season for the "Santa Anna," so the proprietor had
confidentially informed me, but two or three dozen people strolled into
the room before I had been there for half an hour. Still, I saw no
familiar face, and was beginning to think in angry desperation that I
had been eluded again, when the door opened to admit a tall and slender
figure.

I looked up, my pulses quickening, my breath coming fast.

The man had a green shade over his eyes, was limping slightly, had his
right arm in a sling, and altogether presented a somewhat battered
appearance. But, I said to myself, if it was not Harvey Farnham it was
his twin brother.

With all my eyes I stared at him. Almost as though there had been some
magnetic influence in them to draw him he came towards me, and finally
approaching my table, motioned to the attentive waiter to draw out a
certain chair.

He sat down, leaned back with an audible sigh, shook out his serviette
with his left hand, slightly pushed up the green shade that shadowed his
eyes, and began looking carelessly about the room.

As he did so his glance passed over my face. There was not the slightest
hint of recognition in it. "Hullo, Farnham!" I said, carefully
controlling the agitation in my voice.

He started violently and nearly dropped the soup spoon, which he had
picked up with his left hand. Then, pulling himself together by a
violent effort, he smiled, without any of the old cordiality. Almost
mechanically he had reached up for the green shade, and given it a hasty
pull downward.

"Hullo!" he responded in a hoarse voice, following the word with a
cough. "This is a surprise, eh?"

"Yes," I replied slowly. "People do run against each other in unexpected
places, don't they? Now I will wager something that you've forgotten my
name?"

He smiled again, with a relieved expression. "Well"--still
hoarsely--"I'm afraid I have, for a moment. It'll come back, no doubt,
but would you mind enlightening me, meanwhile?"

"My name is Noel Stanton," I very quietly said. But I could have shouted
aloud. Notwithstanding the extraordinary resemblance, this man was no
more Harvey Farnham than I was!




CHAPTER XXIII

A Counterfeit Presentment


We had not much talk together. The few questions which I cautiously put
evidently rendered him uncomfortable, and I on my part, having made sure
of one all-potent fact, was anxious to get away and think the puzzle
over.

I was at the last course of my dinner when the man entered, and having
finished I rose.

"Are you stopping long in San Francisco?" I asked, with my best air of
carelessness.

"A couple of days or so," he said. "See you again to-morrow, I daresay."
It was plain that he was glad to get rid of me. Naturally he was afraid
of all men, strangers to him, who claimed knowledge of him as Harvey
Farnham. He was playing a bold and dangerous game, and no doubt he was
aware that, unless he kept himself in hand, and never for an instant
lost his presence of mind, any moment might find him beaten.

So dizzy was I with the fumes of my discovery that my brain would not
answer to my command. I could not think. I could only say over and over
again--"Not Harvey Farnham! The fellow is a mere decoy!"

Out in the open I knew that I should have a better chance of mastering
myself. On the way to the door I stepped into the "office" again and
glanced at the visitors' book. Harvey Farnham's name was written down
opposite the number 249, and I knew, therefore, that his room must be
near, and in the same wing in the back as mine.

The glorious salt wind soon restored me to myself, and I wandered
through some of the streets I had known and forgotten, thinking busily.
I could understand much now that had been dark to me, though even yet
far too much for my peace of mind remained hidden.

It was no wonder that this counterfeit presentment of a dead man (for I
was certain enough now that poor Farnham was dead) had cumbered himself
with bandages, and simulated sprains, and thickened his voice with an
alleged bronchitis. There was a wonderful family likeness between
voices, when they only spoke in a rough whisper, and the green shade
over the eyes had doubtless proved very advantageous in keeping up the
optical illusion on which the man had courageously dared to count, even
among Farnham's Denver friends. To be sure he had hurried away as soon
as possible from every place where he had stayed since arriving at New
York on the _St. Paul_. In each one he had accomplished an object
vital to the interest of the plot. He had been able to refute the story
of Harvey Farnham's murder, in person, and having evidently been well
grounded in all prominent facts connected with Farnham's life, habits,
and trip to England, had made a _coup_ in his interview with the
New York police.

Having done all that was necessary in the east, he had then taken the
final and most hazardous step of going to Farnham's home. It was hardly
remarkable, therefore, that he had seized the opportunity of escaping so
trying an ordeal at once. It seemed to me impossible that he should
intend returning to Denver, where, in the light of day, and among old
business and domestic associates, he could not long hope to escape
detection, perfect as the likeness seemed to be. What, then, would he
do, I eagerly asked myself? He had so far been successful in
establishing the fact all along his route that Harvey Farnham had not
only returned in safety to America, but had shown himself at home. So
much having been gained, Wildred must perforce be relieved of all
suspicion of the crime which I had tried to fasten upon him, and this
being the case, I assured myself that it was Wildred's hand only which
had contrived this intricate and ingenious plot. This man, disguised as
Farnham, was in Wildred's pay, there could be no doubt of that, and had
in all probability been engaged for the purpose he was now carrying out
before the murder had taken place.

I tried as I walked to put myself in the place of the schemers, and thus
hew out, through an intimate mental process, some idea as to how the
loose ends of the mystery were to be disposed of.

"If I were that fellow," I said to myself at last, "I should think it
was about time to disappear. I should feel sure I'd come to the end of
my tether, and that somehow or other Harvey Farnham, as represented by
me, had got to be unostentatiously wiped out."

Farnham, however, was too rich and important a man in the western states
of his own country to disappear conveniently and with impunity. There
would be a hue and cry, and suspicious facts might somehow be brought to
light. The only safe way, I decided, would be for the alleged Harvey
Farnham to kill himself; but this it did not appear very likely that the
most dazzling bribe could induce him to do. He meant to find some more
comfortable way out of the hole into which he had so deliberately crept
than the way of suicide, and it began to seem that the only method by
which I could prove my case would be by finding out what that way was to
be.

At present, unless I could have the fellow arrested, and such disguise
as he might wear dragged off, I should have great difficulty in
obtaining credence of my story. The incidents were all so remarkable
that they must be certified with the best of evidence, and such evidence
as I wanted could only be forthcoming from Bennett, or someone else in
Denver who knew Farnham equally well.

What I must do, I thought, would be to keep on the man's track, and
never for an hour lose sight of him. I must do this without arousing any
suspicion on his part as to my motives until the last moment, when I
should be prepared to accuse him.

This conclusion naturally reminded me that at the very moment it was
reached I had virtually lost sight of my quarry, and that already I
might have missed my chance. Accordingly, I hurried back to the Santa
Anna Hotel, and though it was then too late to wire Bennett, I
determined to do so early the next morning. I would request him to come
on to San Francisco at once on a matter of extreme importance, and--his
mind being already disturbed concerning his employer--he would lose no
time in obeying. In Bennett, if I could fairly corner the bogus Farnham,
I should have the most valuable witness in the world.

My first question was as to whether Mr. Farnham were in the hotel. He
had not yet returned from a call which he had gone to make after dinner,
and I sat down, therefore, in the corridor inside the front doors,
through which he would have to pass on entering.

I pretended to be absorbed in a local paper, but in reality my thoughts
were a maelstrom. Suppose he had already escaped me!

At half-past eleven, however, he came in. I did not seem to lift my eyes
from the pages before them. He would have to go directly by me on his
way upstairs; time enough to appear to observe him then.

"Cablegram for you, Mr. Farnham," said the clerk of the hotel.

"Ah!" The exclamation was one of surprise. He had not, then, been
expecting the message.

I could not resist looking up after all to watch him in the act of
reading it, and as I did so my eyes caught a gleam from his, under the
green shade, as they turned to my face with an expression that was like
a hunted animal's. In the instant I was as positive as though he had
told me in so many words that the cablegram he had received was from
Carson Wildred, and intimately concerned me. Probably it said, "If a man
named Noel Stanton turns up, he is an enemy--beware of him."

I regretted immediately that I had given him my real name when we met at
dinner, for, warned now by Wildred, he would be ever on his guard. He
was seized with a creditable fit of coughing as he passed me, and having
growled out something about being "deuced tired, and sleeping like a
log," he went upstairs.

I followed him in time to see him enter his own room, which was only
half a dozen doors from mine, and to hear him noisily lock the door. It
occurred to me that he was desirous to have me know that he _had_
locked it, and I wondered if already he had begun to suspect my motive.




CHAPTER XXIV

Fire!


I went to bed determined not to sleep, but to keep my ears open for any
sound in the passage outside. Luckily there was a creaky board on which
he had stepped a few minutes ago. If he attempted to go away during the
night he would very possibly step on it again. But I was exceedingly
tired after my long journey. Before I had been in bed an hour I was
dreaming so vividly a pursuit of my quarry through the streets of San
Francisco, that I fully believed I had waked, got up, and gone out after
him.

In the end the dream seemed to change. The pretender had boarded a
railway train, and I was with the engine-driver of another, following at
a dare-devil speed. The place was reeking hot. In my dream I choked in
the smoke which flew into my face, and was dazzled with the red glare of
the fire, on which the engine-driver was piling great pieces of fat
bacon. As we flew along the rails the locomotive swayed from side to
side, and I could hear a loud rattling of wheels and of window glass.

Suddenly a puff of smoke seemed on the very point of stifling me, and I
awoke to find myself sitting up in bed and gasping for breath.

I had not dreamed the rattling of glass, nor the jarring sensation, nor
yet the smoke and heat and lurid light. The walls shook with a dull
vibration, and the window-panes were like castanets. Through the glass
transom over the door I could see a shimmering, ruddy glow that rose and
fell, and was brightened by bursting sparks and little darting tongues
of yellow flame. Apart from this one lurid spot all was thickly
curtained into darkness by a heavy pall of smoke.

Had I lain for a few moments longer I must have suffocated in my sleep.
Even as it was, my brain felt dull and stupid, and I could scarcely
collect my senses.

Choking and coughing, tears running from my eyes that smarted with the
pungent wood smoke, I sprang out of bed, and then sat down again with a
slight exclamation, drawing up my feet. The floor was so hot that the
touch of it, even for an instant, had almost scorched my skin.

Close at hand were my boots. I drew them on and then fumbled about for
one or two articles of clothing. The wild light that rushed past the
transom told me that escape by way of the passage was already cut off,
and even as I looked a small, curling tress of flame blew in through the
crack between the door and the worn sill.

The window was less easy to find. As I felt for it through the veil of
smoke strange conjectures stole into my brain. What if this were the
plan of Carson Wildred's wily accomplice for getting safely rid of me?

I had no intention of being got rid of thus easily, however. I found the
window and opened the lower sash. With the rush of air from outside my
oppressed lungs got relief for a second or two, but the draught drew in
the flames that rioted through the hall; the glass in the transom,
already cracked, burst with a loud explosive sound, and a torrent of
fire and smoke poured in through the aperture.

Had I not leaped on to the window-sill, and without an instant's
hesitation let myself swing over, I could not have kept my senses in
that raging furnace.

If I had had a room in the main building of the hotel, I should only
have had to step on to a verandah outside my window, but in this wing
(which I had chosen as my place of residence because I had inhabited it
before) there was nothing of the sort, and I had now the space of about
ten seconds to decide whether to jump or have my hands burnt off my
wrists.

In any case the decision could not have been a difficult one, but, as it
happened, the need was rendered the more imperative by the fact that
smoke had already begun to pour from the window below. Very shortly
escape would be cut off in all directions.

My room was on the second floor, high enough to give me a severe fall,
perhaps a fatal one, and I felt that my life was of value now.
Cautiously but hurriedly I reached out with one hand to the side of the
window, hanging with all my weight from the other, which clutched the
sill. My groping fingers came in contact with a twisted rope of
creepers; bare of leaves for winter, and serviceable for the use I
wished to put it to. I grasped the thick stems for dear life, and went
down hand over hand, dimly hearing voices from below cheering me in my
descent.

I had been unconscious of the noise until that moment, but as my feet
touched the ground I was received with acclamations, and saw that a
crowd was rapidly collecting on the spot. The firemen were arriving, and
as I reached _terra firma_ a great spout of water went up over the
burning wing.

The main portion of the house, which was built of stone, save for the
surrounding verandahs was still uninjured, but the wing at the back,
which had been a later addition, run hastily up to meet the needs of
business, was of frame, and it was burning like tinder. Though it seemed
that the alarm had only been given five minutes before my appearance on
the scene, already it was beyond saving. My reason for preferring the
wing I have already stated, but what the pretended Harvey Farnham's had
been I had yet to learn, for so far was the main portion of the hotel
from being crowded on this occasion, that we two had been the only ones
who slept in the annex. Otherwise the alarm must have been given from
inside, instead of by a policeman, who had seen a sudden light leap up
while passing on his beat.

Where was Mr. Farnham? That was the question asked by the excited
landlord, who, half-dressed, had come out to give what help he could. By
this time a sheet of flame was pouring from his windows, so much more
violent than in any other portion of the fated wing, that I could but
fancy, as I looked up, that the fire must have started thereabouts.

The only hope was to save the main building--the frame addition had been
doomed from the first. Everyone had come out, guests and servants alike,
in varying stages of deshabille, which might under ordinary
circumstances have struck one as comic enough, but the supposed Farnham
was nowhere to be seen.

When it became known that there was another occupant of the burning
annex, the firemen made heroic efforts to reach the windows on their
ladders, but each time they were beaten back by the blinding flame and
smoke--a salamander could not have existed there for an instant.

Murmurs of horror and dismay came from the lips of the crowd as they
stared with a species of fearful fascination at the flames, which must
long ago have destroyed, not only life, but all vestiges of humanity, if
indeed a human being had been there when they began their revel. But I
said nothing. I thought now that I understood the reason why my friend
had taken the room in the frame addition to the Santa Anna Hotel. The
plan commenced to take form in my mind, and I believed that the
cablegram had only precipitated its execution.




CHAPTER XXV

"It's Dogged as Does It"


Fortunately, to prevent delay and temporary embarrassment, there was
plenty of gold for present needs in the pockets of the one garment which
I had put on before escaping. Everything else which I had brought to the
Santa Anna Hotel was lost; but never, perhaps, was a man more completely
indifferent to such loss than I. The only thing on the American side of
the Atlantic which now interested me was to find out whether the false
Harvey Farnham had actually (by an irony of fate) perished in the
flames, or whether--as I more than suspected--he himself was responsible
for the fire.

It would be impossible to ascertain the truth until such time as the
ruins of the burnt wing of the hotel should have sufficiently cooled to
render a search practicable. Even then, if no other measures were taken,
the fact might never be absolutely substantiated. If nothing more was
ever heard of Harvey Farnham, it would probably be taken for granted
that he had met his death in the fire at the Santa Anna Hotel, even
though no actual traces of his body were forthcoming. His heirs, whoever
they might be, would doubtless claim their inheritance, and even
assurance money, if such there were to be had, before many months had
passed. Carson Wildred would be for ever safe, and my quest would have
ended in nothing but bitterness and disappointment.

This being the case, I could not afford to wait until the burnt building
should be ransacked for Harvey Farnham's remains, I must take it for
granted that no such remains were there, and go in search of the living,
breathing body. I tried to put myself mentally in place of the man who
had stolen his identity from the dead. Were I he, I thought, and had I
done that of which I believed he had been guilty, I would lose no time
in putting myself beyond the reach of possible pursuit. I would have
laid my plans with some exactitude, and would have been prepared for the
necessity of flight. I would have thrown aside as many details of my
likeness to Harvey Farnham as nature had not provided me with, and
having set fire to the room I had occupied, I would have got out of the
hotel as quietly and quickly as practicable. If it had been
comparatively easy for me to escape by means of the creepers down the
side of the house, the same means might well have been employed by the
man whose movements I was mentally trying to follow.

Success having attended my movements so far, I should have gone straight
to a railway station, and would never have breathed freely until I had
left San Francisco well behind me.

So wise, under the given circumstances, did this course of action seem
to me, that I promptly decided no other would have been feasible. The
thing for me to do, therefore, was to find out what trains left San
Francisco during the night time. I thought I might calculate upon the
fellow's having boarded a passenger train in an open and ordinary manner
as, if his plans had been properly laid, no suspicion could attach to
him, and there would be no necessity for more desperate precautions.

He could have had a good start before the fire spread and was
discovered, and--still taking it for granted that I was correct in my
deductions--the sooner I was on his track the better. My hands were
burned, I was practically without clothes, and had suffered a
considerable nervous shock, which at another time I might have had
leisure to feel and analyse.

But I did neither at the present juncture. I simply procured a stiff
portion of brandy neat, drank it at a gulp, purchased a few articles of
clothing from an accommodating waiter, dressed myself with all speed,
and set off to the principal railway station, or "depot," of San
Francisco.

"It's dogged as does it," I quoted to myself, with a certain grimness of
resolution, when my spirits began to flag.

As I got inside the station there was a certain bustle and stir of
departure or arrival in the air. "Train going out or coming in?" I asked
shortly of a sleepy porter.

"Going out--Salt Lake City," grumbled the man in reply.

I don't know why I instantly felt the conviction that the bogus Farnham
was in that train, but I did feel it, and so intensely that when I saw
the long line of cars beginning to move it seemed to me that not to
reach it and jump on board would mean the ruin of my life.

I have a dim recollection of persons shouting at me, of feeling a
detaining hand trying to drag me back. I remember, too, thrashing out
with considerable force, ridding myself of my would-be preserver. I
caught on by the rear platform, and after flying helplessly for an
instant like a ribbon in the wind as the train increased its speed, I
got a foothold and climbed up the steps.

At the top was a negro night porter, ash-coloured with fright. He helped
to pull me on board, and I tipped him generously (when I began to regain
my breath and scattered wits) for agreeing not to make an excitement by
reporting the affair to the conductor.

I panted out that I wanted a berth, found that there would be a vacant
one on board the "sleeper" at my disposal, and sat down in the
smoking-room, ostensibly to wait while the bed was made up for me.

I must have been a curious object to look upon in my dishevelled and
hybrid costume, not an article of which, save the boots and trousers,
had been made for me. But I had no thoughts to waste upon my own
appearance. I sat wondering at the unhesitating way in which I had
rushed ahead, and staked my all on this one throw of the dice, so to
say. If my man had not left San Francisco, or if he _had_ left, and
in another direction, in great probability I had lost all trace of him
for ever. Yet I had flung myself on board this train as though I had had
my quarry in my eye, and had but to put out my hand to lay hold upon
him. I was now beginning to be very much astonished at myself.

Having come on board, however, I would at once begin a tour of
exploration, I resolved, going from one end of the train to the other,
and not forgetting a visit (with or without leave) to the "cab" of the
engine.

I rose, pulling myself together, and saying again between my teeth,
"Yes, it's dogged as does it," when a man came into the smoking-room. I
had been alone before.

We looked at each other. He was a tall, slim, young fellow, with a
smooth face. At sight of me he stopped short, flushed to the roots of
his close-cropped hair, and would precipitately have retired had I not
taken one quick step forward and grasped him by the shoulder.

Gone was the curly wig, the beard, and the lump on the nose, which had
been modelled after Farnham's; gone was the green shade, the sling, and
the limp, but much of the odd resemblance, which had been heightened in
so artistic a manner, still remained. At last, after crossing an ocean
and a continent to do it, I had got my hands on the man I had come to
find, and I didn't mean to let him go.

Yes, it certainly had been "dogged" that had done it.




CHAPTER XXVI

A Tell-tale Ornament


"No, you don't!" I remarked, cheerfully, and with the force of superior
muscles I pulled him towards me. "Come, sit down here by me," I said. "I
want to talk to you." And somehow it came about that we subsided on the
cushioned seat together.

He had recognised me, of course, as the man he had seen in the
hotel--the man, Noel Stanton, against whom I did not doubt his cablegram
had warned him. He was pale as death, and I could see that this meeting,
added, like the piling of Ossa upon Pelion, on top of all that he had
already gone through, had robbed him of the shattered remnant of his
nerve.

Still, he was ready to "bluff" and brave if out while he could.
"Confound you!" he exclaimed. "What are you about? You must be mad to
attack a stranger without the slightest provocation. Let me alone, sir,
or I'll rouse the car."

"I wouldn't, you know, if I were you," I said coolly, for the more
excited he grew the more did my own calmness come back to me. "You've
been playing a dangerous game ever since you took your passage in the
American liner _St. Paul_ (or, rather, since Carson Wildred took it
for you), but you've never, perhaps, steered so close to the wind as
to-night, when you resorted to incendiarism as a finishing stroke."

The fellow stared at me in simulated nonchalance and defiance, but my
hand was on his shoulder still, and I could feel the shudder that ran
through his body.

"I say you must be mad," he reiterated.

"So you observed before; but I could very easily prove to you that I'm
not, if you were not already sure of it. You can call for assistance if
you like, but if you do the story I've got to tell will go flashing over
the wires back to 'Frisco, and on to Denver, and you will find yourself
in almost as hot a place as if you had stayed at the Santa Anna Hotel,
where you wanted the world to think that poor Harvey Farnham had been
roasted."

Once more the fit of shivering seized him. He glanced wildly about, as
though to find some means of escape, but there was none.

"I am a bigger man and a stronger man than you," I remarked, in a
significant and reflective manner. "Better hear the alternative I've got
to offer. I know everything, you see--that is, everything that concerns
_you_, and the curious game you've been playing.

"I've been just three days behind you everywhere since you left New
York. I've got every link in the evidence now, and what with Bennett, of
Denver, and the proprietor of the Santa Anna Hotel, and a few others, I
can burst your wretched little soap bubble plot in four-and-twenty
hours. There's just one way in which you can stay my hand."

"What's that?" He had spoken out impulsively, before he had stopped to
think. The instant the words were uttered he saw all that they admitted,
and bit his lip. But it was too late; he was completely trapped.

"I'll tell you," I said, keeping my hand on his shoulder, almost
caressingly. "I'd listen attentively, if I were in your place. What you
can do is to make a clean breast of your story from beginning to end.
I'm willing to pay you more for confessing than Wildred did for
plotting. Then you must go back to England with me, and stand by while
the thing is made public."

As I spoke he did not once take his eyes from me. It was remarkable even
yet, now that he was out of his disguise, how strong his likeness was to
Farnham. He might have been a younger brother.

When I had finished he sighed and drooped his head. His own hair, which
was very closely cut, was of a beautiful reddish golden colour, much the
shade of Karine Cunningham's, as the light fell on it from above. I
thought of her with a great wave of passionate love, and more of hope
than I had dared to feel for many a long day.

Perhaps it was the recollection of her lovely face and the wonderful
halo of her hair which caused me for an instant to relax my grasp. I
only became conscious of having done so when the fellow twisted himself
from under my hand, and springing lithely to his feet would have darted
through the swing door had I not leaped after him like a tiger.

We fought together as the car swayed and bounded along its tracks. Once
he dived under my arm and was almost out of my clutches, but I caught
him by the collar with so fierce a grip that the linen of his shirt
tore, and the garment ripped open to the waistcoat.

Something which he wore beneath snapped, as he still struggled to escape
me, and a bright object flashed under my eyes as it fell, and dropped
with a slight metallic noise to the floor.

Evidently it was to him an article of value. Impulsively he stooped,
forgetful for a second of the object which had animated him, and thus
the advantage became all mine again. I had him pinioned fast.

At our feet, I now had time to observe, lay a broken gold chain and a
locket.

Twisting my hand firmly in his collar I bent over and picked up the
ornaments. "Allow me," I said, smiling. And as I was about to put the
locket in his hand I could not avoid seeing the portrait that it framed.
It was an open-faced, old-fashioned thing, set round with a rim of
pearls. The crystal had been cracked across in the fall, but the
delicately painted ivory miniature within was intact, and I gave a
slight exclamation as I saw that it represented Karine Cunningham.

If I had been surprised to see her picture in the "studio" at the House
by the Lock, I was doubly surprised to see it in a locket worn by a
young desperado on the other side of the world. Impulsively I withdrew
my hand which held the ornament, with the feeling that the man had no
right to it--that I could not return it to him again.

"Give it back to me!" he ejaculated, forgetting his evident fear of me
for the first time, and speaking with a certain manly fierceness that
thawed the chill of my contempt for him. "If I've got a right to nothing
else on earth, I've got a right to that. It's a portrait of my sister."

"_Your sister!_ You swear that?"

"Of course I swear it. I don't see why you shouldn't know it--though I
haven't done much credit to the name of Cunningham."

I could not doubt him. Not that I had not every reason to believe that
he would be willing to lie as fast as he could speak if it happened to
suit his purpose, but the ring of sincerity in his voice was
unmistakable.

I let go my hold upon him. Such was his astonishment at the manoeuvre
that he made no attempt to take advantage of his freedom, but simply
stood still and stared at me.

"Here is the locket," I said. "I came from England to California to
serve Miss Cunningham's interests, and I will not lay my hand upon her
brother."

"I don't know what you mean," he said, sullenly.

"I'll tell you," I returned, "if you'll sit down here and listen to me
for a few minutes longer. After that, as far as I am concerned, you are
free to do as you choose. You look surprised--but whatever may have been
your faults and your offences, I would stake my life you love your
sister."

"She is the only being on earth I do love," he replied, still half
dazedly.

Then he sat down, his eyes furtively on me, and I seated myself beside
him.

"She is sacrificing herself for someone," I remarked. "I think I begin
dimly to understand now who that someone may be. I think, too, that
circumstances have given me the right to be inquisitive, as I can still
further explain to you later on. Is Miss Cunningham going to marry
Carson Wildred to save you from any unpleasant consequences of the past,
for instance?"

He started as though he had been struck.

"She is _not_ going to marry Carson Wildred!" he exclaimed.

"Oh, yes, she is, unless it can be prevented. I see I have even more to
tell you than I thought. Is it long, may I ask, since you have seen your
sister?"

"Last November," he said drooping his head, and bringing under my eyes
again the hair that was like hers.

"Ah, that explains your ignorance. The man had not shown his hand at
that time. Now I am going to trust to your affection for Miss
Cunningham, to your presumable wish to save her from unhappiness, and
talk to you as though we had been allies instead of enemies. Perhaps I
may be a fool for my pains; but something seems to say to me----"

"Something says right. Go on!" he ejaculated, gruffly.

No doubt the very most dunder-headed of lawyers or detectives would have
told me that I was mad, thus deliberately to give all my good trumps
away to the treacherous, hired scoundrel whom I had been hunting down
with the dogged ferocity of a bloodhound. On principle, of course, I
_was_ all wrong, and I knew it; but still I went on.

I told him the strange story of the past few weeks from beginning to
end. I commenced with the part which concerned Farnham and Carson
Wildred alone. I did not pass over that which had to do with Karine, my
hopeless and unrequited love for her, my passionate anxiety to serve her
at all costs; and I ended by declaring my certainty that Carson Wildred
and Willis Collins were one and the same man.

"He is doubly a murderer," I said. "And yet, unless you and I together
can keep him from it, he will be your sister's husband."

"I'll kill him first!" exclaimed my companion.

"I think the trick can be done without resorting to such extreme
measures as that," I returned, "especially if you are willing to come
over from his camp to mine."

He looked at me sharply for a moment without answering, then he said:

"You seem pretty quick, I've noticed, in what you've just been telling
me at putting two and two together. Well, you say you were at the Santa
Anna Hotel the night the murder was committed ten years ago. You knew
there were two men mixed up in it. You remembered one of them; would you
remember the other?"

"He was a mere boy," I said, "and it's a long time ago. He must have
changed almost beyond recognition."

"He's just twenty-nine at present; I've good reason to know, as I'm he."

It was my turn to be astonished, but it was not policy to show it.
Therefore I merely said, "Oh, indeed!"

"You see," he went on dully, "that's where Wildred has had his pull over
me since he ran across me, by a piece of devil's own luck, in Canada
five years ago. As you say, I have changed; but his eyes are like
gimlets, they'd pierce a stone wall. It's quite true, as you suspected,
that he and Collins are one. I knew him by a queer scar on his hand,
shaped like a star--perhaps you've observed it? But he didn't mind. He
seemed even to find a sort of pleasure in telling me how he had been to
a clever fellow in Paris, and got himself made over into another man, so
that he might the more easily turn his back upon various little episodes
of the past. I couldn't have proved it if I'd wanted to, he was so
different, and had worked up such a new record for himself to travel on.
He knew that, and he knew, too, that I was in his power."

"I don't exactly see how _that_ came about," I objected.

"Don't you? You're not so quick as usual, then. I'd been accused of the
murder at the Santa Anna Hotel. I hooked it, and got over to Mexico, so
to Spain and France. I'd always been a black sheep, you know, but that
was the first really serious trouble I'd got into. However, as I said,
five years later, when Wildred and I met, I was in Canada; I'd turned
actor (I'd always a little talent that way), and was doing pretty well.
He pointed out to me--and I wasn't very long in seeing his point--that I
was not so much changed but what I should easily be recognised by those
who had known me during those wild days when I'd been under his thumb in
San Francisco, and the authorities there would still be very glad to
hear of me. He didn't happen to want anything of me just then, but he
allowed me to understand that it was to my interest to keep sweet with
him. And from that day to this he's had his eye on me."

"But it was _he_ who was accused of that murder, not you," I said.

"_What!_"

The man seemed either not to believe or understand me.

I repeated the statement, and then, when he stammered his astonishment,
his ignorance of all that had taken place in San Francisco after his
escape (at which we had all tacitly connived at the time), I went on to
explain the true circumstances of the case. Carson Wildred had deceived
him into the belief that he alone had been suspected--that if he were
caught he would be promptly hanged.

"He has told the same story to your sister, I would swear!" I exclaimed,
hotly. "It is for this reason that she has been persuaded into promising
to marry him. Believing that he knows your whereabouts, and holds it in
his power at any moment to have you punished as a murderer--believing,
too, no doubt, that you did commit the murder, she has been ready to
save your life by the sacrifice of all that has made hers dear."

"Curse him! I'd take my oath you're right!" he asseverated. "He's sly
enough and vile enough for anything."

"Did you ever see Harvey Farnham?" I questioned.

"Yes, years ago I knew him well, and liked him immensely--as he did me,
I think. It was in Tuolumne County, California, where he had a gold
mine--the Miss Cunningham. It was I who named that, oddly enough it may
seem to you, after my sister, of course. He wasn't aware of that, but
thought it was just a whim of mine, that probably I'd admired some girl
called 'Miss Cunningham,' and wanted to pay her a compliment. You see,
no one knew me by my right name even then.

"It was before that hateful time when I got in with Collins, or Wildred,
whichever you like to call him, and not long after I'd run away from
home and England under the assumed name of Hartley--it was my mother's
maiden name. I was only seventeen or eighteen, but I was pretty sharp
for my years, I'm afraid, for I'd been among a queer lot already, and
one night I would have got into a row with some older man over cards, a
row that might have ended badly if it hadn't been for Mr. Farnham, who
had dropped into the place to look on, and who stood by me for all he
was worth.

"It seemed he noticed me the moment he entered the room, thinking that I
looked enough like him to be his own son. Afterward he took me up,
making a lot of me, wanting to find out where I'd come from, and all
that. He thought my resemblance to him (which everyone who saw us
together invariably remarked) a wonderful joke, and used to call me his
'boy,' and 'sonny,' getting it into his head that I was a sort of
'Mascot,' who brought luck to him in whatever he undertook. That was the
principal reason, of course, that he was so keen on having me name his
mine for him. I think if I had sowed all my wild oats, and been willing
to settle down a bit into a respectable member of society, there was a
time when he wouldn't have minded adopting me, for some old, unhappy
love affair or other had kept him out of the marriage-market, eligible
as he was, and he swore that he never meant to marry, even for the hope
of having an heir to all his money. Yes, I might have been that heir if
I hadn't been a fool, for Farnham certainly thought the world and all of
me in those days. As it was, he did me many a kindness."

"And now, by way of repaying that affection and those kindnesses," I
could not help exclaiming, with a returning touch of the old bitter
contempt, "you've undertaken to help his murderer to get off scot free.
You've been masquerading in the very clothes the poor fellow wore,
you've been using his luggage, trading on the likeness to him which once
won for you his regard, heightening it in every way by artificial means,
so that not only shall Carson Wildred, or Willis Collins, escape
suspicion, but that he may enrich himself on the dead man's millions.
You even set an hotel on fire to finish the whole fiendish plot with a
fine dramatic effect!"

The poor wretch, who had made such a wreck of his young life, was white
as death, and shaking like an aspen. I could see the beads of sweat
oozing out on his pale forehead. "For God's sake," he implored, "don't
say that to me; I can't bear it! Until you told me just now I swear to
you by all I hold sacred--by my sister's love, which I so little
deserve--that I never dreamed of Harvey Farnham's being dead. You may
believe me or not, as you like, but you're _her_ friend, so I
should be glad that you should believe. And, at least, you owe it to me
in common justice to hear what I've got to say.

"Collins always managed to keep his eye on me, and knew my whereabouts
and my doings, making me feel that at any moment he could come down on
me if he chose. I daresay he had other men in his power like that, men
whom he thought he might wish to make his tools at one time or other. I
didn't often hear from him, though I knew myself shadowed, and knew
also, only too well, whom I had to thank for it. You can't guess the
horror of the feeling, or how it got on my nerves. I fancied it would
drive me to madness or suicide one day, always knowing I was watched,
that I could never, try as I would, escape that Eye, which was really
Willis Collins's, spying me out across the ocean.

"Well, a cablegram came from him commanding rather than asking me to go
to England, saying that it would be much to my advantage to do so, and
that my fare and all expenses would at once be sent me in advance. There
was just a hint that I had better not refuse, which I understood as well
as if it had been a definite threat; and, anyhow, there was a certain
attractiveness in the idea of going home--I hadn't seen Karine or
England for so long.

"I didn't mean to let my sister know of my presence--I would have spared
her that--but I fancied myself standing among the crowd in the Park,
watching her drive by, or something of that sort. Even a glimpse of her
face would have been sweet.

"But when I arrived one of the first things Wildred did was to tell me
that he knew the Tressidys, with whom Karine was living, that he had
heard my sister often speak of me, and that he would secretly arrange a
meeting between us. I couldn't resist the temptation of having a few
words with her when it was offered for the asking, and I saw her at the
House by the Lock. An excuse was made to bring her and Lady Tressidy
there--something about a portrait of Karine that was in a queer room
called the 'studio'--and while Wildred was showing Lady Tressidy over
the house I saw my sister, and had a talk with her. She felt grateful to
Wildred for bringing it about, and fool that I was, I didn't suspect the
deep game he meant to play with her, using me as the decoy. I thought he
had merely been willing to take the trouble that he might get the more
work out of me when he wanted it, though what the work was for which he
had brought me to England I didn't yet know.

"After that first meeting with Karine I had given Wildred my word never
to try and see her again; now I understand why. He wished to revive all
the old love she had felt by the sight of me, awaken her sympathy for my
troubles, when she should learn his version of them from his lips, and
then keep me from her, lest I should hear that he had asked her to be
his wife, threatening to betray me if she did not accept, and so, in
spite of my cowardice (for I am a moral coward), setting me against him,
to be his slave and tool no more.

"When I had been in England about three or four weeks, keeping out of
the way of anyone who might possibly remember me, Wildred suggested the
scheme of my travelling back to America, impersonating Farnham, and
finally finishing the plot, as I did finish it to-night. He admitted
that it was for this he had sent for me, but swore Farnham himself was
in the thing as deep as he; that it meant a fortune to them both, which
they were to share, and which could be had in no other way. He explained
that Farnham had had bad luck in speculations, was bankrupt, hadn't the
pluck to begin over again on the lowest rounds of the ladder, nor to
undertake carrying out this plan himself. He would funk the fire
business, Wildred said, and might, instead of escaping, actually be
burned to death. The object to be gained, of course, I was made to
believe, was getting the life assurance. Farnham was supposed to have
several policies, each one for an enormous sum; he had left everything
of which he should die possessed, life assurance and all the rest, to
Wildred, who would actually go halves with Farnham when the money should
be secured.

"I have nothing of my own, you know, except what I can make by my wits,
for my father disinherited me, and I've had just a little too much pride
ever to take anything from Karine. Wildred offered me ten thousand
pounds to work this business for him; half to be paid down, half when
the thing had been successfully carried through to the close.

"Of course, I had sense enough to know it was a villainous fraud, but
I've never been very scrupulous, and it was easy to persuade myself that
I owed Harvey Farnham a good turn for what he did for me in the past.
Besides, I wanted the money, and there was five thousand in notes
(Wildred was too sly to give a cheque) on the table for me to take or
leave. I didn't see that I was going to do much harm to anybody except
the insurance companies, who are rich enough to lose, as Farnham hadn't
a relative in the world; but before heaven, if I'd dreamed of the truth,
I'd have let Wildred do his worst before I'd have gone in with him.

"As for the Santa Anna, I knew that every board of the hotel was
assured--the landlord would lose nothing, and after I'd kindled the fire
I knocked like mad on your door. I fancy, though you didn't know it, it
must have been that which first began to rouse you. I didn't give myself
much time to get out, after taking off the disguise (which I flatter
myself I did pretty well), but I just managed it. I can tell you I was
desperate when I walked in here and found you; but now I was never so
thankful for anything in the course of my life."

"The present question is, then," I said, "whether you will go straight
to England with me and tell all you know about Carson Wildred? If we
stopped on this side, to prove things step by step as we went, we should
labour under two disadvantages. It would mean indefinite delay, and you
would get into trouble about that business at the hotel to-night. To
sail at once for England, and let matters here take care of themselves
for the present, is our only plan, I think. What do you say?"

"You are sure that Wildred can't swear my life away?"

"As sure as I am that we are both alive at this moment."

"Then I'm in your hands. I'll save my sister, and I'll get even with
Wildred for making a tool and a dupe of me."

"By the time we have landed on the other side," I answered, "there'll
still be a clear fortnight to do the first, and I think we may
accomplish the latter transaction simultaneously."




CHAPTER XXVII

Too Late!


We had a stormy passage, and arrived at Southampton four-and-twenty
hours later than we should have done. It was Cunningham who bought a
paper as we got into the train. I was too completely preoccupied to have
absorbed a line of news, even had my eyes mechanically perused the
printed matter. Cunningham (who was always restless, and could not bear
to be left at the mercy of his own thoughts) read incessantly, however,
and at the end of half an hour or so handed over his paper to me.

"Look at this," he said, with some eagerness, pointing out a paragraph.
I glanced at it carelessly at first, but in an instant I was as keen as
Cunningham had been.

"Another Fortune for a Millionaire," the paragraph was headed, and
beneath was set forth the interesting fact that Mr. Carson Wildred, who
was shortly to marry Miss Cunningham, the celebrated beauty and heiress,
had just heard of a legacy of half a million pounds, left him by an
American friend, Mr. Harvey Farnham, lately burned to death in a San
Francisco hotel.

"So you see it wasn't only the mine, and the money he should have paid
for the mine, he wanted," said Cunningham. "Oh, he's a marvellous chap,
this Wildred!"

I acquiesced in this opinion, and recalled a remark made in the club by
a mutual acquaintance. "Carson Wildred is always inheriting fortunes
from chaps that die at the four corners of the globe," he had curiously
announced. I wondered grimly, as I remembered the speech, whether all
these benefactors had met their death after the manner of poor Harvey
Farnham.

Time was pressing now, and our idea was to go straight to Karine, I to
appear only as the supporter of her brother. A desire for the punishment
of Wildred might have held a prominent place both in Cunningham's mind
and mine, but our first thought was to save Karine from becoming the
murderer's wife.

She must be disabused of the belief that her brother was in any way in
Wildred's power. She must know that, as Cunningham expressed it, the
"shoe was on the other foot." She must be shown the black depths of
Carson Wildred's villainy, and be dragged back from the brink of the
precipice on which she had stood.

Ours was a quick train, and went straight through to London without
stopping. After arriving at Waterloo station, therefore, we were obliged
to wait for nearly an hour before we could get another which would take
us to Haslemere.

A curious feeling that I had passed through all this before came over
me, and as we stepped out of our carriage on the platform of the
Haslemere station it seemed but yesterday that I had arrived at the same
place, intent on bidding Karine that farewell which never had been
spoken.

The time of day gave me the only sense of difference. We had left the
ship early in the morning, had made our first journey in two hours, and
now it was only very little past noon.

I had wished (considering the reception I had met at Sir Walter
Tressidy's on my first and last visit at his country house) to remain at
an hotel in Haslemere, there to await such news as Cunningham might have
to bring. For Karine's sake, I thought, it would be better for me not to
appear openly in the matter, unless it proved that the influence of her
brother and his narrative were not as potent in their effect as I
anticipated. Should he require any attestations from me, I was only too
glad to be on the spot and to be called upon to give them.

Cunningham, however, had overruled this programme of mine. No one could
tell, he said, how he might be received. He might be sorely in need of
me to back him up--perhaps even to prove the truth of his otherwise
unsupported assertions.

The Tressidys, he alleged, were peculiar. Though his sister had not
confided in him, he knew that she was unhappy with them. They had very
little money of their own on which to keep up the appearance they wished
to make in the eyes of their world, and Cunningham did not believe that
Lady Tressidy would be above accepting a heavy bribe from Wildred for
furthering his suit, by almost any means, with poor Karine.

Half against my will, therefore, yet not wholly with reluctance, I must
confess, I entered the carriage which was to drive us both to the house
where a few weeks ago I had been so ruthlessly repulsed.

"Thank heaven!" I said, as we rattled up the hill (perhaps in the same
vehicle which had driven me before), "that the storm wasn't just a
degree more severe in crossing. It was touch and go with us one day, at
all events, I believe; but a fraction worse, and we shouldn't have been
here now to stand between Miss Cunningham and that villain. A week or
ten days more, perhaps, and even if we'd reached her we might have been
too late."

There was a certain tumultuous joy in my heart, far removed from
happiness, yet intoxicating as new wine. Karine might never be mine, but
she was saved, and it would be I who had saved her. I could never be
regarded by her quite with indifference after this day.

As we drove we made various hurried plans as to what we should do if we
were refused admittance. We were determined at least to see Karine, even
if we were obliged to force our way into her presence.

As we got out of the carriage and ran up the four or five broad stone
steps that led to the front door, something crackled under our feet like
exaggerated grains of sand. We were far enough, however, from guessing
the nature of the foreign substance that was thus crushed beneath our
disregarding boot-soles.

The door was opened by a smiling footman. He was not the man I had
previously seen, and evidently, judging from the genial flush on his
face and the twinkle in his eye, something agreeable or amusing had
recently taken place. He tried to draw his countenance into the
conventional lines of footman-like solemnity, but, his eyes lighting
upon Cunningham, the expression changed to one of surprise. Very
possibly he noted the similarity of colouring between the brother and
sister, and a certain vague haunting likeness that would show itself at
times.

"If Miss Cunningham is at home, tell her that her brother has come and
wishes to see her immediately on a matter of importance," said my
companion, valiantly taking the bull by the horns.

"Miss Cunningham is not at home, sir," replied the servant. "She--that
is--in fact, sir, she has just left us for good and all. She--she was
married, sir, at half-past ten o'clock this morning, and the wedding
breakfast's only been over since an hour ago."

The gritty substance under our feet had been the rice thrown, as though
in mockery, after Karine as she passed to her carriage on her husband's
arm.




CHAPTER XXVIII

A Wild-Goose Chase


"Do you know where the--the bride and groom have gone?" questioned
Cunningham, grudgingly.

"No, sir. I heard Lady Tressidy say only this morning that even she
hadn't been told. Mr. Wildred had some idea of a surprise, I believe,
sir."

The fact that not only had my companion claimed to be the brother of the
bride, but that his facial expression and colouring answered for his
truth, caused the fellow to feel apparently that we had a right to
explanations.

There was no use in endeavouring to make further enquiries. Even if Lady
Tressidy or Sir Walter did know the destination of the newly-wedded
pair, it was more than improbable that they would be ready to share
their knowledge with us. And it was like Carson Wildred to be prepared
even for the very emergency which had now arisen, by taking just such
precautions as he had.

Had we not been impatient and chosen the steep road, less often
travelled than the other, we should no doubt have met the carriage which
drove the bridal couple to the Haslemere station. Another
exemplification of the old proverb, that "the more haste, the less
speed." We could now only repair our mistake, if it still admitted of
reparation, by giving chase with such speed as was practicable.

I gave the order to the coachman, "Drive to the station as quick as you
can," and in another moment we were off.

Fate seemed to have ordained that I should meet nothing save
disappointment at this door; but to-day's experience had brought me
something far deeper and more cruel than mere disappointment. I had not
counted upon the chance that Wildred would be permitted to hurry on the
wedding during my absence, and now I felt as though a chasm had suddenly
yawned under my feet. Karine was Carson Wildred's wife!

"What are we to do?" questioned her brother dully. "We can't leave her
with him, you know."

Leave her with him! The very fact that I was obliged to answer him gave
me back the power of concentrating thought. A moment before my mind had
been a blank, a chaos; but now I returned, unhesitatingly--

"We'll find out where they've gone, and have him arrested and your
sister taken from him before nightfall."

"But supposing they've gone abroad--which is what they very likely
mean--before we can catch them?"

"We _must_ catch them. There won't be a train till later in the
afternoon by which they can get away now. They'd have to go by the night
boat, if it was France. Somehow or other--though everything seems
against us, and we are only two, where there ought to be a dozen going
in as many ways at once--we'll circumvent that devil yet."

"You have plenty of confidence in yourself," said Cunningham. "Perhaps
you don't know Carson Wildred as well as I do."

I did not answer, though the words rang ominously in my ears. I was very
busy with my own thoughts.

As soon as we could find out where Wildred had taken Karine (even within
my own mind I would not call her his wife), we must lodge such
information with the police that he could be arrested at once, either on
English or foreign soil, as the case might be. A man accused of murder,
as he would be, could, fortunately, be apprehended anywhere.

At Haslemere station they could only inform us that the party of which
we were in search had had tickets for London, and had left about
three-quarters of an hour before our arrival.

Even if we could have told our story with sufficient succinctness to
have Wildred met at Waterloo by the police, there would have been no
time to do so. We must simply follow as we could. Luckily there was a
slow train due in a few moments, otherwise I think we (I at least) must
have gone mad with the strain of waiting.

At Waterloo we heard of them. A porter had taken their luggage and put
it on a cab. The gentleman and lady had driven away in a private
carriage. What direction had been given to the coachman or the cabman he
had not happened to hear.

I now proposed that Cunningham should proceed immediately to Scotland
Yard, while I busied myself elsewhere. He was the one who could tell of
the plot by which he had personated Farnham in America, by Wildred's
desire, and in the hope of obtaining a substantial bribe. The
authorities were already in possession of such separate information as I
could give, and now that they would learn from Cunningham how Farnham
had never gone to America at all, a very different and more lurid light
would be shed upon the past.

Meanwhile I would drive to Charing Cross, and might yet be in time to
intercept the couple if they were intending to depart for France.

At Charing Cross they had not appeared, and hastening to a telegraph
office, I sent messages containing Wildred's description and Karine's to
every one of the principal railway stations in London. Replies were
paid, and were to be received for me at the Charing Cross Hotel. Having
done so much, I drove to the piers from which the Holland boats sailed;
then, having discovered nothing, back to Charing Cross again. The train
which would catch the night boat at Dover was just about going out, but
Wildred and Karine were not visible.

When the last moment had come and gone I betook myself to the hotel,
where my telegrams were to await me. I also looked for Cunningham, who
was to have met me there, after Scotland Yard, and decided upon
forthcoming arrangements. Despatches were awaiting me from the head
porters of various stations--Victoria, Euston, Paddington, and so
on--but no Cunningham had as yet appeared.

I opened the message from Paddington last; the others had no news for
me, but it seemed that at Paddington a lady and gentleman, apparently
answering the description given, had taken tickets for Maidenhead. All
the blood in my body seemed to mount to my head. Unless there had been a
mistake in the identity, Wildred must have carried Karine off to the
House by the Lock!

It was horrible to me that she should be there. The thought of the
house, and what I believed had happened to Harvey Farnham under its
roof, was abhorrent. Why had he chosen to take his young bride, on the
day of their marriage, to that gloomy and accursed spot? A strange
thrill of apprehension, vague, yet none the less dreadful, shook my
nerves.

I consulted the latest A.B.C. time-table, which lay in the reading-room
of the hotel. In exactly an hour another train would leave Paddington
for Maidenhead and Marlow (the nearest stations to Purley Lock), and
after that there would not be another until ten o'clock.

I should not have much more than time to catch the former, if I intended
to go by it--and I _did_ intend to go. Exactly what I was to do,
how I was to get Karine away from her husband, I did not dare stop to
think, but somehow I would do it. So great was my dread of Wildred as a
criminal, and my respect for him as a schemer, that I even feared dimly
for Karine's safety with him. It was madness to entertain such a doubt,
I assured myself, for great heiress as she was, Karine was lovely enough
and sweet enough to inspire genuine love even in so cold-hearted a
villain as Wildred.

He might tire of her in the end, but for the present her life, at least,
would be safe with him. So I repeated mentally, over and over again; but
still I was pricked with a boding fear for more than her peace of mind.
Why had he taken her to that grim, hateful house by the river?




CHAPTER XXIX

At the House by the Lock


I would have wished to wait for Cunningham, both because I wanted him
with me, and because I was anxious to hear what he had done at Scotland
Yard. However, he did not come, so I wired him to the latter place, left
a short note for him also at the hotel, to be kept till called for, and
started off in a cab (when I dared delay no longer) at breakneck pace
for Paddington station.

I just caught the train I wanted, changed at Maidenhead, and arrived at
Marlow by half-past eight o'clock. This time I had neither leisure nor
inclination to walk, as upon my first visit to the place on Christmas
Day, but took a fly, and offered the man an extra fare if he would make
haste.

A little short of the House by the Lock I stopped him. A certain
instinct seemed to bid me not be too ostentatious in the manner of
announcing my arrival. I got out, and by the light of a round, red moon
rising over black trees in the east I glanced at my watch. It was
five-and-twenty past nine. The whole day, since my arrival at
Southampton in the morning, had gone in searching for Karine, and it
might be that I was as far from success now as I had been in the
beginning.

A hundred yards away a small yellow light shone steadily through the
moon-tinged darkness. I thought it came from the House by the Lock,
though the one poor ray made but scant cheer of illumination for a
bride's homecoming.

"Wait here for me," I said to the driver. "I may come within half an
hour, I may be much longer; but, at all events, wait. Here is a
sovereign for you, and you shall have as much again when I return."

The tone of his voice told me that he was suspicious, as well as
curious, regarding the mysterious intentions of his fare; but I was sure
that he would not fail me. Two pounds were not to be so easily picked up
every evening.

I walked on rapidly. As I approached the House by the Lock I lost sight
of the yellow gleam which for some time had guided me, but the moon
glinted bleakly on the staring panes of dark, upper windows.

Desolate as the place had appeared at the hour of sunset, it had had an
air of hospitable welcome at that time compared to that which it wore
now. Never, it seemed to me, had I seen a habitation so grim, so
silently suggestive of haunting, evil things. The face of the moon, as
it rose, lost the ruddy hue which had coloured it nearer the horizon,
and its paling disc was swept by black and ragged storm clouds. The wind
moaned through the trees like the wail of a lost soul, and there was a
stealthy, monotonous lapping of the dark waters so close at hand.

Other sound there was none, and, though I had seen the small ray from a
distance, now--so far as I could ascertain--not a window in the whole
gloomy pile was lighted.

I went up the path, knocked, and rang the bell, which sent back jangling
echoes, such as belong in one's fancy to an uninhabited house. From a
distant kennel a dog began to bay. Otherwise I was not answered, and as
I rang and thundered on the knocker again, the animal's voice at length
subsided into a protesting whine.

I ought by this time to have been sure that Wildred and Karine were not
in the house, but, on the contrary, I was by no means certain of that
fact. Mentally I argued that, if the master was absent, a caretaker or
servant would certainly have been left, and unless a stone-deaf person
had been selected for the post my violent alarms would have brought him
to me.

If any reason existed, however, why the door should not be opened, it
would be easy to understand how and why the caretaker might be suddenly
afflicted with an inability to hear.

Instead of being plunged into discouragement, an ever-kindling fire of
rage mounted within me. Rather than go away ignorant as to whether
Karine was hidden in this hateful house or not, I would force an
entrance. I sprang down the steps and went to one of the bow windows
nearest the door.

Not an instant's hesitation had I in kicking in one of the panes of
glass, but, as it happened, I had only my trouble for my pains. There
were solidly-barred shutters inside, so heavy that even I, strong man as
I was, could not break them open.

Furious now, I ran up to the door again, and drove my gloved fist
through the glass in one of the curious, six-inch-wide window panes that
ran the length of the door on either side. The shivered glass jingled
sharply on the polished wood of the floor inside, and I thrust in my arm
up to the elbow, hoping to get at the lock on the door within. As I did
so footsteps came running in the distance.

"Here! Here! What's the matter with you?" cried an imperative voice.

I had heard it before, I remembered. It was that of the eminently
respectable-looking servant who had so cleverly defended his master's
reputation on the occasion of my former visit to the House by the Lock.

"If you're a burglar," remarked the voice, "you'd better go away while
you can. I have a revolver, and my hand is on the trigger now."

"I am no burglar," I returned. "This is not exactly the time of night to
expect such gentry, is it? But you've kept me waiting long enough. I
wish to see your master and mistress, whom I happen to know are here
this evening, and I don't mean to go away without doing it."

The man inside chuckled.

"Nice way of announcing yourself, ain't it, sir? But as it happens
you'll have to go elsewhere to see my master and the new mistress. I
don't know where they are--it ain't likely I should--but I _do_
know they aren't in _this_ house, where there isn't a solitary soul
but me. As for the time of night, that's neither here nor there, so long
as I'd chosen to go to bed; and I can't dress all of a minute to please
anybody that likes to come banging at the door. You deserve to be had up
for damaging the house, that you do, whoever you may be."

There was a ring of virtuous indignation in the voice, and for a few
seconds' length I hesitated. Perhaps, after all, the fellow was telling
the truth. I was very certain of his capacity for lying, but it might
well be that Wildred and Karine had not really come here. Still----

Far away a door slammed sharply, and just in time to decide me. The man
_had_ lied. He had just told me that he was alone in the house, and
this one sound had unmistakably proved the falsehood. It was not the
sort of noise with which the wind shuts a door, even had the wind been
violent enough to do so, and windows open to admit it. The latch had
been lifted by a human hand.

The servant, who was entirely out of my sight, began talking hurriedly,
jabbering any nonsense, as though to cover what had happened. I listened
intently, and through his chattering I fancied that I could
hear--subdued with distance and intervening walls--the sound of a
woman's crying.

My heart seemed to leap into my throat. I could feel the blood throbbing
almost to bursting at my temples.

"You liar!" I roughly exclaimed. "They _are_ here, and I will see
them, if I have to break the door down!"

"Try it, then!" the man cried, tauntingly. "Just try it--and you may try
all night. Ta, ta! Good-bye, and good luck to you!"

I heard his feet tapping swiftly along the uncovered floor as he ran
away. Another door was opened and closed, and he was out of earshot.

Desperately I again endeavoured to find the lock. It was no use. Thrust
in my arm as far as I might I could not touch it, and though I broke the
narrow pane on the other side as well, the fastenings of the door were
beyond my reach.

With all my strength I flung myself against the door, but the heavy wood
stood firm as though it had been a sheet of iron. There was evidently no
hope in that direction, and dizzy with my own rage and desperation, I
began attempting some of the windows. But all were secured with the
impregnable shutters and bars inside, and it would have seemed that the
inmates of the House by the Lock were prepared to stand a siege.

Whether it was Karine whom I believed I had heard weeping or not, I
could not be sure. I could not even have taken my oath that there had
been such a sound at all, but I was morally certain of it.

I ran round the house, trying in vain to batter in another door, and was
met everywhere by silence and darkness. At the side, however, I came at
last upon the extension with the tower, whence I had seen the suspicious
smoke and flame pouring on that memorable Christmas afternoon. Over the
roof of the low "studio," which possessed no windows, I could see a
faint yellow glow, like a luminous halo or crown, and suddenly, as I
stood regarding it in some bewilderment, I recollected the skylight
which I had observed from within.

If I could in some way climb to the top, break through the glass and let
myself down, the problem as to how I should get into the house would be
effectually solved.

It now struck me that the studio, as seen from outside, was
disproportionately large compared with the room inside, as I remembered
it. There had been only the one, which apparently constituted the sole
purpose of the building, and yet it appeared to me that there might have
been space for two of the same small size.

Low as the erection was it was too high for me to climb, and I began
hastily looking about for some means of assistance in carrying out my
plan.

In the coach-house, I thought, there might be a ladder, and thither I
repaired without delay. But the doors were padlocked, and try them as I
might I could not open them.

What was I to do? The more difficulties which encumbered my path, the
more did I determine to surmount them. Returning towards the house I
noticed a large rustic seat placed under an ancient apple tree, and it
occurred to me that if I could balance the article against the
projection of the building I might, by standing it on end, use it as an
improvised ladder. If I could only mount for a certain distance I could
pull myself up by the ledge of stonework which ran along the edge of the
flat roof.

The light which apparently filtered through the skylight had warned me
to be cautious in my movements. Whoever was in the house must have known
long ago that someone was determined upon forcing an entrance, but,
judging by the laughing taunts of the servant, it would be believed that
the boast had been a vain one.

If anyone was in the studio it might be as well if, for a few moments at
least, I could see without being seen or heard. I therefore went about
my preparations as quietly as possible.

I dragged the rustic seat across the grass and set it in an angle
between the tower and the low building of the studio, giving it a
certain slanting inclination, that it might not fall when burdened with
my weight. Then I scrambled up, not venturing to pause for an instant at
the top, for I could feel that the thing was slowly beginning to slide
from under me.

With a leap I caught the ledge of stone that ran round the roof, and
setting my knee against the wall, helped myself up. It may read simply
enough when written down in black and white, but it was rather a
difficult task in the accomplishment, and I felt that I had reason to
congratulate myself on my own success when it was done.

Framed in a margin of dark roof eight to ten feet in width was the
skylight, through which penetrated a subdued radiance.

Cautiously, noiselessly, I crawled to the round bubble of glass and
looked down. A curtain of embroidered Indian silk was drawn half across,
but through the open space that was left I could see something of the
interior.

The jewelled lamp which I had previously observed hanging from the
centre alone illumined the octagonal room. Now that I was on the roof I
was able to appreciate more than ever the smallness of the studio. There
was space for a wide passage running all the way round, between the
inner walls and the outer walls. I suspected method in this design--a
secret which Wildred had cleverly contrived to hide, and which, in
conjunction with the mystery of the tower, might account for much that
had been dark before.

As I looked a figure passed into my line of vision. It was Wildred
walking restlessly up and down with his hands behind him. I could hear
the murmur of his voice, though through the glass of the skylight the
words were not distinguishable.

Suddenly there came a sharp exclamation in a woman's voice, and my heart
gave a responsive bound. Wildred was talking to Karine, and it was she
who had answered him with a cry.

I had not expected, when I decided upon trying to enter like a burglar
through the skylight, that Karine would be in the studio. It would
doubtless frighten her very much if I should suddenly make my appearance
beside her amid a shower of broken glass, and I hesitated so to alarm
her, unless the man down there was already commencing to use his power
to torment her. If she would only go out and leave me to give Wildred a
surprise I would have been thankful; but as I could not hope for her to
do that, I determined to know what her companion was saying to her,
which had caused her to exclaim in astonishment or perhaps in fear.

I took out my pocket-knife, and with great care to avoid all noise I
began to loosen one of the small diamond-shaped panes from its leaden
setting. As soon as it was released at one end I slipped the point of
the knife underneath and so raised it that there might be no danger of
its falling downward and startling those within the room.




CHAPTER XXX

Conclusion


I bent my ear over the tiny aperture. It made all the difference in the
world. I could now hear every word that Wildred was saying.

"I have always, and with some reason, I think," was the first sentence
that I caught, "considered myself a man of more than average mental
ability. I am usually prepared for any traps which can possibly be
sprung for me; but in this instance I find I have made my one mistake. I
believed in a woman's devotion. Probably it serves me right to have been
deceived. Since you have found it all out through her, I may as well
admit to you that it is true. She did live here. Nobody suspected her
presence, or even her existence. She was very useful to me in many ways.
If she had proved troublesome I could have rid myself of her at any
time, and she knew it. Instead of doing what I ought to have done, I
believed that she was willing to go away without betraying me, and I let
her go free with a present of a thousand pounds. She could even have
asked for more when that was gone, and I would not have refused her. I
was a fool ever to marry her, but she was the handsomest woman I had
seen at that time, and as you know I was some years younger, some
degrees more impulsive than I am now. I was still more of a fool not to
have put her out of the way, knowing what she did--but as I remarked,
that was the mistake of a lifetime. She has told you such of my secrets
as she knew, she has shown you certain things in this house which have
very naturally displeased and shocked you. She timed her return very
well--jealous idiot!--but she will pay for what she has done."

"How will she pay?"

I could not see Karine, but I could hear her voice, vibrant with the
fear and horror that she felt.

"Better not ask; the question doesn't concern you. She will simply
become familiarised with the secrets of the House by the Lock in a
manner upon which she didn't count, that's all."

"I had never pictured Satan himself so cruel, so horrible as you," cried
Karine. "I thank heaven, now that I know through this wretched woman
what you really are, that not I, but she is your wife!"

"Yet you must remain with me, as though you knew nothing but what I
would have had you know, for your own sake and your brother's.

"Had it not been for that foolish creature, who has ruined herself in
trying to ruin you and me, we might have been happy together, Karine. I
admire you more than any woman on earth, for you are certainly the most
beautiful, and your coldness to a man of my temperament has only added
to your attractions as a girl. As a married woman it would have been
different. I meant to make you love me; and even now, Karine, what has
happened that need change anything between us? You are not a
conventional little fool, as are some women I could name, and the love
of a man like me must create some impression on your nature. The
obstacle which you think stands between us shall be removed, the
marriage ceremony can again be performed over us--secretly, if you
choose. No one will be the wiser, and as in any event you must stay here
in my house----"

"I will not. Somehow God will help me to escape, and then, when I am
free from you, I shall let such friends as I may have left deal with you
as you deserve."

"It's difficult to see how you will get away. It's true I did not dream
that Marion would be here to greet us or I would not have brought you to
this house. But now that you are in it you will stay. No one knows that
we are here--no one in your world, at least--and I intend that we shall
have a protracted honeymoon. You heard how some vagabond, some tramp who
wished to get in, failed just now? Well, it is just as difficult for
strangers to _escape_ from the House by the Lock as it is for them
to effect an entrance. For instance, you and I are now cut off by means
of a sliding iron door from the old portion of the house. From this
there is absolutely no way out, unless I allow it, save one, and that
way two or three people have already found by going through a certain
little door hidden behind the hangings. I'll show it to you, if you
like, or perhaps the lady who told you so much has told you that as
well?"

"She has. She told me all about poor Mr. Farnham, how you made him
believe you a friend to be trusted, how you induced him to smoke
opium--here in this very room--this awful room--till he was dazed and
unconscious, and how he only roused from his stupor just as you were
going to burn him alive in your horrible crematory. She told me how the
furnace went wrong at the last moment and you had to kill him in a
different way from what you had planned--less easy for you, more
dangerous of discovery. Oh, the horror of listening to those details,
for she spared me nothing--nothing! I heard from her how Mr. Stanton
came in the midst of the dreadful happenings on Christmas Day, how she
saw him through the door, and afterwards, when he had spoken to the
police, how you bribed her with jewels and money to pretend that she was
your cook, that she had screamed with the pain of burning her foot, and
how she painted her ankle to look like a red scar when she had to show
some proof of her story. She would have been true to you through
everything, she said--poor misguided woman--if she had not been taken
ill and stopped in London instead of going to France, as she had
promised, and so seen in the papers about our coming marriage. What
mockery to call it that; and yet, I thank heaven that it need only be
mockery--that it is not real.

"I wonder that the shock of finding that woman concealed in my
room--waiting for me to come--did not drive me mad. But I am not mad,
and such wit as I have I warn you I shall devote to thwarting you,
Carson Wildred. Do you think I could go on living under the same roof
with you, even if I were in reality your wife? No, you can kill me if
you like; it is the only way in which you can keep me here."

He did not answer for an instant, then he said slowly, "Do you remember
just putting your name on a paper I asked you to sign for me with my
stylographic pen in the train this afternoon? Well, you thought it was
merely an order for letters to be sent on to your new address, but it
was something rather more important than that. You put your name to a
document which leaves all the money of which you die possessed
unreservedly to me. I have already had it witnessed by my servant and
another. You understand to what this points, perhaps? If you show
yourself amenable to reason I shall consider you a wife to be proud of,
and there is no ambition which we need cherish in vain if we are to live
our lives together. But, on the other hand, unless you will go heart and
soul with me, ignoring the past, you have to-day been told too much for
my safety or--_your own_. What if you should catch a serious cold
here at the House by the Lock? Unfortunately, the place is rather damp,
though so charming in many ways. You might have an attack of pneumonia.
Only fancy how the world would sympathise with the husband of so
beautiful and popular a girl as yourself if he were bereaved of you
during the honeymoon?"

"Oh, you are horrible--horrible! It is like death even to listen to
you!" cried Karine. "If only there was a soul on earth to help me--but
there's none--none!"

His answer, if he had made one, was drowned in the crashing of glass.
Better that she should be startled, even to the point of swooning,
rather than endure for another second the torture that that fiend was
inflicting upon her.

I broke in the skylight with the heavy stick which I had brought up to
the roof between my teeth. Then, with hands cut and bleeding, despite
the protection of my gloves, I swung myself down and dropped on to the
floor.

There was a cry from Karine, and a sharp exclamation of dismayed
astonishment from Wildred, for once outwitted. I had never been a match
for him in diplomacy, but when it came to a physical encounter, I had
every advantage over him, and I knew it.

He had no time to pull out the knife or revolver, for which his hand
flew to his pocket, for I was on him, taking him by the throat and
shaking him as a terrier shakes a rat.

I had not stopped even to look at Karine, and yet the vision of her pale
face and hands clasped over her bosom had flashed, lightning-like, upon
my consciousness. "Thank heaven! thank heaven!" I could hear her sob. I
hoped that she did not look--that she had closed her eyes, or covered
them with her hands, but Wildred did not give me time to make
suggestions. He was more nimble, if he was less strong, than I.

I could feel, through all his writhings, that he was trying to force me
along with him towards a certain corner of the room, and, realising it,
resolved to thwart him, whatever his object might be. I had come to the
knowledge exactly one second too late, however. He had managed to place
his foot on a bell concealed under one of the rugs on the floor, and I
heard its summons go pealing shrilly out through the house.

I remembered how I had looked for a bell in this room once before; it
was scarcely to be wondered at, considering its position, that I had not
found it.

In another moment the servant-accomplice would come to the assistance of
his master. Had it not been for Karine's presence I felt that I should
not have found it difficult in my present mood to have held them both in
check, but as it was I should greatly have preferred only one
antagonist.

The struggle in which I was engaged with Wildred had degenerated into a
species of wrestling match. I had him down on one knee at last, and
bending his arms behind him while he poured forth a volley of deadly
oaths--his strange, light eyes flashing into mine--I attempted to tie
his hands together with my silk handkerchief, wound into a slip-knot I
had learned to make at sea.

He was slippery as a serpent in my grasp, and it was taking all I knew
to manage him, when a cry from Karine gave me the first warning that I
was attacked from behind.

The confidential man had stolen in as noiselessly as I had crept upon
the roof and to the skylight.

"Take that, then!" I heard him snarl savagely, and a low exclamation
from my darling told me that in some way he had revenged himself upon
her. For an instant I lost my presence of mind and my hold upon Wildred.
Involuntarily I turned to go to Karine's rescue, and the movement was a
fatal one. Wildred was up like a rod of steel that has been forcibly
bent backward. The two threw themselves upon me together. I felt a
sharp, hot pain run fiercely through my side, and knew that I had been
stabbed. My one thought was for the girl. If they worked their will upon
me, and killed me before her eyes, what was to become of her?

"Run, Karine--escape!" I panted. I could not see her, but I was assured
that she had not obeyed by the loud screams for help which she was
desperately uttering.

Again I got Wildred down, but the other man was on top of me, and for
the second time I felt the burning pain, this time in my shoulder. I
fought like a mad creature now, with the intent to kill, which I had not
had before; but the conviction grew within me that, battle as I might,
the effort would be all in vain.

Sparks danced before my eyes, and then everything grew dim. Out of chaos
came a shriek from Karine. Could it be a cry of joy? What reason was
there for rejoicing?

But there followed a renewed crashing of glass, the muffled thud of feet
descending from a height upon the soft surface of rugs, and the sound of
men's voices.

It seemed to me that Cunningham's was among them, but a strange, cold
pall of darkness enveloped me, and I knew no more.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Afterwards I learned how it was that Cunningham, with two detectives
from Scotland Yard, had arrived in the very "nick of time."

His statements to the police authorities had been necessarily so
elaborate, and had been deemed so extraordinary, that it had taken some
time to create the desired impression at headquarters.

He had been still at "The Yard" when my wire had arrived. When at last
he had induced the "powers that be" to grant a warrant for Wildred's
arrest on suspicion of having murdered Harvey Farnham, and to send a
couple of men to the House by the Lock, where my telegram had announced
that he was probably to be found, it was too late to catch anything save
the ten o'clock train.

Having reached the door of the grim old mansion, Karine's cries for
help, ringing out upon the night through the broken skylight, had told
them in which direction to proceed, and they had used the same method of
surmounting the obstacles which I had adopted and left for them.

The servant was secured, but Wildred, seeing with his usual quickness
that all hope of escape was over, had shot himself through the heart
before the officers could reach him. So died a man who had accomplished
the death of many another, and through his humble accomplice (who now
breaks stones at Portland), and the wretched wife found prisoned in a
room upstairs, the secrets of his numerous crimes and the dark House by
the Lock were revealed.

It was not for many a day after that night's terrible experience that I
heard all the truth. What with the two wounds I had received, and the
strain of the past few weeks, which had begun to tell upon me at last,
for a time I lay in rather a precarious condition. But one morning I
woke to consciousness, and found that the beautiful face which had been
near me in my dreams was present in reality. Karine and her brother had
nursed me through more than a fortnight's illness.

Had I been quite myself I would have felt that then was not the time to
speak of love to the girl who had endured so much. But the words were
uttered before my judgment would let me restrain them, as it so often
had done in the first sweet, sad days of our acquaintance.

"Forgive me," I said weakly. "I'm a brute. You've been such an angel to
me--and I oughtn't to have told you now."

"Oughtn't you?" she answered softly. "Do you remember my saying one
evening at the Savoy Hotel that there was only one thing in the world
which might even then keep me from making a marriage that was horrible
to me?"

"I remember well," I returned. "I remember everything you ever said to
me. Will you tell me what that one thing was?"

"I meant _if you had loved me_. Sometimes I--thought you did, but
you would never say so. You only asked to be 'my friend.'"

"Oh, if I had but known--if I had but dared!" I exclaimed. "I was
perishing of love for you from the first night I ever saw your face. Is
it too late now? I don't ask to be your friend, I ask to be
everything--your lover, and your husband."

"And I _give_ you everything," she said.

So it came about that the sunshine of happiness drove forth the black
shadows which would fain have lingered to haunt us like ghosts from the
House by the Lock.

  THE END


  Transcriber Notes

  Spelling and punctuation inaccuracies were silently corrected.
  Archaic and variable spelling is preserved.
  Author's punctuation style is preserved.
  Passages in italics indicated by _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's The House by the Lock, by C. N. Williamson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE BY THE LOCK ***

***** This file should be named 31228.txt or 31228.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/2/2/31228/

Produced by Darleen Dove, Suzanne Shell, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
