The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Demand and the Supply of Increased
Efficiency in the Negro Ministry, by Jesse E. Moorland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Demand and the Supply of Increased Efficiency in the Negro Ministry
       The American Negro Academy. Occasional Papers No. 13

Author: Jesse E. Moorland

Release Date: February 18, 2010 [EBook #31323]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INCREASED EFFICIENCY--NEGRO MINISTRY ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Stephanie Eason, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.









  Occasional Papers, No. 13.

  THE AMERICAN NEGRO ACADEMY.

  (FOUNDED BY ALEXANDER CRUMMELL)


  The Demand and the Supply
  of Increased Efficiency in
  the Negro Ministry.


  BY JESSE E. MOORLAND.


  Price 15 Cts.

  WASHINGTON, D. C.
  PUBLISHED BY THE ACADEMY,
  1909.



  Press of R. L. Pendleton
  609 F St. N. W.
  Washington, D. C.
  1909




The Demand and the Supply of Increased Efficiency in the Negro Ministry.

BY JESSE E. MOORLAND.


In the discussion of this subject I fully recognize the opportunity men
have to serve God in any honorable vocation. The Christian lawyer or
physician is called of God as truly as a minister. Such men are putting
the emphasis on service and not on getting. The condition confronting us
is alarming and this warrants the earnest plea in this paper for a greater
number of efficient ministers.

This is probably the most important question confronting the colored
people to-day. After all, a race or a nation is measured by its religion,
and the greatest fact about a people is its religion. The efficiency of a
nation depends in a large degree upon the character of its religious
principles. When the good Queen Victoria was asked what made her realm so
great, it was expected that she might point to her well-equipped navy or
her efficient army, but she modestly held up a little book, called the
Bible, and said: "By adhering to the principles contained in this Book,
greatness has come to Great Britain." China is what she is to-day because
she adheres to certain principles taught by her religious teachers, and
Africa is still in darkness because led by blind, superstitious, religious
teachers.

In a larger sense than many people are willing to give credit the Negro
minister has been responsible for the progress of our race and is also
responsible for much that cannot be counted as progress, for no other
single class of individuals has had, and still has, so large and
far-reaching an influence as our ministers. You have only to go to a
community where there is a well-trained, honorable, upright, and efficient
minister to see the marked improvement among the people along every line.
On the other hand, when you find a community where there is an immoral,
ignorant minister, wielding a large influence, you will find a community
that is full of despair.

It is pleasant to read the short story written by Paul Laurence Dunbar
some years ago, entitled "The Ordeal at Mt. Hope." This story possibly
gives one of the most vivid pictures of real, genuine service rendered by
a man of splendid parts in a needy section of the South, bearing out the
practical demonstration of the power the minister has over a community.

It is one thing to lay down principles; it is another thing to show that
these principles are correct and true by the practical work which is based
upon these principles. It is no hard thing to see how true it is that of
all men throughout the history of the world, none have had greater
influence than the religious teachers of a people, and it is just as true
to-day, and it is a waste of time to argue that a race or nation can be
lifted any higher than the religious principles of that race or nation
will allow it to go. History fails to record an instance of this sort, and
it is very evident there never will be an instance of the kind. Man is
bound by his religion. He may not profess it, but he has a belief; even
though he may declare that he believes nothing, the very fact of his
declaration proves him to have a dogma. You had as well expect to find
lions without courage as to find men without some form of religious
conviction. It is a something in man that has to be reckoned with, and
where it is most wisely directed and cultivated, there we find the highest
culture and development along every line. Hence the great importance to a
new race like ours in America that the most careful attention be given to
this very important phase of our development.

This is no time for mere fault-finding. It is a time, however, for sober,
considerate thought. It is a time when the best of the clergy and the best
of the laity of every denomination need seriously to face a question which
is not alone common to themselves but is a serious one confronting the
entire Protestant Church. In some ways our churches are suffering, (and it
seems will suffer more for sometime than others), for the reason that we
have not had, and have not now, so large a number of trained men to draw
upon as others who have had better advantages than ourselves. With an
honest purpose, it is our business to courageously take this matter up and
get at the facts, and then find a way to remedy the alarming condition. We
are at a crisis, and the future of our race is involved,--yea, the future
of our nation, for one-eighth of the population of any land has a
tremendous influence upon the whole.

In the first place, the demand for increased efficiency is emphasized by
increased intelligence of the people. Forty years ago we were just
entering school as a race; to-day we have the second generation in our
public schools, secondary schools, and colleges. These parents and
children read the daily papers, read the magazines, buy some books, and
are beginning to think, and as soon as an individual begins to think
independently all sorts of problems rapidly crowd in on the mind and put
it in an attitude of questioning many of the things which have always
beforehand been taken for granted as correct and true. Along with this
goes the fact that much of the literature of to-day, (including newspaper
editorials and many magazine articles), has a tendency to undermine
Christian faith rather than help it. Much of it comes from brains well
saturated with Pagan philosophy rather than the principles laid down in
the Holy Book. The swing away from Puritanism to what is called liberty
has the effect of loosening many of the well-fixed principles of morality
and right-living, and makes splendid soil for just such practices as we
are constantly reminded of by the glaring headlines in our newspapers
giving every detail of murders, and lax family relations and divorces, and
every conceivable thing that human nature can devise for the uprooting of
many of the essentials of real progress and decent living. This brings a
spirit of unrest and doubt, and the question whether life pays, and
whether it is worth while to make an effort, and whether the Church is of
any effect. The minister is looked upon as a professional parasite drawing
a salary and having a good time, and in the thought of many is cast aside
as of but little consequence.

To meet such conditions as mentioned above, there must be increased
efficiency in the ministry, the demand to meet which is greater to-day
than ever before. I am finding no fault with the efficient men we now have
at work. Many are doing valiant service. They are heroes on the home field
in the same sense that Carey, Judson, Livingstone, Pitkin, Lott Carey and
others were heroes on the foreign field. Some of these men are laying
their lives down in the great work to which they have been called. All
honor to these men! But their numbers are too few. The disproportion is
too great in our professional schools. For example, when a medical school
can boast of four hundred young men preparing to care for the physical
life of the people and the theological school in the same institution can
report barely one hundred men preparing to care for the moral and
spiritual life of the same people, it is time to stop and consider whither
are we tending. Then at a closer glance we see something else which is
worse still. With all due respect to the men in the theological school, it
is an alarming fact that the men in the medical school, in most cases,
have a higher average in scholarship and natural force than the men in the
theological school. Why is this? It is because the training in our
colleges, the teaching from the platform, and the training in most of our
homes is such that our boys to-day are led to believe that the route to
greatest success is along the material highway. It is a current saying now
that the quickest way for a colored man of ability, at this time, to get
out of the reach of immediate want, materially, is to study medicine.
There may not be too many men entering medicine, but certainly not enough
are entering the ministry. In some cases well-meaning men have been
disgusted with certain types of ministers which they have met and have
cast the whole profession aside, giving it no respectful consideration,
and have felt that they could better themselves, socially as well as
materially, by entering some profession other than the ministry. I am well
acquainted with not a few men who entered college with the express purpose
of preparing themselves to enter the ministry, who turned aside to some
other calling for the reason mentioned. Sad to say, very few of the most
capable men in our colleges to-day are looking forward to the ministry as
a life work.

In order that we may cope with such conditions as those just mentioned,
none can gainsay the great need of greater efficiency in the ministry,
that we do not cut the tap-root of all our progress and become of none
effect in the world. The wisest leaders of Japan to-day are deeply
concerned about the propagation of Christian principles among the people.
The recent past has changed a nation in a day, and while the people have
taken on the ways of western civilization, the larger number of them have
not accepted the principles which have made western civilization great,
and these far-seeing prophets of the Sunrise kingdom well understand that
their glory will be ephemeral unless they are able to plant their feet
firmly upon the eternal Rock of Ages. As lightly as it may be regarded,
there is a similar danger confronting the rising young race of colored men
in this land. It is not reassuring that our strongest men, who are able
to make their way through northern universities, have in some cases come
out of these institutions with a shattered faith and are not found in
places of leadership either as ministers or laymen, in our churches and
other religious institutions. A man cannot excuse himself by saying that
he spends his time during the week in the schoolroom, in the law office,
or in the sickroom. The great men of the world and the great races and
nations of the world have done all these things but did not leave the
other undone. To meet this condition a larger number of efficient men must
be led into the ministry.

In order that the supply may be commensurate with the demand, it is
necessary to ask the question where and how shall we begin to meet the
demand for an increased efficiency in the ministry? First, with Christian
parents. It is interesting to note that Paul, in his second letter to his
beloved son, Timothy, 1st chapter, 5th verse, makes use of these words:
"When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which
dwelt first in thy grandmother, Lois, and thy mother, Eunice, and I am
persuaded that in thee also," and he thus shows his belief in spiritual
heredity.

The foregoing passage teaches that we must not shut our eyes to the
responsibility of Christian parents in this matter. Many of the great
preachers of the world were consecrated to this service by godly mothers,
in some cases before they were born, even as Hannah, Samuel's mother,
consecrated him to the Lord before his birth.

Forty years ago, it was a passion with many Christian parents to have at
least one son enter the ministry, and yet I am sorry to say to-day I have
many, many times made inquiry of ministers' sons and have found very few
of them who were willing to give even a respectful hearing to the claim of
the ministry and few parents of such sons who seemed concerned about the
matter.

The first remedy is to go back to first principles and let the people who
claim to love the Lord and His Christ be willing to make an offering of
the very flower of their families to this, the highest and noblest service
ever given to man to perform.

Then our various churches must take a larger interest in leading the most
promising young men into this great service. Some churches have done nobly
at this and have stood by their spiritual sons by furnishing the means by
which they might attend college and fit themselves for service, and have
taken peculiar interest and pride in seeing them return to the mother
church and in listening to them, and in bidding them God speed; but most
of our churches, though able, have paid hardly any attention to this
important phase of service at all, and many of our churches cannot mention
a single successful minister who commands the respect of any large
community because of his ability and power, which they have sent out. On
the other hand, many times men are allowed to come into the ministry
through our churches who are always calculated to do more injury than
good,--men with no preparation and no chance of getting proper training.

God never calls a man to preach unless He also provides the way for him to
make due preparation for that service. This is a principle which cannot
successfully be disputed. When God called Moses He led him out of the land
of Egypt, and he spent years and years communing with God under the canopy
of heaven; and Paul spent three years somewhere in preparation for his
great work, and even the Father's own Son for thirty years was in
preparation to do three years' work.

It is a harmful thing to have a church full of inefficient, licensed
preachers with no hope of ever entering actively into the ministry, but in
most cases are just a worry of the flesh to a progressive pastor. When a
man comes before a board for a license he ought to be given to understand
that this license will be granted only on condition that he prepare
himself intellectually as well as spiritually for the great work of the
ministry, and when prepared that he will enter into the field which is
white and ready and waiting for the reaper.

Possibly the Church has no larger opportunity for advancing the Lord's
kingdom than in just this phase of service. Sometimes a narrow-minded
minister is to blame. He fails to encourage the promising young man for
fear some day he will come back as a rival too much for him. I wish it
were possible to utter these words with sufficient emphasis to arouse many
of our dormant, sleeping churches to a sense of their duty.

One organization in our colleges has the largest opportunity over any
other to help furnish an increased supply from our college men, and that
is the Student Department of the Young Men's Christian Association.
Already the leader of this Department, Mr. John R. Mott, has written a
book, "The Future Leadership of the Church," published by the
International Committee, 124 East 28th Street, New York. In this volume
Mr. Mott takes up this whole question of the supply of leaders in our
churches. Though a layman himself, for some years, he has been lecturing
in the leading colleges of our land and calling the strong men (as only a
true leader can call men) to consider the calling of the ministry, facing
squarely all of the difficulties connected therewith, problems of faith,
problems of training, and the problem of support, which is entirely too
meagre to-day; but with a strong purpose he has been making an effort to
lead some of the best and ablest men into this, the highest of all
callings. The same thing is being done in many of our colored colleges by
our colored International Secretaries; some time during the year the claim
of the ministry is presented to the students. We feel sure that in due
time results will be seen. Capable ministers among us and college
professors also need covet the opportunity, in a larger way than they have
been doing, to appear before bodies of students, to mingle with them, to
impress them with the importance of at least considering this calling, in
order that we may get the supply which is so greatly needed.

Do you wonder at my urgency when I tell you that Bishops and presiding
elders have many times sadly declared to me that few men of any class are
applying for admission to the many annual conferences, and in many cases
not a single candidate applies in a single year; and when they do,
oftentimes they are weak men. In one case eighteen men applied for
admission to an annual conference in a certain State and not one of them
was intellectually qualified to pursue the course of study prescribed for
the first year, and to the credit of the conference they were not
admitted. Certainly the Baptist brethren are not more blessed than their
Methodist friends. The smaller denominations are confronted with a similar
lack of men to pioneer the enterprises which are theirs to do. The
Master's words are as true to-day as ever they were: "The harvest is
great, but the laborers are few." The pastors of training and vision are
themselves alarmed; the best of the laity are overwhelmed with the
magnitude of their task when it is theirs to call a pastor. There was a
time when the most choice men of the race entered the ministry. No other
door was open, but to-day practically every door open to anybody else is
open to the man of ability of the Negro race. This of course depletes the
number from which the supply must come.

Even in the days of slavery the great leaders on the plantations were
generally preachers, and they were in many cases feared and respected by
both white and black. If this preacher chose to be, he was a dangerous man
to the institution of slavery and ofttimes was sold. On the other hand, he
was usually the source of great blessing to large communities, so much so
that there were instances where some such men were given their freedom and
commissioned to preach from plantation to plantation, not only to colored
people, but oftentimes to white people. The story of the lives of these
men reads like romance, and they were the men at the close of the Civil
War, who were ready to welcome the school and did their best to lead the
people into the ways of true progress. They had great power and
influence,--not always sufficient intelligence for their arduous tasks,
but they were giants in their day and deserve well-merited praise. To meet
the demands of these modern times other giants must be raised up, who can
hold the respect of the best trained portion of our people, and at the
same time may maintain the confidence of the most humble of every
community. We have some men like this. They stand like giant oaks in the
forest, towering above the shrubs and undergrowth about them. They are
lonely in their work. Here and there, about the great centers of
population, there may be groups of them, but eighty per cent of our people
are not in the great centers but are scattered throughout the length and
breadth of the land in small hamlets and the country districts. These
people are too often as sheep without a shepherd. No doubt not many of the
shepherds there are doing the best they can. Give them credit for all they
do, but the demand is such that a more efficient ministry must enter into
every hamlet, and there lift and inspire the people; and possibly the
greatest thing to be done in this lifting process is to provide a more
efficient and practical training for the men we desire to lead into the
ministry. Merely to have men enter this great work without a training,
which fits them to cope with the problems of the day, is but a waste of
effort. The Negro minister ought to be the best trained man among us in
order that he may be able to assume his rightful place as a leader of the
people. The training needed for the ministry of to-day must be
comprehensive and practical. This will be the means of attracting men of
ability and will insure increased efficiency. The emphasis for the
training of the ministry to-day needs to be placed upon teaching; not mere
oratory, but teaching.

Jesus Christ was a great teacher. Nicodemus said: "We know thou art a
teacher sent from God." Very seldom is it said that Jesus preached, but it
is commonly said that he taught the people. The minister who is to be His
true representative on earth must also be a teacher, and it is of the
greatest importance that his training be such as shall broaden his views
of life and shall enable him to understand the relations of human society
sufficiently well to warrant his instructing the people in the most
helpful way. Unfortunately a great deal of the training of the past has
been entirely too narrow. Usually the theological seminaries have been
very slow in utilizing the most improved educational methods and have been
very active in maintaining the old order of things. What we need to-day
for our ministers is a training which will put them in possession of the
knowledge of human society just as it is. It is of the greatest importance
that a minister should be given a correct training according to the
principles of Jesus Christ to treat these conditions. The people are
waiting and hungering for this type of leader. There was never a time when
the colored people were so willing to be taught from the pulpit as they
are to-day.

No ground will be gained by mere denunciation, but what is needed is a
splendid constructive method which will build the people up in every phase
of life and sweeten human relations. All the people demand of such a
teacher is that he should be as good as the doctrine he proclaims and
should fully comprehend what he is about. There certainly is no place
where larger opportunity is offered for service than in the high calling
of the ministry. The average course of study in seminaries provided for
both white and colored candidates for the ministry is not calculated to
bring them in touch with the problems which are to confront them as it
should. The following is a course of study covering three years, and a
fair sample of courses provided by seminaries established for colored
ministers:

First year: Biblical Introduction; Hebrew Language; Greek Interpretation;
Sacred Rhetoric and Elocution; Vocal Music.

Second year: Church History; Hebrew Interpretation; Greek Interpretation;
Sacred Rhetoric and Elocution; Vocal Music; Homiletics; Christian
Theology.

Third year: Pastoral Duties; Theology and Ethics; Biblical Introduction;
Homiletics and Church Polity; Christian Theology; Sacred Rhetoric and
Elocution; Electives.

There is not much in this course that inspires men with the gravity of the
problems of human society in the beginning of the twentieth century. Too
many times in our seminaries men speculate about theories of salvation and
various other things labelled doctrines, which are of little or no value
to men whose business it is to bring the kingdom of Jesus on earth as it
is in heaven. Why spend a term on the theory of salvation when Jesus said,
"He that believeth on me hath everlasting life." One man with faith in
this and a comprehensive training will do more to save the world than a
dozen men can possibly do battling over the theories which have grown up
with the church during the past ages. It is unfortunate that many of our
ministers have had no systematic training at all, and it is surprising
that so much has been accomplished with such poorly equipped men as many
of them have been. They are not to be too severely censured. Again I
repeat, no band of men in our race has been more self-sacrificing and more
desirous on the whole for race uplift and development than these men, and
there is no intention at this time to do anything more than to call
attention to the great need of a better trained ministry to reenforce the
present ranks in an effective way for good. It is encouraging to note a
new departure in two leading theological seminaries. Yale Divinity School
changed its course very much a year ago. It strengthened the old course,
leading to the degree of Bachelor of Divinity, known as historical, also
adding a philosophical and lastly a practical course, both of which lead
to the B.D. degree. "The practical course will emphasize the relation of
the minister to the problems of modern society, giving special attention
to Christian sociology, ethics, and methods of Christian activity. As a
preliminary discipline students who take this course will receive in the
junior year special instruction in sociology and instruction in elementary
law in one of the courses furnished by the University for law students."

The Chicago Theological Seminary has made a similar change and says in a
recent catalogue: "The subjects for instruction are those directly
relating to the work of the ministry, and courses in the English Bible,
the psychology of Christian living, religious pedagogy, evangelism,
missions, Christian sociology and citizenship are included in both the
prescribed and elective work. Hebrew and Greek have been made almost
entirely elective, and much that is traditional in systematic theology,
church history, and other departments has had to make room for new
subjects. But the seminary authorities, believing that such changes are
necessary, hold that the mere fact that a subject has a traditional place
in the curriculum of the divinity school should not be a sufficient reason
for retaining it. Each subject must continually prove anew its right to be
taught and justify itself under modern conditions." This does not mean
less study or a less scholarly man as the finished product; but it does
mean that the seminary is to take its place along with other professional
schools in fitting men to meet present needs.

The action of the above schools is most encouraging, and no doubt before a
great while many other seminaries will follow the same course. This will
do for the minister what our medical schools are doing for the physician;
it will bring him in daily contact with the conditions which he must meet
out in the world. Who would think of running a medical school without a
laboratory and a clinic? Young men might know all the books have to say
about the property of drugs or the symptoms of diseases, but such men will
be handicapped if they are to wait until they go out into actual life
before seeing these drugs tried, or the peculiar manifestation of diseases
as they make their inroads on the human system. A thorough knowledge of
sociology makes it possible for young men who are in our theological
seminaries to get some practical knowledge of human relations and
conditions of the present time and thereby be better able to apply the
potent Gospel as a remedy.

What is needed is a greater breadth of view possessed by the leaders of
our seminaries and in many cases more practical men, such as our great and
successful preachers are, ought to be on the teaching staff rather than
some men who could not succeed in any eminent way as pastors; example has
its effect on theologies as well as medicos and the man with the green
bag. Every provision should be made for ministers to be well-equipped
teachers and leaders of the people. Such training will make our ministers
able to place the emphasis on their work where it belongs. Such men will
as carefully consider the financial strength of their people as a
physician considers the physical strength of a patient; and no more should
we see churches built which are out of all proportion to the financial
ability of the people who worship in them. We should not see a great debt
hanging over the heads of a poor people, the most of whom do not own their
own homes but live in narrow streets and alleys under very unsanitary
conditions. But we should see neat houses of worship arranged so as to
meet the needs of a given parish in its largest way and within the reach
of the people's financial ability. Further, we should see radiating from
this center influences which will inspire people to own their own homes,
to take proper care of their children, and to realize what it means to
walk with God as men of old here on earth.

This training will enable men to be brought near enough to see that it is
a waste of time merely to preach narrow denominationalism, but good men of
all denominations will unite in combatting evil and in making a given
community a desirable place for the habitation of the children of men.
Greater care will be taken of the poor and orphans and more energy will be
spent in building up the moral life of the young men and women of the
community. This will be done by these trained men who will come fully as
well equipped to discern what these problems of society are as the
physician who comes to heal our bodies and who must necessarily understand
disease and remedy. Such a minister's thought will not be centered on
making a great name for himself at the expense of an ignorant people. It
will not matter to him whether he has the name of having built the largest
church or the finest church, or whether he has the biggest congregation in
his church, but it will be centered upon the most important thing, and
that is the establishing of the kingdom of Jesus Christ among men on
earth. His efforts will be to lift the burdens from the poor and
unfortunate and make their lives happy and sweet and pleasant. He will be
a leader in devising ways and means to get our people out of the crowded
alleys into the bright sunshine of life that they may be where their
little children may have a chance for true development. He will gather
around him a band of faithful, trained men and women, who will visit the
jail, the sick, the poor, and the oppressed. And he will call to mind the
requirements which Jesus Christ laid down for all men who wish to walk
with Jesus here and to enter with Him in eternal rest. "For I was
hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was
a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and
ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the
righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee a hungered, and fed
thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and
took thee in? Or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick or in
prison, and came unto thee? And the King shall answer and say unto them,
Verily, I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me."

The above words are from the Master's own lips and make plain and clear
the duty of the church, the duty of Christian society as well as that of
the individual. It is a clear indication that Jesus meant for his
followers to acquaint themselves thoroughly with the conditions of society
as He did himself. He was thoroughly familiar with all the evils and the
needs of humanity which surrounded Him. And His work was the healing of
every ill. Too long have men talked about the Father in such a cold,
metaphysical way as to forget their brethren who are next door to them.
Too long have men thought merely of individualistic religion. Our religion
must be more effectively social in its aim and practice. It must so act
and react on society that the whole lump will be leavened. Christianity
has done more for the world than any other religion or principle and yet
it has never been given the chance it should be given to do its complete
work among men. When you look about you and behold the suffering and
misery, the sin and shame, can you but offer a prayer that the day will
soon come when a large number of our strong men shall receive a training
for the ministry which shall fit them to battle effectively with these
great problems which confront us in this modern age? Unless it is done we
go backward. Here is the Negro's great opportunity, viz: To let
Christianity have a chance through him. Will he lose it?

The great reformers of the church have always been men of the broadest
training. Luther and Calvin were not only preachers as we think of
preachers, but also were men of splendid legal training. Dr. F. J. Grimke,
(who is highly esteemed and respected as a minister), not only is a high
honor man of the Divinity School of Princeton University, but also is a
graduate in law as well. Henry Ward Beecher, the greatest preacher America
ever produced, had a law library that any young lawyer would be glad to
have, and a medical library that would be a credit to any young physician.
There was not a phase of knowledge with which he did not have some
acquaintance. The broad training these men had gave them the mastery of
difficult problems. When we shall have a large number of thoroughly
trained men of unquestioned character whose hearts are warm with the love
of God and whose eyes behold the true condition of their people, and whose
hands shall be ready to work for the good of an inspiring race, then we
shall see the kingdom of God come among men in a larger way than it is
possible for us now even to imagine. While many have not had the privilege
of securing the training which fits us to understand in the most
comprehensive way many of the problems which are round about us, it is
still possible for every minister to qualify himself so that he may be a
workman which needeth not to be ashamed. Unfortunately a great many of our
ministers do not do what they might. For some cause they do not purchase
books at all, or do not purchase them as wisely as they should. It is a
poor plan to spend money for books which agents carry about from place to
place. They are generally high-priced and little used after they are
bought. Find out what you ought to buy by reading reviews and by
consulting with men who certainly know. Every preacher should own, read,
and ponder the following books and extend his reading as he may see fit:
"The Social Crisis" by Rauschenbusch (published by Macmillan, New York);
"The Social Message of the Modern Pulpit" by Brown (Scribner, New York);
"The Religion of a Mature Mind" and "The Spiritual Life" by Coe (Revell,
New York); "The Psychology of Religion" by Starbuck (Scribner, New York);
"Elements of Sociology" by Giddings (Macmillan, New York); "United States
Census Bulletin No. 8" (Washington, D. C.); "Proceedings of the Religious
Education Association" (153 La Salle Street, Chicago); "Charities and
Commons" (153 East 22nd Street, New York); "U. S. Census Bulletin on
Religious Bodies."

Again: Is it too much to urge those in charge of the training of our
ministers to consider seriously the compelling need of so recasting the
course of study that a higher grade of men shall be attracted to the
ministry and that a thorough, comprehensive, yet practical, training shall
be given which shall fit men to preach the Gospel of Christ with real
meaning to men in the twentieth century? We ought to stop putting the good
new wine in old skins. The hopeful sign is that there are picked men in
seminary faculties, in the pulpit, and among laymen all over the country
who are thinking about this most important question. May these thinkers
soon crystallize their thoughts in a forceful movement which shall ever
bless the people.

After many years of observation and of contact with almost every class of
men and some different races, I come to the conclusion that there is
nothing quite so interesting to the people as religion. People will go in
crowds to hear a man like Gypsy Smith talk to them about their every day
problems and will hear respectfully what Jesus Christ taught about these
problems and their relations one with the other. In no place in life does
a man of parts have so large opportunity to wield a helpful influence with
his fellowmen as in the ministry. When we can show the great army of
college men that they can be natural men, real men, with natural voice and
methods, in the ministry, when they can be made to understand that it is
the man under the garb and not the garb which designates the real minister
to men, and that they have a chance and a right to go everywhere, finding
out the conditions of society, touching it at its highest and at its
lowest level, and that they will be supported in their work, morally and
materially, there will be a larger supply than we have to-day, if not
sufficient to meet the demands of the times. I have not dealt in
statistics. This I leave for a future study. I have been as one crying in
the wilderness, sounding the alarm, calling attention to our most vital
need, to a problem which is worrying our best men. I plead with Christian
parents to lay their promising sons on the Master's altar, and to the
Church and college I cry awake! and behold ruin of home and country if you
fail to lead many of the ablest and best of those under you into the
Master's service.

Can we do better than carry away with us the words of the chief Shepherd
of the sheep, the Master and Teacher of men, when he said: "Pray ye,
therefore, the Lord of the harvest, that He will send forth laborers into
His harvest."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Demand and the Supply of Increased
Efficiency in the Negro Ministry, by Jesse E. Moorland

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INCREASED EFFICIENCY--NEGRO MINISTRY ***

***** This file should be named 31323.txt or 31323.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/3/2/31323/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Stephanie Eason, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
