The Project Gutenberg EBook of Satan and the Comrades, by Ralph Bennitt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Satan and the Comrades

Author: Ralph Bennitt

Release Date: February 22, 2010 [EBook #31349]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SATAN AND THE COMRADES ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    This etext was produced from Fantastic Universe, September
    1956. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
    U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.




    _It is not always easy to laugh at Satan, or take pleasure in
    his antics. But when the Prince of Darkness goes on a vacation
    or holds a mirror up to human nature at its most Luciferian
    chuckles are certain to arise and follow one another in
    hilarious profusion. Here is a yarn contrived by a craftsman
    with ironic lightning bolts at his fingertips, as mordantly
    compelling as it is jovial and Jovian. If you liked _SATAN
    ON HOLIDAY_, and were hoping for a sequel you can now
    rejoice in full measure, for Ralph Bennitt has provided that
    longed-for delight._




SATAN AND THE COMRADES

_by ... Ralph Bennitt_


    Lucifer wasn't sure that just the right improvements had been
    made in Hell. So he used a dash of sulfur with Satanic skill.


Nick felt almost good-humoredly buoyant after his year's holiday as a
college boy. About a second after leaving Earth he slowed his
traveling speed down to the medium velocity of light by shifting from
fifth dimension to fourth. Though still a million miles above the
wastes of Chaos and twice that distance from the gates of Hell, his
X-ray eyes were quick to discern a difference in the road far below
him.

Sin and Death had built that broad highway eons before. On leaving
Hell, presumedly forever to carry on their work among men, they had
done a mighty good job of the original construction. But time had
worked its ravages with the primrose-lined path, and it was not
surprising that on starting his sabbatical leave, Nick had ordered his
chief engineer to repair the road as a first step in his plan to
modernize Hell.

Apparently, old Mulciber had done a bang-up job, and Nick roared in
laughter at evidences of the engineer's genius and those of wily
Belial, the handsome court wag. The Propaganda Chief had added
advertising at numerous new roadhouses along the way, and unwary
shades traveling hellward gazed at beautiful scenes of lush vegetation
instead of a dreary expanse like the Texas Panhandle. This "devilish
cantraip sleight" also changed the raw Chaos climate to a steady 72 deg.F
and gave off a balmy fragrance of fruits and flowers.

Ten thousand drachmas, a fictitious unit of currency established by
foxy old Mammon, was the flat fee for use of the road. Blissfully
unaware of this "Transportation Charge," or how it would be paid,
numerous phantom pilgrims were sliding down the steeper hills--and
having a swell time. Their shouts of glee reached Nick's largish ears
despite the lack of air as mortals know it. Clever old Mulcie had
installed freezing plants here and there to surface the road with
glare ice.

Nick poised above a party of phantom men and girls sliding downhill on
their _derrieres_ and ending in a heap at the bottom. A nice change
from traveling under their own power. Their maximum speed while swift
and incomprehensible to mortals, seemed relatively slow to one of
Hell's old timers. Only Nick and his best scout, Cletus, could move at
thought speed--"Click-Click Transportation."

Drifting on, a pleased smile on his red, bony face, Nick paused
several times to read Belial's welcomings.

"Die and see the original Naples in all its natural beauty," said one
sign. "Try our hot sulphur springs and become a new soul." Gayest
pleasures were promised to all and golfers had special attention.
"Register with the pro at your favorite golf club so you can qualify.
No charge for pro's services who'll teach you to break 80. Free lunch
and drinks at all Nineteenth Holes."

No fool shade would wonder what he'd qualify for, nor suspect he'd
have to shovel eighty million tons of coal and ashes before his
handicap would be lowered enough to earn him a set of golf clubs or
that the free lunch and drinks were chunks of brimstone, the
sulphurous air and Styx River water which is always just below boiling
point at 3,000 deg.F.

Hell's thousand of new golf courses, gambling joints and bars would be
available only after downtrodden souls had worked a millennia or two
at common labor jobs. A shady deal, indeed, but all a part of Nick's
master plan to get him and his legions back to Heaven.

By modernizing Hades he hoped to annoy "The Big Boss Upstairs" while
diverting the attention of those two vigilant celestial watchers,
Michael and Raphael, from the main idea. In a series of bold moves,
known only to Nick and his Board or Inner Council, mankind would be
wiped off the earth--and thus bring The BBU to time. Or so Nick hoped.

As a first step, he had spent a year as Pudzy, a college boy, studying
electronics and modern skills of all kinds. He had enjoyed the holiday
on Earth though it irked him to recall that he'd been obliged to do
good here and there. The thought of these satanic lapses caused him to
frown, but his jolly mood returned when he saw the familiar gates of
Hell wide open in obedience to his whistle.

The whistle's high frequency waves also awakened Cerberus, the
three-headed watch dog, besides actuating "The Dingus." This
electronic device Nick had stolen to operate the three ponderous
triple-fold gates of adamantine, brass and iron.

He slowed to supersonic speed, brought back his great red wings and
made a neat three-point landing without injuring the needle-sharp dart
at the end of his long, black tail. Still feeling jovial, he kicked
all three of Cerberus's heads, then zoomed down through the tunnel to
the north bank of the River Styx.

There he halted to view the ten-lane suspension bridge Mulciber had
thrown across the steamy black water. Nick was wondering how the old
genius had accomplished such a feat when a thick black wall dropped
across the bridgehead.

"Cost you five thousand rubles to cross, mister," Charon called in a
thick voice.

The old riverman who had ferried new shades across the earth-hell
boundary for eons of time, had just returned after a year's vacation
in Moscow.

He hid a bottle under his brimstone bench, then straightened a gaudy
red tie as he weaved forward. A changed devil, Charon. His year in
Redland had done more than put him into a natty summer suit. Although
not very bright, he had unusual powers of observation. He liked to ape
the odd speech of his customers, especially American prospectors.
These truculent but harmless old timers worked at odd jobs around the
nearby palace grounds, and in the ferryman they found a kindred
spirit.

Nick eyed the loyal old fellow's red tie with amazement. "What, for
St. Pete's sake, are you drinking, Char?"

"Vodka," Charon gasped. Recognizing the stern voice, he tried to focus
his bleary eyes. "'Scuse it, Your Majesty. I've come a long way and
alone. Your substitute, Pudzy, gimme a bottle 'fore he returned to
Ameriky, and it's durn cold up there in Musk-Cow, and so I took a few
nips, and I felt so goldurned glad to git back I polished off what was
left, so I didn't recognize Your Majesty when you came zoomin' along,
and if you'll sort of overlook--"

Nick patted the frightened old fellow's scrawny shoulder. "Better
check in and sleep it off, Char."

"Gosh, stoppin' _you_!"

"You let everybody in till I tell you different. Forget the toll
charge too, you old conniver."

"Yeah, and look!" Chortling with glee, Charon tottered back to his
station and put one hand across the beam of a photo-electric eye. The
ponderous gate slid silently upward. "It weighs fifteen hundred tons,
Mulcie says, and I don't even push a button."

"You still smell like a Communist, Char," Nick said, sniffing the good
sulphurous air. "How come you're on the job as bridgekeeper if you've
just returned from Moscow?"

"Orders from Beelzebub, and it's nigh a half hour by now since this
fella came across the bridge. I'm sauntering home, friends with
everybody, I am--"

"What fellow?"

Charon scratched his grisly thatch. "Come to think of it, I never see
'im afore this. I'm standing back there, looking down at my old skiff
and wondering about my job, when this fella comes up. 'This is for
you, Charon,' he says, and held out your official incombusterible
letterhead with the cross-bones and dripping blood--"

"Yeah, yeah. What does this stranger look like? What's his name? Who
signed the paper?"

"Beelzebub signed it. I guess I know the John Henry of your Number Two
devil even if I am a dumb ferryman." Perhaps sensing he had blundered,
Charon almost wept. "This paper appoints me head bridge-tender from
now to the _end_ of eternity, and, bein' worried about my job, I
hopped right to it. You're the first--"

"Which way did he go? What's he look like?"

Charon almost said "Thataway," as he shook his head and pointed a
trembling finger to the distant shore. "Lemme see. He wore neat
clothes about like mine, and he zoomed off like the upper crust shades
do when in a hurry--which ain't often. He has mean little eyes, sort
of pale blue, is built wide and short, and talks American good as I
do. Now't I think of it, he had an impederiment in his speech, and he
smelt like a bed of sweet peas."

"Very good, indeed." Scanning the paper, Nick smiled as he recognized
a forgery of the Beelzebub signature. He drew out his pen which writes
under fire as well as water, and scribbled "Nick," then put the
document into the eager hands. "This gives you the job forever--or
till I revoke the appointment."

"Boydy-dumb-deals!" Charon shouted. "Boss, you oughta hear about my
adventures in Redland. I had a real gabfest with the new Premier,
Andrei Broncov, and his Minister of Culture, Vichy Volonsky."

Nick grinned sardonically. "I heard a little about the most recent
changes in the Kremlin. Are my old sidekicks well? And are they having
any particular trouble since liquidating the old gang?"

"How come you call that fat crumb, Broncov, your sidekick?" Charon
frowned, trying to collect his wits in the dread presence. "He didn't
ask about you. He took me for an illegitimate son of Joe Stalin's, so
how would he know you and I are pals? I bought this red tie and hired
a sleeping dictionary to catch onto the language better, and--"

"Your dictionary probably spilled things to the MVD."

"Not while my gold held out. Anyhow, those punks are way overrated.
Tricky, maybe, and they lie good. They'd rather bump you off than eat
breakfast."

"Purge is the word. The old comrades Broncov threw out a month ago now
fully understand its meaning. How is the comrade?"

"Gosh, boss, I'm sick of hearing that word. They say it just before
they knife you. Broncov's been busy, all right. Since taking over the
Number One job he's been sending a lot of his best friends down this
way. To keep Joe Stalin company, he told me. He looks fat even if Bill
Shakespeare says this new lot--"

"I suppose he and his pals plied you with liquor," Nick said.

"They tried to drink me under the table." Charon cut a laugh in half.
"Gosh, I durn near forgot. Y'know what the sidewinder, Bronco, babbled
'fore he passed out? Top drawer stuff. Only he and this Vichy
Volonskyvich know about it. Seems Bronco learned, somehow, about your
taking a vacation, so he's been torturing a lot of his friends into
confessing they plotted agin 'im. He promised them an easy death if
they'd carry on down here. How you like that?"

"The fools. What's his plan?"

"I ain't sure I got it all as his tongue got thicker from the vodka.
But I learned Hell's full of comrades who've sworn to their god,
Lee-Nine, they'll toss you to the wolves. They aim to pull Joe Stalin
off his clinker-picking job and make him secretary here."

"Go on," Nick urged in ominous tones. "How?"

"They've swiped some new secret weapon and figure to obliterate you
and every devil in authority so things will be organized nice and cozy
when they finally get here. The Dumb--"

"Good report, Char." The new weapon did not bother Nick much, but from
his profound studies of atom smashing he decided anything can happen
these days even to a top devil. He continued briskly: "Hereafter,
sniff all your customers and make sure they don't _smell_ like a Red.
You know the aroma by now--sweet peas with an underlying stink--so
keep your nose peeled. When you spot a comrade, radio-phone the guard.
Those lads will know what to do you can bet your last ruble."




II


The rousing welcome home Nick received as he climbed the hill to his
great palace would have warmed his heart if he'd owned one.

"Thanks, boys and girls," he intoned in his best golden voice. "It's
swell to be back among you. I haven't time for a speech now, but tune
in to Channel Thirteen tomorrow evening for my fireside chat."

He wanted to take off for Moscow immediately, but decided to start the
war by calling The Board. Also, the boys would be hurt if he didn't
inspect what they'd done during his absence. After a hasty,
Russian-style dinner of caviar, cabbage and cold horse with a gold
flagon of vodka, he ordered Azazel, Flag Bearer and Statistician
Chief, to call a meeting in the throne room.

Little Cletus waylaid his big boss. The scout among the celestials
looked like a chubby cherub what with his dimpled cheeks and curly
black hair, but he'd proved to be the trickiest imp south of the
pearly gates. Knowing that Raphael had cajoled the little imp into
revealing something of the improvements in Hades, Nick suspected
treachery by one of his most trusted scouts.

"I hear you've been seeing Raphael!" he barked.

"Aw, I told 'im a pack of lies," Cletus scoffed. "Maybe Rafe figured
out something; he's a smart apple. I told 'im everybody here is hot
and unhappy like you ordered me to say if they ever caught me. I said
our air-conditioning system goes haywire and that we were ripping out
a thousand old boilers and coolers. Stuff like that."

"Don't lie to me, you ornery little brat. Okay to anybody else but not
to me. I happened to hear Rafe talking to Mike, and they're wise to my
plan of making Hell attractive."

"Well, hell," Cletus protested, "they saw Mulcie's gangs fixing the
road. If Rafe and them extra-extrapopulated that dope to figure out
the truth, why blame me?"

"We'll forget it," Nick said, vastly relieved to believe his scout had
not betrayed him. "I have a job for you. I'm going to Moscow and I
want your help. Light out as soon as you can. Requisition as much gold
as you can handle by the usual translation method, and include a sack
of polished diamonds and rubies. I'll tell Mammon it's okay when I
arrange for my own supply."

"Okay, boss. Where do we meet? And what am I supposed to look like,
and do?"

"Make yourself bellhop size and register at the Droshky Hotel as
Prince Navi from Baghdad with fifty Persian oil wells to sell. Let 'em
see your gold and jewels. And, remember, you'll account for any dough
you toss away to women and bribes. Get going!"

Nick could see into the _near_ future, at least, and he chuckled after
Cletus vanished through the wall. "The little devil doesn't know
what's in store for him."

In the throne room, sage old Beelzebub sat at the right of His
Majesty's chair; huge Moloch with his evil grin and snaggle teeth, at
the left. Tall, prissy Azazel, always acting important, planted
Satan's flag and then sat down at a table opposite wide-shouldered
Mulciber and handsome Belial. Charter members all of the original
organization booted out of Heaven some eighteen million years ago when
Nick's first but not last rebellion flopped.

After the customary ritual of renewing their vow to get back to
Heaven, the gang sat down. Nick rapped the arm of his throne and
glared at Chemos, the lustful one.

"Cheme," he said, "if you will quit flirting with Astarte, The Board
will take up business."

Belial snickered when the culprits' red faces grew even redder, and
after a wink at the court wit, Nick went on: "I intend to take off for
Moscow after a quick look about with Mulcie and Belial. Incidentally,
my compliments on the good work you did on the road."

"Egad, boss," Moloch complained, "why can't you stay home more and
line things up for us?"

"Time enough--" Nick sniffed, scowled, then pointed toward a thick
pillar near the rear of the big room. "I smell an interloper. Thammuz,
Dagon, drag 'im up here! Beel, I fancy he's the one who forged your
signature."

Beelzebub rose in anger when a shadowy figure darted for the door. The
intruder moved as fast as any wraith but the two former gods were too
quick for him. A brief struggle, then they dragged the eavesdropper
before the throne where they held him upside down.

"It's the Paperhanger!" Beelzebub roared.

"I guessed that from Charon's description," Nick said calmly. "He's
siding with the Reds again--Smell him? Stand up, Adolf, and hear your
sentence!"

"I didn't do a thing, Your Majesty," Hitler began, but the hot,
glowing eyes were too much to face. His knees buckled and he sank,
groveling, on the floor. "Didn't I send you millions of customers?" he
wailed. "Haven't I done a good job of sweeping out and collecting
garbage? Have a heart, Nick. I came in here to sweep, and how would I
know about this private conference?"

"You talk about hearts?" Nick flared. "You hung around to listen. You
forged Beelzebub's signature on my official paper, then put Charon in
charge of the bridge, thinking he's too dumb to report any Commies
coming here."

"I can prove--"

"You get the same chance at that which you gave people in Berlin. Down
the chute with him, boys!"

The chute, connecting with a main one leading down to the burning
lake, has a flap which Belial gleefully lifted. Since shades have no
mass worth mentioning, the long duct acts like a department store
vacuum tube.

"Oh, my beloved emperor, forgive me," Adolf yelled as he felt the
suction. "I only wanted to organize a counter-revolution against the
Communists and--"

"Ratting on your pals again, eh?" Nick sneered. "You stay in the
burning lake a thousand earth years. You'll have plenty of time and
company for your plotting. Let 'im rip!"

"No! I'll be forgotten--"

"No one remembers you now except as a dung heap." Nick turned a thumb
downward, and the screeching shade vanished.

"Like a paper towel in a gale," Belial said as he let the flap clang
shut. "How'd that creep get a job where he could snoop?"

"My fault," Beelzebub admitted. "He's a smooth talker. I saw him not
long after you left, Your Majesty, when I went out to inspect the
garbage incinerator. He had shaved off his dinky mustache and changed
the color of his eyes, but I recognized him."

"It's okay, Beel." Nick patted the heavy shoulder of his top
assistant. "The punk did us a left-handed favor in bringing things to
a head." He told of how Charon had discovered the Red plot, then
outlined his general plan.

"Those Commies can't stand ridicule," Nick summed up. "While I'm gone
I want every Communist son tossed into the burning lake. Alarm all
guards and tell them how to identify them--the fragrance of sweet peas
with an underlying stink. No one in the USSR has used up a cake of
soap in twenty years, and the perfume they add can't quite cover the
BO."

"Must be a lot of Commies here," Mulciber commented. "How many guards
have we, Azzy?"

Azazel, Statistics Chief, glanced at a roll of incombustible
microfilm, and cleared his throat. He liked being called upon, and
since he had the history of every shade while on Earth, he was the
second most feared devil in Hades.

"After promoting the last batch who qualified for better jobs during
the minimum millennium at common labor," Azazel said, "and adding--"

"Never mind the commercial!" grouchy Moloch roared. "Boss, how do we
know all our guards are to be trusted?"

"We don't," Nick said. "When did we ever trust anybody? But our system
of checkers, checkers checking the checkers, super-checkers on up to
charter members, hasn't failed yet."

"If His Eminence, The Corpse-Snatcher, is satisfied," Azazel said,
smoothing his sleek black hair, "I shall answer Prince Mulciber's
polite question. We now have on the guards' roll exactly thirteen
million four hundred--"

"That's close enough." Plainly pleased with his title, Moloch grinned
at the big engineer. "Mulcie, why not build a chute straight up into
Moscow? Save the boss trouble. He could take along a few gorillas and
toss all those troublemaking stinkers straight into a hot bath."

Nick joined in the laughter. "Trouble with that, Molly, The BBU
wouldn't stand for it. Only Death can give the final sting, and even
he has to wait for the call. Our game is to play it cagey, stick by
the few rules The BBU laid down, and stay out of trouble."

"How do you aim to handle those fellas?" Belial asked.

"Tell you after I do it." Nick guessed the fun-loving Propaganda Chief
wanted to go along, but decided Cletus would be a better assistant in
a plan already formulated. A boon companion, Belial, for any nefarious
project. True, he had the quickest wit of the lot, but had worked
over-long in the advertising racket, and many of his schemes resembled
those of a hen on a hot griddle.

Nick turned to the secretary. "If you have all this down, Asta, I'll
consider a motion to adjourn."




III


It was an hour short of midnight and snowing in Moscow when Nick
landed in the printing room of Pravda, the official Red journal. As he
had calculated, several sample newspapers had been run off.

Vichy Volonsky, a short, roundheaded man, had held up the rest of the
issue while he studied the content through his nose-glasses. Editor
Blochensk and the mechanics anxiously awaited the great man's verdict.
An unfavorable one meant the concentration camp for everybody. As
Minister of Culture, Volonsky previewed all news personally when not
running errands for Andrei Broncov at a meeting of the Inner Council.

The Number Two ranking man in the Kremlin clique frowned most
frighteningly, then, moved by an odd compulsion, walked into a
sound-insulated telephone room. He closed the door and stared at it
stupidly while looking through the invisible Nick.

"Why did I come in here?" he said. "There's only the usual bilge in
the sheet, nothing to telephone the fat slob about. Yet something made
me."

"I did," Nick said, suddenly visible. "When I finish, Pravda will
never be the same again. Lie down, Vichy!"

Volonsky opened his mouth, but Nick wiggled a finger, and no yell came
out. In the wink of an eye, he squeezed out the Minister's shade and
took its place.

"Pretty cramped and smelly quarters," Nick told himself, "but do or
die for good old Hades."

"What? Who are you?" Volonsky's phantom teeth chattered. "You must be
Nick, himself."

"Russia's patron saint till you amateurs took over. I have business
with your boss. I mean Andrei Broncov. Not that it matters, but who
conceived the idea of deposing Satan? Talk, _mujik_, and tell the
truth. All of it."

"Blame Broncov, not me," Volonsky pleaded. "It was his scheme to kill
off several thousand loyal party comrades. They got a choice: Be
tortured to death, or die quickly and work for a revolution in Hell as
soon as they arrived. Naturally--"

"I've heard enough, rat." Nick spat contemptuously, and a puff of gray
smoke spread rapidly over walls, ceiling and floor. "That will hold
you," he jeered, and opened the door. Aping the Minister's important
waddle, he walked over to the great press.

Editor Blochensk stared with fear-bulged eyes. "Anything--anything
wrong, Your Excellency comrade?" he asked shakily.

"Nothing I can't fix."

"Oh!" The editor clutched his throat. "Thank--uh--uh--"

"Never mind, I know Who you mean." Muttering words in Hell's silent
language, Nick walked completely around the press. "It's perfect,
Blochy. Don't let the content worry you. It's part of The PLAN. Roll
out your papers and deliver them fast. Don't question anything. Orders
from--you know."

Only minutes ahead of the new Volonsky, Cletus had entered the lobby
of the Droshky Hotel on Red Square. The cherubic scout had obeyed
orders and made himself bellhop size, large size. He didn't exactly
resemble the one in the cigarette ad but he had the kid's twinkle in
his dark eyes. And he had already latched onto a luscious blonde; or,
more likely, Nick concluded, the reverse.

Having just registered as a Persian prince, Cletus again clanked down
a large sack of gold pieces and a smaller one of jewels. "Put these
diamonds and rubies into your best safe," he ordered in perfect
Russian.

The clerk's eyes began popping, so did the blonde's and those of a
score of spectators, including four hard-faced MVD boys.

"And I'll take care of you, Honey-Navi," the blonde said.

"Ah, you just love me for my two billion dollars," the imp retorted,
and winked at her. As did Nick, Cletus could plainly see the twist
operated on the MVD payroll as well as in her own interests.

"I'm selling out my fifty oil wells," he announced, "and I've come to
town to see the head man, whoever he is today. I thought I'd let you
dumb _mujiks_ bid for the wells before I practically give them to
Super-San Oil company for a measly two hundred million dollars."

"Of course, Prince Navi," the clerk said loudly. He nodded toward the
four tough lads who, likewise, had not yet noticed the great Volonsky.

Nick rapped on the counter with his six-carat diamond ring. "How about
a little service here, comrade?"

"One moment, comrade," the clerk said nervously.

"What you mean, one moment?" Nick roared. "I haven't flown all the way
from New York to have a two-bit clerk tell me to wait. I represent
Super-San Oil and I'm here to meet a Persian Prince Navi."

"Quiet, Amerikaner, till--Oh, Your Excellency Comrade Vychy Volonsky!"
The mouth of the astonished clerk fell open. Then, fearful of making a
wrong move in the Red game of dirty politics, he failed to guess why
the great one should act as a miserable capitalist. "A thousand
pardons, Your Excellency Comrade. What can I do for the beloved
comrade? I didn't recognize you--"

"Hush, fool!" Nick looked toward Cletus just then gazing into the
blonde's blue eyes.

The four MVD agents went into a quick huddle, then the one with a
broken nose bowed to the fake Volonsky. "If Your Excellency Comrade
will step aside with us, we'll explain this fool's mistake."

"Put him in the can and question him tomorrow," Nick snarled. "Anybody
can see he's working for the filthy capitalists."

"Of course, Your Excellency Comrade." Broken nose and his three pals
escorted Nick to a chair beside a column. "I'm Lieutenant Putov of the
MVD," he whispered. "We picked up this Prince Navi the instant he
entered, and have been watching him."

"Skip the commercial," Nick said, almost laughing as he gave Moloch's
favorite expression. "How come you didn't spot him at one of our
airports?"

"He must have landed on an abandoned field in his private plane, Your
Excellency Comrade." Lieutenant Putov glanced at the other three
equally worried looking plug-uglies. "He's a prince, all right. Look
at the gold and jewels he tossed to the clerk, several million dol--I
mean, several billion rubles. We haven't checked his story, but he
claims he's here to sell fifty Persian oil wells."

"I know _that_, idiot. Our spies in Baghdad advised us yesterday.
That's why I pretend to be with the stinking Super-San--Wggh!"

"What are Your Excellency Comrade's wishes?"

"Get him away from that blonde before she ruins our plans."

"Ah, that's Nishka, one of us." Astonishment widened Putov's watery
blue eyes. "Have you forgotten the night you and she drank--"

"You talk too much, Putov." Nick flapped a hand. "Get a car to take me
and the prince to the Kremlin. Hurry it! Comrade Andrei Broncov and I
have a Council meeting at midnight. You three, bring the prince to me
here."

Cletus and Nishka had withdrawn to a sofa in an alcove off the lobby.
Without effort, Nick could see them and hear the female agent saying:
"How do I know you have all that money, Navi-Honey? I'll bet you
brought gilt lead and fake jewels just to impress me."

"No, but I've been to America," Cletus bragged, knowing well his boss
would be listening. "So be nice and I'll prove they're real. I've been
everywhere but this lousy place. I even lived in Egypt."

"Talk some Egyptian for me," Nishka wheedled.

"I've forgotten most of it," Cletus said, cannily dodging the trap.
"But I once made a study of the ancient language." He ripped out a
stream of what had once been his native tongue. Then, partly at least
to test Nishka's knowledge, he added in English, "How's for looking at
my room before we go out on the town?"

"Wha-at? Why, you bad boy!" The girl winked at her three fellow agents
coming toward them in a crablike walk, then spoke in Cletus' ear:
"It's the LAW, Navi-Honey, but don't let them worry you. Little Nishka
will stay with you--to the limit."

Cletus leered at her and rose to accompany the MVD to the front of the
lobby. He and Nick put on an act, then went to the street followed by
a chattering crowd.

Once inside the sleek car Putov had conjured up, Nick said: "The heap
is wired so we'll talk only in Hell language."




IV


It wasn't far to the grim walls of the Kremlin, and as the big car
purred across the snowy, radio-stricken square, Nick gave Cletus the
main points of his plan. Obviously warned, the police gave a snappy
salute and let the car enter the courtyard. A few moments later,
Hell's emissaries were zooming through long corridors and up to the
second floor; walking the last fifty yards.

Six husky guards armed with sub-machine guns opened the great doors to
the Premier's private study. "He's been asking for you," a huge guard
whispered.

"He would, the brainless pup," Nick snarled, reading the big fellow's
thoughts. A Volonsky man called Gorkzy. "Don't announce us."

Inside the great room, at a desk almost large enough for a roller
skating rink, Andrei Broncov appeared to be studying a document. True
executive, he went on reading till Nick coughed.

"Your Excellency Comrade Broncov, I have brought Prince Navi. Where is
the rest of the Council?"

"Ah!" Broncov's plump face widened in a smile for Cletus. "This is an
honor, Your Highness. I trust you will pardon my preoccupation with
affairs of state. They're in a mess--as are all capitals when the old
order departs. I supposed you'd be announced." Andrei Broncov glared
at the pseudo Volonsky and whispered in a dialect, "The Council is
waiting below, fool."

"Nuts," Cletus said. "Talk English, will you? I can hardly understand
your outlandish language. Or, speak Persian."

"My knowledge of your native tongue is not good, but I'm quite at home
in English or Amerikaner. A Russian invented--"

"Yeah, he knows," Nick cut in. "Forget the malarkey, Bronco. This lad
is here on business and has no time for our phoney hooptedo. From his
grandfather, the old Shah, he inherited fifty of the richest oil wells
in Asia, and he's giving us a chance to bid on them instead of
carrying on a, quote, cold, unquote, war, and steal--"

"I understand," Broncov said through his big teeth. His lips tightened
in his rage over Volonsky's direct speech, but he managed to say
fairly suavely: "Your Highness, we appreciate your giving us a chance
to buy your wells. Surely, a banquet is in order."

"No, I want to get out of this place. It's too cold."

Nick peered over his Volonsky nose-glasses. "How much, kid? No
fooling."

"Volonsky!" Broncov barked. "Mind your speech. I'll handle this little
deal. You're excused."

"Uh-uh." Nick grinned. "I stay for _my_ cut."

"You both look like a couple of crooks to me," said the young prince.
"I want two hundred million dollars--in gold."

Broncov's hand shook as he reached for a row of buttons. "How about a
bit of tea and cakes, or, perhaps something stronger before we discuss
this matter with the Council? They're waiting just below us, and I'd
like to present the deal already consummated."

"Got any Old Style Lager around?" Cletus asked.

"We have some good Bavarian beer, a stock we--ah--bought some time
ago."

"I've heard how much you paid the Heinies. The beer I want is made in
Wisconsin, USA, so I think I'll fly over there tonight. Super-San Oil
keeps begging me to visit their country. Offered me two hundred
million for my wells but only half in gold. I want all gold, and I
won't discuss any other terms."

"Bungler!" Broncov whispered in dialect. "Why didn't you get him
drunk, first? Without oil we can't carry on this cold war or kid the
peasants much longer. Where in hell could we get even two hundred
dollars in gold?"

"Go to hell and find all you want," Nick said with a wicked grin.

"I understood what you high-binders said," Cletus put in. "My cousin
told me before I left home Communist clucks don't savvy Saturday from
Sunday. Everybody knows you top boys have stolen everything not nailed
down, and have stashed it away against the time your own people kick
out Communism for good."

"Oh, come, Prince Navi, I don't understand how such an evil story
started. Our people wouldn't dare--"

"Wouldn't they?" Cletus laughed nastily. "We have spies too, and we
know your common herd would settle for anything else. Most of them
want their church and their Tsar back, bad as he was."

"Bah! The capitalist press started that myth."

"Why, Bronco," Nick protested, "you can read that story in Pravda,
'The Organ of Truth.'" The fake Minister of Culture cleared his throat
to keep from laughing when the glowering Premier began thinking of
various ways to torture unsympathetic comrades. In silent Hell
language, Nick added: "Good work, Cleet. I'll take it from here."

"Lies put out by the war mongerers of Wall Street," Broncov shouted.
He continued raving, but Nick no longer listened.

Sounds outside the window told him time had begun pressing. He shook
the hat he'd been carrying. "Gold, is it you want, Prince Navi? You
think we have none? How about this?"

A glittering gold piece tinkled on the floor and rolled toward the
amazed Red Premier. Puffing, he bent over and scooped up a newly
minted coin the size of the American gold eagle. "It's a new
issue--I--never mind. We have lots more where this came from, haven't
we, comrade Vychy?"

"I'll say," Nick said. "Watch!"

Gold pieces continued falling from the hat, one by one, then in a
steady stream. Stunned, Broncov clutched his throat, muttering: "It
can't be true. Miracles don't happen."

He watched in silence while his Minister of Culture made a pile of
gold coins four feet high. When the floor timbers began creaking, Nick
made another similar heap; then, others, till the thick walls began
bulging inward.

"Stop!" Broncov cried. "A couple of tons is enough." Eyes now popping,
he waved his arms as the floor sagged under fifty times that weight.
"There's the two hundred million for you, Prince. The rest is for--us.
We'll sign the papers in another room."

Ignoring frightened cries, Nick made more piles of gold next to the
windows. Outside on Red Square, people were running in all directions,
shouting and waving newspapers. A cannon roared. A hundred or more
machine guns began rattling. Plainly, the bullets were not fired at
any one, for the people were laughing and weeping, singing and
dancing.

"Come here and have a look, Bronco," Nick suggested.

"It's--a trick, a revolution," Broncov panted. "Damn you, Volonsky,
you started it." He snatched a heavy revolver from his desk and fired
it at Nick without warning.

The false Volonsky laughed when five of the slugs bounced off the
invisible shield around him. A sixth bullet splintered the window
glass. The other five returned and struck the raging Red boss, cutting
his face and arms enough to bring streams of blood. He dashed for the
door but collided with the six guards who burst into the room.

Broncov wiped off some of the blood running into his eyes well enough
to see all six waving copies of Pravda. "What's going on here?" he
screamed.

"Read about it in Pravda," bellowed Gorkzy, the huge guard. "It always
prints the truth--you've taught us."

"What truth?" quavered the Premier. "Put down those guns!"

"Oh, no. Pravda says you were shot trying to escape, and for once it
really told the truth." Implacably, the big guard brought up his
Tommy-gun and let it rattle.

The stricken Red leader took two steps backward and fell to the floor
as the other five guns opened up on him in a hell's chatter of death.
His falling weight added the last straw to the overstrained floor
timbers. They gave way in a roar, and a hundred tons of yellow gold
streamed downward in a cataclysmic wave of wealth and death to the
Council members below.

       *       *       *       *       *

Poised on air, Nick and Cletus became invisible to mortal eyes. "That
wraps it, Cleet. Let's see how the boys take it."

The six guards were peering down into the ruin below, and at some of
the fortune still clinging to the slanting floor.

"Great Nicholas!" Gorkzy yelled. "Gold!"

"Just like Pravda says," howled another man. "Listen! It says:
'Volonsky and the mysterious Persian prince have disappeared. Broncov
executed by heroic guards. All members of the once-feared Inner
Council crushed almost beyond recognition when floor crashed upon them
from the weight of the gold brought by the prince.'"

"And look at this!" roared the big Gorkzy. "'All soldiers and police
throw down their arms. Refuse to shoot the people shouting they want
their Tsar and church back. Satellite countries freed of the odious
Communist yoke. Concentration camps, collective farming, and slave
labor abolished. All spies and saboteurs recalled to Moscow for trial
and punishment. Ivan, the Tsar, to issue proclamation.'"

"What Tsar?" The six stared stupidly at one another.

One man picked up a shiny gold piece and tested it with his teeth.
"The Bolsheviks murdered the old goat and all his family. How can this
be?"

"He probably left plenty of bastards," another man hazarded.

"I get it," Gorkzy shouted. "Prince Navi is a grandson. His name is
N-a-v-i--Ivan spelled backward. Why, the smart little devil! And now
he's here some place to reign over us."

"Oh, no," Cletus protested as he and Nick slithered through the wall.
"You aren't going to make me rule over these dopes, boss. Have a
heart. It's cold here, and the whole country stinks."

"That's your punishment, m'lad, for letting Raphael and Michael catch
onto you. You can't prowl around Heaven just now so you'll have to
work here in Hell's Rear Annex for a while. Look!" Nick thumbed one of
the gold pieces. "Your image stamped on all of them. Also 'Ivan--Tsar.
In God We Trust.'"

"Okay," Cletus said, shuffling a little, then brightening. "Anyhow,
I'll have Nishka."

"Not if the common folks find out she worked for the MVD." As if to
punctuate Nick's prophesy, a dozen bombs exploded inside police
headquarters.

"Heck!" Cletus shrugged resignedly. "Well, lend me that hat, and
conjure up a couple million tons of soap--not perfumed."

Roaring with laughter, Nick promised to spread soap over the entire
country, then watched the little imp zooming back and forth across Red
Square--sprinkling the snowy pavement with Ivan-Tsar pieces of gold.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Satanic laughter lasted till Nick had whizzed half way across
Chaos. "That caper," he told himself gleefully, "will fool The BBU
about my plan. Or, will it? Great Hades! I did a _good_ deed."

A million miles above the wastes of Chaos, he remembered he still wore
Volonsky whose shade would still be imprisoned in the Pravda room.
Nick shucked out of his unpleasant quarters, halted to watch the thing
spinning downward.

"Cheer up, Vych," he laughed. "Next century I'll gather up what's left
and give it back to you--maybe."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Satan and the Comrades, by Ralph Bennitt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SATAN AND THE COMRADES ***

***** This file should be named 31349.txt or 31349.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/3/4/31349/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
